6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 1/636
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to the left, have been passed, but
have not been incorporated in the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are
any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1850
AN ORDINANCE ADDING ARTICLE IIB, TO TITLE 22 OF THE PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL CODE TO PROVIDE FOR AN ADDITIONAL ONE
PERCENT (ONE CENT) TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX TO BE ADMINISTERED BY THE STATE BOARD OF EQUALIZATION, TO PROVIDE
FUNDS TO MAINTAIN ESSENTIAL LOCAL CITY SERVICES INCLUDING POLICE, FIRE/9-1-1 EMERGENCY AND MEDICAL AID RESPONSE,
STREET MAINTENANCE, AND OTHER SERVICES
WHEREAS, Sacramento politicians have taken more than $10,500,000 from Porterville over the last five years, impacting the City’s ability to
provide services and programs at the levels local residents want; and
WHEREAS, Porterville’s population has increased 15% in the last ten years and is expected to keep growing – it is more expensive to provide
services such as public safety, streets and sidewalk repair, park maintenance, and services for seniors and youth to meet the needs of our growing
community; and
WHEREAS, nearly 60% of Porterville streets are rated “poor,” “very poor,” or “worse by independent pavement management engineers, and
essential repairs must made before they get even worse or more expensive to repair in the future; and
WHEREAS, nearly 60% of all 911 calls to the Porterville Fire Department require emergency medical attention; and
WHEREAS, the American Heart Association © says brain deterioration starts between 4-6 minutes after a person stops breathing, and the City of
Porterville seeks to maintain 911 rapid response times from our City’s firefighters and emergency medical workers; and
WHEREAS, there are about 200 gang members who live or frequent Porterville and the City’s Police Department must adequately address gang
violence, including drive-by shootings and assaults with a deadly weapon, and keep gang members and drug dealers from nearby communities out of our
City; and
WHEREAS, well-maintained streets, the quality of local parks and library, safe and clean public areas and neighborhoods, and rapid emergency
response by police and fire departments are investments that strengthen our community, improve property values and make Porterville a more desirable
place to live, do business and raise a family; and
WHEREAS, the Porterville community has identified key priorities including maintainingpolice, fire and emergency response times; preventing
property crimes like thefts and burglaries; repairing potholes/maintaining streets; keeping public areas safe and clean; maintaining and improving school
safety; and addressing homelessness; and
WHEREAS, the proposed measure will create another source of locally-controlled funding where all proceeds would be used locally for the benefit
of the Porterville public, and no funds could be seized by Sacramento; and
WHEREAS, the proposed measure ensures accountability and transparency in expenditure by requiring independent audits and citizen oversight,
as well as requiring that all funds be used for Porterville; now
THE PEOPLE OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE DO ORDAIN AS FOLLOWS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 2/636
SECTION I. AMENDMENT OF CODE.
Porterville Municipal Code Title 22 is hereby amended by the addition of a new Article to read as follows:
ARTICLE IIB. TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Sec. 22-9.1 Title. This ordinance shall be known as the City of Porterville Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance of 2018.
Sec. 22-9.2 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this Ordinance, except that any term or phrase not defined in this Ordinance shall
have the same meaning as that term or phrase is defined in Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code:
(a) “City” means City of Porterville.
(b) “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this ordinance by
vote of the electorate on November 6, 2018.
(c) “Ordinance” means the City of Porterville Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance of 2018.
(d) “State” means the State of California.
Sec. 22-9.3 Purpose.
This Article of the Porterville Municipal Code is adopted for the following (and among other) purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted liberally in order to accomplish all of its lawful purposes:
(a) To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 7251 et seq.,
and Section 7285.9, which authorizes the City to adopt this Ordinance if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of
the tax at an election called for that purpose.
(b) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code.
(c) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure that can be administered and collected by the
State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory
and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Transactions and Use Taxes.
(d) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the
provisions of Parts 1.6 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at
the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance.
(e) To provide transactions and use tax revenue to the City to be used for the general governmental purposes of the City and with any transactions
and use tax revenue received being placed into the City’s general fund.
Sec. 22-9.4. Contract with State.
Prior to the Operative Date, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this Ordinance; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the Operative Date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 3/636
Sec. 22-9.5. Transactions Tax Rate.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a transactions tax is imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City
at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail within the territory of the
City on and after the Operative Date of this Ordinance.
Sec. 22-9.6. Place of Sale.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from the sale shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at
which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization.
Sec. 22-9.7. Use Tax Rate.
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on
or after the Operative Date of this Ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said territory of the City at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the sales
price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State transactions or use tax regardless of the place
to which delivery is made.
Sec. 22-9.8. Adoption of Provisions of State Law.
Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Parts 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted, incorporated
and made a part of this Ordinance as though fully set forth in it.
Sec. 22-9.9. Limitations on Adoption of State Law and Collection of Use Taxes.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code:
(a) Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City of Porterville shall be substituted. However,
the substitution shall not be made when:
(1) The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the
Constitution of the State of California;
(2) The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather
than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Ordinance;
(3) In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the
result of the substitution would be to:
A. Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part
1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or;
B. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by
the state under the said provision of that code.
(4) In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the California Revenue and Taxation
Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 4/636
(b) The word “City” shall be substituted for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203.
Sec. 22-9.10. Permit Not Required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit
shall not be required by this Ordinance.
Sec. 22-9.11. Exemptions and Exclusions.
(a) There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State
of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any stateadministered
transactions or use tax.
(b) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:
(1) Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally
outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.
(2) Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City pursuant to the contract of sale by delivery to
such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:
A. With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of
the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury,
signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
B. With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer,
that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
(3) The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the Operative Date of this Ordinance.
(4) A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the Operative Date of this Ordinance.
(5) For the purposes of subparagraphs (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the
contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
(c) There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal
property:
(1) The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
(2) Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and
exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 5/636
necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided
in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.
(3) If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contact entered into prior to the operative date of this
Ordinance.
(4) If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative
date of this Ordinance.
(5) For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
(6) Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of
the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or
through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer.
(7) “A retailer engaged in business in the City” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant
to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to
collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City.
(d) Any person subject to use tax under this Ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid
to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax.
Sec. 22-9.12. Amendments.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this Ordinance to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and
use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and
Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become adopted and a part of this Ordinance without further action of the City
Council of the City of Porterville or the City’s electorate, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed
by this Ordinance. The City Council may amend this Ordinance to comply with applicable law or as may be otherwise necessary in order to further the
Ordinance’s stated purposes.
Sec. 22-9.13. Prohibition on Enjoining Collection.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the
City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this Ordinance.
Sec. 22-9.14. Severability.
In any provision of this Ordinance of the application of it to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Sec. 22-9.15 Effective Date.
This Ordinance relates to the levying and collection of the City’s transactions and use taxes and shall become effective only if approved by a
majority of the voters voting on the measure at the November 6, 2018, Special Municipal Election. The Operative Date of this Ordinance shall then be as
defined in Section 22-9.2(b).
Sec. 22-9.16. Accountability and Oversight. This ordinance authorizes the Transactions and Use Tax Oversight Committee, formed pursuant to
Resolution 24-2006, to act as an independent citizen’s oversight committee for the expenditure of all funds collected by the Porterville Public Safety and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 6/636
Essential City Services Measure. The Committee has been responsible for accountability and public oversight regarding expenditures of Measure H funds
since the measure was passed in 2005. The Committee shall now conduct spending oversight for all funds collected from to the Porterville Public Safety
and Essential City Services Measure. The Committee shall conduct spending oversight pursuant to the procedures in Resolution 24-2006, and said
provisions shall be incorporated herein by reference.
SECTION III. SEVERABILITY.
Any provision of the Porterville Municipal Code or appendices thereto inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance, to the extent of such
inconsistencies and no further, is hereby repealed or modified to that extent necessary to effect the provisions of this Ordinance, except that any existing,
duly adopted transactions and use tax existing as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance shall remain in effect and the transactions and use tax imposed
by this Ordinance shall be additive thereto.
APPROVED by the following vote of the People of the City of Porterville on November 6, 2018:
Yes 6,322 64.05%
No 3,548 35.95%
ADOPTED by Declaration of the vote by the City Council of the City of Porterville on December 10, 2018.
______________________________
Milt Stowe, Mayor
ATTEST:
_______________________________
John D. Lollis, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1853
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE
AMENDING CHAPTER 15, ARTICLE VII OF THE PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL CODE “MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES,” RENAMING THE
ARTICLE “CANNABIS DISPENSARIES,” ALLOWING CANNABIS DISPENSARY BUSINESSES AND ESTABLISHING PERMITTING PROCEDURES
AND REGULATIONS
WHEREAS, California legislation provides that the City of Porterville has the power to regulate commercial cannabis activities, including the regulations of cannabis
dispensaries; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Porterville finds that it is in the best interest of the community to allow the establishment a limited number of cannabis
dispensaries, subject to the regulations set forth below and the location requirements proscribed in Chapter 21 of the Municipal Code (Porterville Development Code);
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE HEREBY ORDAINS as follows:
SECTION 1. Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to permit and regulate legal cannabis businesses in the City of Porterville.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 7/636
SECTION 2. Article VII of Chapter 15 is hereby renamed “Cannabis Dispensaries,” and Sections 15-85 through 15-105 of Article VII are added as follows:
CHAPTER 15
ARTICLE VII – CANNABIS DISPENSARIES
15-85: Definitions. The following definitions are applicable to the terms when used in Porterville Municipal Code Chapters 15, 18, or 21, concerning regulations
pertaining to cannabis uses, activities and operations.
“Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this section.
"Business Owner" means the owner(s) of the Cannabis Business. For publicly traded companies, owner means the chief executive officer or any
person or entity with an aggregate ownership interest of 5% or more. For all other businesses, other than publicly traded companies, an owner is an
individual that has an aggregate ownership of interest other than a lien or encumbrance, of 20% or more in the commercial cannabis business.
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain or varietal of the genus
Cannabis that may exist or hereafter be discovered or developed that has psychoactive or medicinal properties; whether growing or not; the seeds thereof;
the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the
mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. For the purposes of this Code, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
“Cannabis accessories” means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which is intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis products into the
human body. “Cannabis accessories” also has the same meaning as in Section 11018.2 of the Health and Safety Code.
"Cannabis business" or “cannabis industry” means any business activity in the City relating to cannabis, including but not limited to cultivation
(including nurseries), transportation, distribution, manufacture, compounding, conversion, processing, preparation, testing, storage, packaging, delivery and
sales (wholesale and/or retail sales) of cannabis or cannabis products, whether or not carried on for gain or profit. A cannabis business does not include
any business whose only relationship to cannabis or cannabis products is the production or sale of cannabis accessories.
“Cannabis Dispensary” or "Dispensary" means a facility where cannabis or cannabis products, are offered, either individually or in combination, for
retail sale, including an establishment that engages in delivery of cannabis or cannabis products as part of a retail sale. In addition, and without limiting the
foregoing, “dispensary” includes “dispensary” as defined in California Business and Professions Code Division 10 and any successor statute(s), as may be
adopted or amended from time to time. For the purposes of obtaining a City permit and operating within the City, “Cannabis Dispensary” or “Dispensary” is
limited to Storefront Cannabis Retailers.
"Cannabis product" means any product containing cannabis, including, but not limited to, flowers, buds, oils, tinctures, concentrates, extractions,
edibles and those products described in Section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code.
“City” means the City of Porterville, either the entity or its territorial limits, as the context requires.
“City Council” or “Council” means the City Council of the City of Porterville.
"Collector” means the City’s Financial Director or his or her designee.
“Commercial Cannabis Business,” “Commercial Cannabis Activity,” or “Cannabis Business” or “Cannabis Operation” means any commercial
marijuana activity allowed under State Law and the implementing regulations, as State Law and the implementing regulations may be amended from time to
time, and all uses permitted under any subsequently enacted State law pertaining to the same or similar uses for recreational cannabis, including the
cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and
cannabis product for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes the activities of any business licensed by the State or other government entity
under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of State law regulating the licensing of cannabis businesses. It also
includes cannabis dispensaries, cooperatives or collectives.
"Commercial Cannabis Regulatory Permit" or "Regulatory Permit" means the permit required under this section to have a Cannabis Business.
“Concentrated cannabis” means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby
increasing the product’s potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate.
“Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any
technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer, or independently licensed under this division that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the
commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of marijuana or marijuana products.
“Delivery employee” means an individual employed by a licensed dispensary who delivers cannabis goods from the licensed dispensary premises to
a physical address.
“Development Agreement” means an agreement entered into between the City and the Business Owner and any other Responsible Parties as
required by the City, in accordance with Chapter 21, Series 600, Article 609 of the Porterville Municipal Code.
"Distributor'' means a person engaged in procuring cannabis from a cultivator, and/or procuring cannabis products from a manufacturer, for sale to a
licensed commercial cannabis business. In addition, and without limiting the foregoing, “distributor” includes “distributor” as defined in California Business
and Professions Code Division 10 and any successor statute, as may be adopted or amended from time to time.
"Distribution" means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis or cannabis products between licensees.
"Employee" means each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any cannabis business, whether as owner, member of the owner's
family, partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and each and every other person employed or working in such cannabis business for a wage, salary,
commission, barter or any other form of compensation.
"Gross Receipts," means the amount a Cannabis Operation received from all sources during its accounting period, without subtracting any costs or
expenses.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 8/636
“Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.
“MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as codified in Division 10 of the California Business and
Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.
“Medical Cannabis Dispensary” means a storefront cannabis dispensary with a valid M-Type 10 retailer license in accordance with MAUCRSA.
"Operator" means the Business Owner and any other person designated by the Business Owner as responsible for the day to day Cannabis
business operation.
“Premises” means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the
control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis activity will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only
be occupied by one licensee.
“Processing” means any method used to prepare cannabis or its byproducts for personal use or commercial retail and/or wholesale, including but not
limited to: drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create cannabis related products and concentrates.
"Responsible Party" shall mean the Business Owner, Operator, manager(s), and any employee having significant control over the cannabis
businesses operations.
"State" means the State of California.
“State Law” means all regulations and laws pertaining to Cannabis Business in the State of California.
"State license," means a State license issued pursuant to California Business & Professions Code Sections 26000, et seq. or other applicable State
law.
“Transport” or “Transportation” means the transfer of cannabis or cannabis products from the permitted business location of one licensee to the
permitted business location of another licensee, for the purposes of conducting commercial cannabis activity authorized pursuant to this chapter.
15-86: Cannabis Dispensaries Permitted Uses and Zoning.
Business Owners meeting the requirements of this Article shall be allowed to conduct Storefront Cannabis Dispensary Operations in the zone
districts and locations as specified in Chapter 21 of this Code, upon obtaining a Regulatory Permit from the City, obtaining a business license from the City,
obtaining the applicable license from the State of California, and entering a Development Agreement with the City as specified further in this Article. Nonstorefront
cannabis retailers are not permitted within the City.
15-87: Cannabis Dispensaries Requirements and Restrictions.
A. Maximum Number of Permits. The number of regulatory permits for dispensaries is limited to no more than one permit plus an additional permit per
every 25,000 residents. Said permits may be issued for medical (Type M) or adult use (Type A) businesses as allowed by the State. However, the City
Council is authorized to reserve one of the allowed permits for exclusively a medical cannabis dispensary.
B. Regulatory Permit/Fees.
1. Regulatory Permit. No person or entity shall operate a Cannabis Dispensary within the City of Porterville without first obtaining a
Cannabis Regulatory Permit from the City. The Regulatory Permit shall be site specific and shall specifically identify the commercial cannabis activity
that will be allowed at that site. No commercial cannabis activity will be allowed unless specifically identified in the Regulatory Permit.
2. Request for Proposals Processes. The City may conduct initial request for proposals processes for regulatory permit applications
(commercial and/or medical), once it determines when dispensary regulatory permits shall become available, and thereafter as such permits become
available. Nothing in this Chapter or Code shall be construed to create an obligation for the City to conduct a request for proposals process for, or to
create an obligation to grant a permit to, any cannabis dispensary.
3. Medical Cannabis Dispensaries.
a. If, after one full year from the City’s first issuance of a Request for Proposals solely for a Medical Cannabis Dispensary, no responses
are received within the prescribed time period for such responses, the City Council may opt to allow the permit reserved for a medical
dispensary to be utilized for an adult-use dispensary, as otherwise permitted by this Chapter.
b. Any Medical Cannabis Dispensary established pursuant to this Chapter must be in operation for a full year before it will be eligible to
apply for any transition to an adult-use dispensary (Type A), and any medical cannabis dispensary applying for a transition shall be
subject to all the requirements of this Chapter, including applying for a new regulatory permit and entering into a new development
agreement.
4. Permit Availability at the Discretion of the City Council. The City shall maintain complete discretion over whether any permit approvals
are made, and when permits shall be issued, where the uses may be located (subject to Chapter 21), and the manner of permit approvals.
5. Fees. All related fees and charges associated with conducting a request for proposals process, regulatory fee application process,
and the granting, administering, and enforcing of the regulatory permits, and any other City costs related to the operations of a dispensary shall be
established by Resolution(s) of the City Council, which may be amended form time to time.
C. Development Agreement. No approval required by this Article shall be given for any permit for a dispensary unless the City Council prior to or
concurrently with approves a Development Agreement, setting forth the terms and conditions under which the commercial cannabis activity will operate
in addition to the requirements of this Article, all other local ordinances and regulations, state law and such other terms and conditions that will protect
and promote the public health, safety and welfare. No use or operation under any permit for a dispensary shall be allowed to begin until the
development agreement is effective.
D. State Law and Other State Laws. The cannabis dispensary shall at all times be in compliance with State Law and the implementing regulations, as
they may be amended from time to time, as well as all required State license(s) under State Law, and any other applicable State law. The Operator shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 9/636
obtain required licenses under State Law prior to opening for business, or if the State is not ready to issue licenses under State Law prior to the time of
opening, within twelve (12) months of the State being ready to issue the required license(s). Provided, however, that the Operator shall at all times be in
compliance with all other requirements of State Law and implementing regulations, and any other applicable State law, regardless of the timing of the
issuance of a license under State Law. The Operator shall meet or exceed the health and safety requirements of State Law in any operations relating to
recreational cannabis.
E. Register of Employees. The Operator shall maintain a current register of the names of persons required to have Employee Permits. The register shall be
available to the Police Chief at all times immediately upon request. All agents, officers, or other persons acting for or employed by a licensee shall display a
laminated identification badge issued by the licensee. The identification badge shall, at a minimum, include the licensee’s “doing business as” name and
license number, the employee’s first and last name, and a color photograph of the employee that shows the full front of the employee’s face and that is at
least 2 inches by 2 inches in size.
F. Labeling. All cannabis products offered to customers at a retail location must provide testing and labeling at a minimum as required by State law
and in compliance with any additional City regulations and as they may be amended.
G. Signage. All signage shall be subject to approval by the City of Porterville and consistent with the City’s Signage Ordinances, and any other policies or
guidelines adopted by the City.
H. Alcoholic Beverages. Alcohol for personal consumption shall not be provided, stored, kept, located, sold, dispensed, or used on the Premises.
I. Transportation. Transportation shall only be conducted according to activity permitted by State law.
J. Distribution. There shall be no distributions to the Premises of cannabis or cannabis containing products except from properly licensed and permitted
cannabis businesses. City -licensed and permitted cannabis retailers shall not distribute cannabis as a licensed distributor within the City.
K. Minors. It shall be unlawful for any Operator to employ any person who is not at least twenty- one (21) years of age, or any older age if set by the State.
L. Hours of Operation. Cannabis Dispensaries shall be allowed to operate per the requirements of the underlying zone district and subject to the City's
noise and nuisance ordinances but in no case shall exceed the minimum State standards. Additionally, Cannabis Dispensaries shall not be open before 10
a.m. on weekdays, 9 a.m. on weekends, or remain open after 10 p.m. on weeknights, or 11 p.m. on weekends, Pacific Standard Time.
M. Compliance with Building and Related Codes. The Premises in which the Cannabis Dispensary operations occur shall comply with all applicable local,
State and federal laws, rules, and regulations including, but not limited to, building codes and the Americans with Disabilities Act, as certified by the Building
Official of the City. The Operator shall obtain all required building permits and comply with all applicable City standards.
N. Secure Building. All Cannabis Dispensary operations shall occur entirely inside of a building that shall be secure, locked, and fully enclosed, with a
ceiling, roof or top. The building shall include a burglar alarm monitored by an alarm company or private security company. The building, including all walls,
doors, and the roof, shall be of solid construction meeting the minimum building code requirements for commercial structures and include material strong
enough to prevent entry except through an open door.
O. Premises Security. The following security conditions shall apply:
1. Alarm System (both perimeter, fire and panic). A licensee shall maintain an alarm system as defined in Business and Professions Code section
7590.1(n). A licensee shall ensure a licensed alarm company operator or one or more of its registered alarm agents installs, maintains, monitors, and
responds to the alarm system.
2. Remote monitoring of alarm systems.
3. Exterior lighting systems for after-hours security.
4. Exterior and interior camera systems approved by the Police Chief. The camera systems shall meet the minimum requirements of State Law,
include interior monitoring of all access points of the site from the interior, and be of a minimum 5 mega pixels in resolution. Cameras shall record
continuously 24 hours per day and at a minimum of 20 frames per second. Areas monitored are defined by State law.
5. All security systems at the site are attached to an uninterruptable power supply that provide continuous power.
6. The Porterville Police Department or Department designee shall have access to all security systems.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 10/636
7. Subject to the provisions below regarding the use and handling of Confidential Information, IP access for remote monitoring of security cameras
by the Porterville Police Department or Department designee.
8. Subject to the provisions below regarding the use and handling of Confidential Information, any and all video or audio tape recordings made for
security or other purposes shall be marked with the date and time made and shall be kept, in an unaltered state, for a period of thirty (30) days and
must be made available to the Porterville Police Department or Department designee for duplication upon demand. In addition, upon request by the
Porterville Police Department the Responsible Party shall duplicate the records for the Porterville Police Department or Department designee.
9. Hardened bullet resistant windows for exterior windows as part of any new or existing construction.
10. Accounting software systems need to be in place to provide audit trails of both product and cash, where applicable.
11. Electronic track and trace systems for cannabis products shall be utilized as approved by the City and as required by State law.
12. Premises may be inspected and records of the Business Owner audited by the City for compliance on a quarterly basis or at any reasonable time
at the City’s discretion.
13. State of the art network security protocols and equipment need to be in place to protect computer information.
14. The foregoing requirements shall be approved by the Police Chief prior to commencing operations. The Police Chief may supplement these
security requirements once operations begin, subject to review by the City Council if requested by the Business Owner.
15. The City, Police Chief, Police Department employees, and any other law enforcement official acting under the direction of the Police Chief who
access the Premises and video and/or audio feeds or recordings of the Premises ("Recipients") may receive or be provided with confidential
information relating to the Cannabis dispensary, which may include the following: data, records, plans, and matters relating to customers, vendors,
tenants, agreements, and business records (collectively "Confidential Information").To the extent Confidential Information is acquired without a
warrant for access to the Premises and video and/or audio feeds or recordings as authorized under this section, the Recipients shall, to the maximum
extent possible, keep such Confidential Information confidential and not disclose the Confidential Information to any third parties. Provided, however,
that the Recipients may disclose Confidential Information to the State or Federal courts in California in connection with any criminal law enforcement
action against the Business Owner or Operator, (including its employees, contractors and agents conducting business within the Premises) arising
from or related to the Cannabis dispensary, but only to the extent it is necessary and relevant to such criminal prosecution, and the Recipients shall
file any such documents under seal to the extent they contain any Confidential Information. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may disclose
Confidential Information:
a. As may be required by the California Public Records Act or pursuant to a civil subpoena, provided however, the City shall notify the Operator
and provide the Operator with a reasonable opportunity to obtain a protective order before disclosing the Confidential Information.
b. In connection with any City enforcement proceeding relating to compliance with City's Municipal Code and this section, but only to the extent
the Confidential Information is relevant to the proceeding.
P. Delivery.
1. All deliveries of cannabis goods must be performed by a delivery employee of a licensed dispensary.
2. Each delivery employee of a licensed dispensary shall be at least 21 years of age.
3. A licensed dispensary shall not use the services of an independent contractor or courier service to deliver cannabis goods.
4. All deliveries of cannabis goods shall be made in person. A delivery of cannabis goods shall not be made through the use of an
unmanned vehicle.
5. A delivery employee begins the process of delivering when the delivery employee leaves the dispensary premises with the cannabis goods for
delivery. The process of delivering ends when the delivery employee returns to the licensed dispensary premises after delivering the cannabis goods
to the cannabis patients or primary caregivers.
6. A delivery employee of a licensed dispensary shall, during deliveries, carry a copy of the dispensary’s current license, the employee’s governmentissued
identification, and an employer provided badge containing a picture and the name of the delivery employee.
7. A licensed dispensary shall maintain an accurate list of the dispensary’s delivery employees.
Q. Deliveries of Supplies and Transportation of Product. The following rules apply to the deliveries and transportation:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 11/636
1. Deliveries to the Premises of supplies shall only occur as provided for in the diagram and floor plan on file with the City as part of the application
process. Delivery vehicles shall not have any markings indicating that deliveries are being made to a Cannabis Dispensary.
2. The transportation of cannabis samples and product to and from the Premises shall be in unmarked vehicles with no indication that the vehicles
are transporting cannabis samples and products. The Responsible Party shall stagger transportation times, vary routes from the facility, and take other
security measures as requested by the Police Chief.
R. Premises Maintenance. The Business Owner, Operator, and all Responsible Parties shall continually maintain the Premises and its infrastructure so that
it is visually attractive and not dangerous to the health, safety and general welfare of employees, patrons, surrounding properties, and the general public,
and in accordance with the conditions and site plan approved with the Development Agreement. The Premises of the Cannabis Dispensary shall not be
maintained in a manner that causes a public or private nuisance.
S. In addition to any regulations, policies, or procedures authorized to be adopted by the City in accordance with this Article or this Code, the City Manager,
or his or her designee, is authorized to establish any addition rules, regulations, policies and standards governing the: application review and approval
process, the issuance, denial or renewal of cannabis dispensary regulatory permits, the ongoing operation of commercial cannabis dispensary businesses
and the City’s oversight of same; and/or concerning any other subject determined to be necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of this Article.
Additional rules, regulations, policies and standards shall be published to the City’s website and maintained and available to the public if the Office of the City
Clerk.
T. Indemnification and Limitations on City’s Liability.
1. To the fullest extent permitted by local, state, and/or federal law, the City shall not assume any liability whatsoever with respect to having
issued a regulatory permit or executed a development agreement pursuant to this Article, or otherwise approving the operation of any commercial cannabis
business.
2. As a condition to the approval of any regulatory permit and approval of a development agreement, the applicant shall be required to
execute an agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend at the applicant’s sole cost and expense, and hold harmless
the City, and its officers, officials, employees, representatives, and agents from any against all claims, losses, damages, injuries, liabilities or losses which
arise out of, or which are in any way related to the City’s drafting, adoption and passage of regulations, related resolutions, policies, rules and guidelines,
allowing cannabis dispensaries or in the future making any regulatory amendments; the City’s issuance of the regulatory permit; the City’s approval and
execution of a development agreement; the City’s decision to approve the operation of the dispensary; the process used by the City in making the decision
to issue, approve or deny a permit or a development agreement; and/or the alleged violation of any federal, state or local laws by the dispensary or any of its
officers, employees or agents.
3. The dispensary shall maintain insurance at coverage limits and with conditions thereon determined necessary and appropriate from time to
time by the City.
4. The dispensary shall reimburse the City for all costs and expenses, including but not limited to attorney fees and court costs, which the City
may be required to pay as a result of any legal challenge related to the City’s approval of the applicant’s regulatory permit, or related to the City’s approval of
the applicant’s commercial cannabis activity, or the City’s approval of a development agreement. The City may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own
expense in the defense of such action, but such participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder.
5. The terms and provisions as enumerated in this section related to indemnification and limitation on the City’s liability shall be an explicit term
of a regulatory permit and a development agreement that an applicant and permittee shall agree to in order for same to be valid.
15-88: Regulatory Permit Required.
A. At the time authorized by the City, applications for Regulatory Permits shall be filed by the proposed Business Owner(s) with the City and include the
information set forth herein. The City may request such additional information as they deem necessary to determine who the applicant is, and may adopt
additional requirements as authorized in Section 15-87.B.
The applicant shall certify under penalty of perjury that all the information contained in the application is true and correct. The application shall contain the
following items for the Business Owner, Operator and all Responsible Parties known at the time (if different than the Business Owner), and any other party
designated below, to the extent the same shall apply:
1. The full name, present address, and telephone number, including such information to the Premises Owner.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 12/636
2. Date of birth.
3. Tax identification number.
4. The address to which notices relating to the application is to be mailed.
5. Previous addresses for the five (5) years immediately preceding the present.
6. The height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
7. Photographs for identification purposes (photographs shall be taken by the Police Department).
8. All business, occupation, or employment for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of submittal of the application form.
9. The Cannabis Operation business history, including whether the Business Owner and Responsible Parties while previously operating in this or
another city, county or state has had a cannabis related license revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business or activity or
occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation.
10. Complete property ownership and lease details, where applicable. If the Business Owner is not the Premises Owner, the application form must
be accompanied with a notarized acknowledgment from the Premises Owner that Cannabis sales will occur on its property.
11. A descriptive business plan for the Cannabis Operation, including a detailed list of all Cannabis Business activities proposed to occur on
the Premises.
12. A diagram and floor plan of the entire Premises, denoting all the use of areas proposed for Cannabis production, including, but not
necessarily limited to, cultivation, processing, manufacturing, testing, transportation, deliveries, and storage. For Cannabis Dispensaries, the floor
plan should show the layout and design of the building. The diagram and floor plan need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the Premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches.
13. The name or names of the Operator. The Operator shall designate one or more Responsible Parties, one of which shall at all times be
available as a point of contact for the City, 24 hours per day. The contact information and schedule of the Operator and Responsible Parties shall
be provided to the Police Chief and updated within twenty-four(24) hours of any changes.
14. The proposed security arrangements for insuring the safety of persons and to protect the Premises from theft.
15. An accurate straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to the application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be
occupied by the Cannabis Operation and the property line of any school or any other sensitive use as set forth in the Operational Requirements.
16. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information submitted.
B. Other Permits or Licenses. The fact that an applicant possesses other types of State or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the
requirement of obtaining a Regulatory Permit.
15-89: Employee Permit Required.
A. Every employee or independent contractor working at a Cannabis Operation or involved in transportation/delivery related services for a Cannabis
Business shall obtain an Employee Permit. It shall be the duty of the Operator to ensure that Employee Permits are obtained from the Police
Department prior to the employee or independent contractor commencing work. Persons who are listed as a Business Owner on a Regulatory Permit
shall not be required to obtain an Employee Permit if such person also serves as an employee or contractor. All Responsible Parties, except the
Business Owner, shall be required to obtain an Employee Permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 13/636
B. Each employee and independent contractor shall be required to provide the following information under penalty of perjury, so that the Police
Department can perform a background check:
1. Name, current resident address, and telephone number.
2. Date of birth.
3. Tax identification number.
4. Height, weight, color of eyes, and hair.
5. Photographs for identification purposes (photographs shall be taken by the Police Department).
6. Be fingerprinted by the Police Department.
7. Such other identification and information as deemed necessary by the Police Chief and pertinent to the Employee Permit.
8. Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek verification of the information contained within the application.
9. The name of the Business Owner holding the Regulatory Permit and the Operator for which such person is proposed to work.
15-90: Application Fees.
Every new application for a Regulatory Permit, Employee Permit, or renewal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of
City Council. This fee shall be in addition to any other business license, tax, or permit fee imposed by this Code or other governmental agencies. The fee
shall include an amount to cover the costs of fingerprinting, photographing, background checks as well as general ongoing monitoring for compliance and
processing of the application.
15-91: Investigation.
A. Upon the filing of a properly completed application and the payment of the fee, the Police Chief is authorized to conduct an investigation of the
application, including a background check of the applicant and all employees and independent contractors. All applicants for a Regulatory Permit and
Employee Permit shall be required to submit to a fingerprint-based criminal history records check conducted by the Porterville Police Department.
B. For Employee Permits, after the background checks and investigation are complete, and in no case later than thirty (30) days after receipt of a properly
completed application, the Police Chief shall either approve or deny an Employee Permit. At the discretion of the Police Chief, Employee Permits may be
conditionally approved pending the background investigation.
15-92: Term of Permits and Renewals. Regulatory Permits issued under this
Chapter shall expire on December 31 each year. Applications for renewal shall be
made at least forty-five (45) days prior to the expiration date of the permit and shall
be accompanied by the nonrefundable fee referenced in this section. When made less
than forty-five (45) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will
st
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 14/636
not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on similar to applications for
permits except that the Police Chief shall renew annual permits for additional one
year periods if the circumstances and information provided with the initial
application have not materially changed. Regulatory fees may be pro-rated based on
the term of the Regulatory Permit.
15-93: Grounds for Denial of Regulatory Permit.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require the City to grant a regulatory permit. Notwithstanding this, applications for a Regulatory Permit are
required to be denied for one or more of the following:
A. The business or conduct of the business at a particular location is prohibited by any local or State law, statute, rule or regulation.
B. The Business Owner or Operator has been issued a local or State permit related to Cannabis operations at any other location in California, or
another state, and that permit was suspended or revoked, or the Business Owner or Operator has had disciplinary action relating to the permit.
C. The Business Owner or Operator has knowingly made a false statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted to state a material fact in the
application.
D. Consistent with State Law or other applicable State law, the Business Owner or Operator, or any Responsible Person, has been:
1. Convicted of a serious or violent offense as listed under California Penal Code sections 667.5 and 1192.7(c); or
2. Convicted of any of the offenses listed in Business and Professions Code section 19323; or
3. Convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude as defined under State law (generally crimes relating to theft and dishonesty) within the five
(5) years preceding the date of the application; or
4. Convicted of a felony involving the illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as defined
in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, unless the individual has received a Certificate of Rehabilitation as defined in the Act; or
5. Has engaged in misconduct related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a permittee, such as lying on an application, falsifying legal
documents, or anything that would otherwise ban the permittee from obtaining a State license under State Law; or
6. Consistent with State Law or other applicable State law, the Business Owner or Operator has engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive
business acts or practices; or
7. The Business Owner or Operator is under twenty-one (21) years of age, or any older other age set by the State; or
8. The Cannabis Operation does not comply with the zoning ordinance standards of the City, the development standards set forth in this Municipal
Code, or the terms of the Development Agreement; or
9. The required annual business license fee, annual regulatory fee or fees specified in this Code or the Development Agreement have not been paid.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 15/636
15-94: Grounds for Denial of Employee Permit.
The grounds for denial of an Employee Permit shall be one or more of the following:
A. The applicant has been issued a local or State permit related to Cannabis production at any other location in California, or another state, and that
permit was suspended or revoked, or the applicant has had disciplinary action relating to the permit.
B. Consistent with State Law or other applicable State law, the applicant has been:
1. Convicted of a serious or violent offense as listed under California Penal Code sections 667.5 and l 192.7(c); or
2. Convicted of any of the offenses listed in Business and Professions Code section 19323; or.
3. Convicted of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude as defined under State law (generally crimes relating to theft and dishonesty) within the
five (5) years preceding the date of the application; or
4. Convicted of a felony involving the illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled substances, as
defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, unless the individual has received a Certificate of Rehabilitation as defined in State Law; or has
engaged in misconduct related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a permittee; or
5. Consistent with State Law or other applicable State law, the applicant has engaged in unlawful, fraudulent, unfair, or deceptive business acts or
practices; or
6. The applicant has committed any act, which, if done by a permittee, would be grounds for suspension or revocation of a permit; or
7. An applicant is under eighteen (21) years of age, or any older age set by the State.
15-95: Notice of Decision and Final Action.
A. Regulatory Permit. Action on a properly authorized and submitted application for a Regulatory Permit shall be as follows:
1. The Police Chief shall cause a written notice of his or her recommendation on the issuance or denial of a Regulatory Permit, and the date and
time when the City Council will consider action on the Regulatory Permit, to be personally delivered or mailed to the applicant by certified U.S. mail,
postage prepaid.
2. Following a public hearing before the City Council, the Council may grant the Regulatory Permit subject to the other requirements of this Article
and subject to such conditions as it deems reasonable under the circumstances to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, or it
may deny the issuance of the Regulatory Permit for any of the grounds specified in this section. The decision of the Council shall be final, subject to
judicial review below.
B. Employee Permit. Action on the Employee Permit shall be as follows: The Police Chief shall cause a written notice of his or her determination on
the issuance or denial of an Employee Permit to be personally delivered or mailed to the applicant by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid. The Police
Chiefs decision on an Employee permit shall be final, subject to judicial review.
15-96: Suspension and Revocation of Regulatory Permit or Employee Permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 16/636
A. Regulatory Permit. The City Council may suspend or revoke the Regulatory Permit of a Commercial Cannabis Operation when any of the following occur:
1. The Cannabis Operation is conducted in violation of any provision of this section, the terms of the Development Agreement, State Law, or any
other applicable State law.
2. The Cannabis Operation is conducted in such a manner as to create a public or private nuisance.
3. A failure to pay the Regulatory Fee required by this Article or other required fees pursuant to this Code or the Development Agreement.
4. A failure to take reasonable measures to control patron conduct, where applicable, resulting in disturbances, vandalism, or crowd control
problems occurring inside of or outside the Premises, traffic control problems, or obstruction of the operation of another business.
5. A failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the Regulatory Permit issued in connection therewith or the terms of the Development
Agreement.
6. Any act which would be considered grounds for denial of the Regulatory Permit in the first instance.
B. Employee Permit. The Police Chief may suspend or revoke an Employee Permit when the permittee or the employee has committed any one or more of
the following acts:
1. Any act which would be considered a ground for denial of the permit in the first instance.
2. Violates any provision of this section, State Law, or any other applicable law relating to the Cannabis Operation.
3. Violates or fails to comply with the terms and conditions of the Employee Permit.
C. Procedures for Revoking Regulatory Permits. For Regulatory Permits, the procedures for revoking conditional use permits shall be utilized except that
the matter shall be heard by the City Council in the first instance, and shall be subject to the same judicial process as applied to a Conditional Use Permit.
D. Procedures/or Revoking Employee Permits. Prior to suspension or revocation of an Employee Permit, the Police Chief shall conduct a hearing. Written
notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee at least five (5) calendar days prior to the date set for such hearing. The
notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking or suspending the permit. Notice may be given either by personal delivery
or by certified U.S. mail, postage prepaid. Any permittee aggrieved by the decision of the Police Chief in suspending or revoking an Employee Permit shall
have no appeal rights and the Police Chiefs decision shall be final, subject to judicial review as set forth in this section.
E. Immediate Suspension. The Police Chief may immediately suspend or revoke a Regulatory Permit and an Employee Permit without notice or a hearing,
subject to the appeal rights set forth herein, under either of the following circumstances:
1. The Business Owner or Operator is convicted of a public offense in any court for the violation of any law which relates to the Cannabis
Operation, or in the case of an Employee Permit, the employee is convicted of a public offense in any court for the violation of any law which
relates to the permit.
2. The Police Chief determines that immediate suspension is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. The
Police Chief shall articulate the grounds for the immediate suspension in writing and the suspension shall only be for as long as necessary to
address the circumstances which led to the immediate suspension.
15-97: Effect of Denial or Revocation.
When the City Council shall have denied a Regulatory Permit or revoked a Regulatory Permit, or the Police Chief shall have denied or revoked an
Employee Permit, no new application for a Regulatory Permit and no new application for an Employee Permit shall be accepted and no Regulatory Permit
or Employee Permit shall be issued to such person or to any corporation in which he or she shall have any beneficial interest for a period of one (1) year
after denying or revoking the Regulatory Permit or Employee Permit.
15-98: Abandonment.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 17/636
In addition to the suspension or revocation of a Regulatory Permit, a Regulatory Permit shall be deemed abandoned if the Cannabis operation ceases for a
period of more than ninety (90) consecutive days. Before restarting operations, a new Regulatory Permit shall be secured. The 90 day period shall be tolled
during periods of force majeure, which shall be defined as follows: war; insurrection; strikes; lock-outs; riots; floods; earthquakes; fires; casualties;
supernatural causes; acts of the "public enemy"; epidemics; quarantine restrictions; freight embargoes; lack of transportation; unusually severe weather;
inability to secure necessary labor, materials or tools; delays of any contractor, subcontractor or supplier; or any other causes beyond the reasonable control
of the permittee.
15-99: Other Licenses, Permits, Taxes or Charges.
Except as expressly provided in this Chapter, nothing contained in this Chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect
any requirements for any permit or license required by, under or by virtue of any provision of any other title or Chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or
resolution of the City, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or other charge imposed, assessed or required
by, under or by virtue of any other title or Chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the City. Any references made or contained in any
other title or Chapter of this Code to any permits, licenses, taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license fees, shall be deemed to refer to the
permits, licenses, taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of license fees, provided for in other titles or Chapters of the Porterville City Code unless otherwise
expressly provided.
15-100: Violation Deemed Misdemeanor and other Remedies.
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter or who other than by a sworn statement, knowingly or intentionally misrepresents to any officer or
employee of the City any material fact herein required to be provided is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1-9 of this Code. A
person who on a sworn statement states as true a material fact that he or she knows to be false is guilty of perjury. Additionally, the City may avail itself of
any remedies or enforcement provisions provided for in the Code.
15-101: Actions to Collect.
The amount of any tax, fee, penalty and/or interest imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the City. An action may be
commenced in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent tax, fees, penalties and interest thereon.
15-102: Severability.
If any provision of this Chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful,
unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall have no effect on any other provision of this Chapter or the application of this Chapter to any
other person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable.
15-103: Remedies Cumulative.
All remedies prescribed under this Chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof.
15-104: Amendment or Repeal.
This Article may be repealed or amended by ordinance of the Porterville City Council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 18/636
15-105: Penalties.
Any entity that fails to pay the taxes and/or fees required by this Code or the Development Agreement within fifteen (15) days after the due date shall pay in
addition to those taxes and/or fees a penalty for nonpayment in the sum equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the total amount due. Additional penalties will
be assessed in the following manner: ten percent (10%) shall be added on the first day of each calendar month following the month of the imposition of the
twenty-five percent (25%) penalty if the fee remains unpaid – up to a maximum of one hundred percent (100%) of the fee payable on the due date. Receipt
of the fee payment by the City shall govern the determination of whether the fee is delinquent. Postmarks will not be accepted as adequate proof of a timely
payment.
SECTION 3. CEQA REVIEW. The City Council hereby finds that this ordinance is not subject to review under the California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) pursuant to CEQA Guidelines section 15061(b)(3) [there is no possibility the activity in question may have a significant affirmative effect on the
environment]. In addition to the foregoing general exemption, the City Council further finds that the ordinance is categorically exempt from review under
CEQA under the Class 8 categorical exemption [regulatory activity to assure the protection of the environment]. The City Manager is hereby directed to
ensure that a Notice of Exemption is filed pursuant to CEQA Guidelines section 15062 [14 C.C.R. § 15062].
SECTION 4. NO LIABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance shall not in any way be construed as imposing any duty of care, liability or responsibility
for damage to person or property upon the City of Porterville, or any official, employee or agent thereof.
SECTION 5. PENDING ACTIONS. Nothing in this ordinance or in the codes hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding
pending or impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or
ordinance or code repealed by this ordinance, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this ordinance.
SECTION 6. SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance, or its application to
any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, or its application to any
other person or circumstance. The City Council of the City of Porterville hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable.
SECTION 7. CONSTRUCTION. The City Council intends this ordinance to supplement, not to duplicate or contradict, applicable state and federal
law and this ordinance shall be construed in light of that intent. To the extent the provisions of the Porterville Municipal Code as amended by this ordinance
are substantially the same as provisions in the Porterville Municipal Code existing prior to the effectiveness of this ordinance, then those amended
provisions shall be construed as continuations of the earlier provisions and not as new enactments.
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVE DATE. The foregoing ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date of the passage hereof. Prior to the
expiration of fifteen (15) days from the enactment hereof a certified copy of this ordinance shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to
Government Code section 36933(c)(1) and a summary shall be published once in the Porterville Recorder, a newspaper printed and published in the City of
Porterville, State of California, together with the names of the Council members voting for and against the same.
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 7th day of May, 2019.
Martha A. Flores, Mayor
ATTEST:
John D. Lollis, City Clerk
By: __________________________________
Patrice Hildreth, Chief Deputy City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1854
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 19/636
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE AMENDING CHAPTER 21 (DEVELOPMENT CODE) OF THE
PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL CODE, CONCERNING CANNABIS LAND USES AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES
WHEREAS, in 1996, the voters of the State of California approved Proposition 215 (codified as Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 et seq. and
entitled “The Compassionate Use Act of 1996” referred to herein as the “CUA”);
WHEREAS, in 2003, the California Legislature adopted SB 420, the Medical Marijuana Program (“MMP”), codified as Health and Safety Code Section
11362.7 et seq., which permits qualified patients and their primary caregivers to associate collectively or cooperatively to cultivate marijuana for medical
purposes without being subject to criminal prosecution under the California Penal Code;
WHEREAS, under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, codified in 21 U.S.C. Section 801 et seq., the use, possession, and cultivation of marijuana are
unlawful and subject to federal prosecution without regard to a claimed medical need;
WHEREAS, on October 9, 2015, Governor Jerry Brown approved a series of bills commonly referred to as the Medical Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act (“MCRSA”), effective January 1, 2016, which established a comprehensive State licensing and regulatory framework for the cultivation, manufacture,
transportation, storage, distribution and sale of medical cannabis, and which recognized the authority of local jurisdictions to either impose additional
restrictions or prohibit certain activities related to the cultivation, manufacture, transportation, storage, distribution and sale of medical cannabis;
WHEREAS, on November 8, 2016, California voters approved the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act (“AUMA”). The AUMA added
Division 10 to the California Business and Professions Code, Sections 26000, et seq., which grants State agencies the authority to create, issue, renew,
discipline, suspend, or revoke licenses for cannabis businesses. The AUMA provides that the State shall begin issuing licenses to cannabis businesses
under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code by January 1, 2018. California Business and Professions section 26055(e) provides
that a State licensing authority shall not approve an application for a State license for commercial non-medical cannabis activity if approval of the State
license will violate the provisions of any local ordinance;
WHEREAS, on June 27, 2017, the Governor signed into law Senate Bill 94 which repealed the MCRSA, included certain provisions of the MCRSA in the
licensing provisions of the AUMA, and created a single regulatory scheme for both medical and non-medical cannabis known as the Medicinal and Adult-
Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (“MAUCRSA”). The MAUCRSA retains the provisions in the MCRSA and AUMA that granted local jurisdictions
control over whether commercial cannabis activity could occur in a particular jurisdiction. Specifically, California Business and Professions Code section
26200 provides that the MAUCRSA shall not be interpreted to supersede or limit the authority of a local jurisdiction to adopt and enforce local ordinances
that completely prohibit the establishment or operation of one or more businesses under the State, within that local jurisdiction. Furthermore, the
MAUCRSA provides that a State licensing authority shall not approve an application for a State license for a business to engage in commercial cannabis
activity if approval of the State license will violate the provisions of any local ordinance or regulation. The MAUCRSA requires that a State licensing
authority begin issuing licenses to marijuana businesses beginning January 1, 2018;
WHEREAS, on April 2, 2019, the City Council of the City of Porterville held a public hearing on the proposed Ordinance, at which time all persons
interested in the proposed Ordinance had the opportunity and did address the City Council on these matters. Following receipt of public testimony the City
Council closed the public hearing; and
WHEREAS, it is in the interest of the City, its residents, and its lawfully permitted businesses that the City adopts this ordinance to amend its
cannabis regulations to permit the limited development and establishment of commercial cannabis dispensaries, and remove the restrictions on personal
cultivation and related activities and prohibitions smoking and use in public places or on private business properties (provided that those restrictions and
prohibitions are relocated to Chapter 18 of the Municipal Code by an Ordinance adopted by the City Council concurrently herewith);
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE DOES HEREBY ORDAIN as follows:
SECTION 1. Table 202.02 is hereby amended as follows:
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS – DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification DR-N DR-S DR-D D-MX DRM-2 DRM-3 D-PO D-GC D-PS Additional Regulations
Residential Use Classifications
Single Family Dwelling See sub-classifications below
Attached P(1) - - - P P - - -
Multi-family Residential P(1) P(2) - P P P P(1) - -
Family Day Care Home See sub-classifications below
Small P P - P P P P - -
Large - - - P P P - - - Section 301.07 Family
Day Care Home, Large
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 20/636
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS – DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification DR-N DR-S DR-D D-MX DRM-2 DRM-3 D-PO D-GC D-PS Additional Regulations
Group Residential - - - P(3) P P - - -
Mixed Use Development C Section 203.04
Supplemental Regulations
Residential Care
Facilities, Limited
P P - P P P P - -
Single Room Occupancy
Hotels
- - - C(1) - - - - - Section 301.18 Single
Room Occupancy Hotels
Public and Semi-Public Use Classifications
Clubs and Lodges C(4) P P P - - P(5) P - Section 301.02 Alcoholic
Beverage Sales
Colleges and Trade
Schools, Public or
Private
C(5) C C C - - C C P
Community Center - - - C - - - - P
Cultural Institutions C(5) C C C - - P C P
Day Care Centers C C C C C C P - C
Elderly and Long Term
Care
- - - - P P P - -
Government Offices P P P - - - P - P
Instructional Services P(5) P P P - - P P P
Park and Recreation
Facilities, Public
P P P P P P P P P
Religious Facilities - - - C C C - - -
Residential Care
Facilities, General
- - - - C C - - - Section 301.15 Residential
Care Facilities, General
Schools, Public or
Private
P(4) P P P - - - - P
Social Service Facilities - - - C C C - - - Section 301.19 Social
Service Facilities
Commercial Use Classifications
Animal Care, Sales, and
Services
See sub-classifications below
Kennels - - C - - - - C -
Pet Stores M(6) P(6) P(6) M(6) - - - P(6) -
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 21/636
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS – DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification DR-N DR-S DR-D D-MX DRM-2 DRM-3 D-PO D-GC D-PS Additional Regulations
Veterinary Services,
Small
- - C - - - - P -
Artists’ Studios P P P P - - - P -
Automobile/Vehicle
Sales and Services
See sub-classifications below
Automobile/Vehicle
Rentals.
- - - - - - - P -
Automobile/Vehicle
Sales and Leasing.
- C C(7) - - - - P -
Automobile/Vehicle
Service and Repair,
Major.
- - C - - - - C - Section 301.04
Automobile/Vehicle
Service and Repair, Major
and Minor
Automobile/Vehicle
Service and Repair,
Minor.
- C(7) C(7) - - - - P - Section 301.04
Automobile/Vehicle
Service and Repair, Major
and Minor
Automobile/Vehicle
Service and Repair,
Washing.
- - - - - - - C - Section 301.05 Auto
Service Stations and Car
Washing
Service Station - - - - - - - C - Section 301.05 Auto
Service Stations and Car
Washing
Banks and Financial
Institutions
See sub-classifications below
Banks and Credit Unions P(8) P(8) P P(8) - - P(8) P -
Building Materials and
Services
- - - - - - - P(9) -
Business Services P(10) P(10) P(10) P(10) - - P P -
Cannabis Dispensary P P P(16) P(16) - - - P(16) - Municipal Code Chapter
15, Article VII
Commercial
Entertainment and
Recreation
See sub-classifications below
Cinema/Theaters C C C C - - - C - Section 301.02 Alcoholic
Beverage Sales
Downtown
Entertainment
- - C C - - - C C Section 301.02 Alcoholic
Beverage Sales
Small-scale C C C C - - - C - Section 301.02 Alcoholic
Beverage Sales
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 22/636
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS – DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification DR-N DR-S DR-D D-MX DRM-2 DRM-3 D-PO D-GC D-PS Additional Regulations
Eating, Drinking, and
Smoking Establishments
See sub-classifications below
Bars/Night
Clubs/Lounges
C C C C - - - C - Section 300.08 Outdoor
Seating; Section 301.02
Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Coffee Shops/Cafes P(8) P(8) P(8) P(8) - - P(8) P(8) P(8,
13)
Section 300.08 Outdoor
Seating
Restaurants P(8) P(8) P(8) P(8) - - P(8) P(8) P(8,
13)
Section 300.08 Outdoor
Seating; Section 301.02
Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Tobacco Bars C C C C - - - C -
Food and Beverage
Retail Sales, less than
5,000 square feet
P P P P - - P(11) P P(11) Section 301.02 Alcoholic
Beverage Sales
Food and Beverage
Retail Sales, more than
5,000 to 50,000 square
feet
P P P P - - - - - Section 301.02 Alcoholic
Beverage Sales
Hotels and Motels C C C C - - - C -
Bed and Breakfasts - - - P(3) - P(3) P(3) - -
Maintenance and Repair
Services less than 1,500
square feet
- - - - - - - P(12) -
Medical Facilities See sub-classifications below
Medical Clinic - P P P - - P P P
Professional/Medical P(13) P P P - - P P P
Mixed Use Development C Section 203.04
Supplemental Regulations
Nurseries and Garden
Centers
- C C C - - - P -
Offices See sub-classifications below
General Offices P(13) P P P - - P P P
Walk-In Clientele P P P P - - P P P
Parking, Public or
Private
P P P P P P P P P
Personal Services P P P P - - P P -
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 23/636
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS – DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification DR-N DR-S DR-D D-MX DRM-2 DRM-3 D-PO D-GC D-PS Additional Regulations
Retail Sales, less than
50,000 square feet
P P P P - - P(11) P -
Retail Sales, more than
50,000 square feet
C C C C - - - C -
Industrial Use Classifications
Handicraft/Custom
Manufacturing
- - - - - - - P -
Industry, Limited - - - - - - - C -
Recycling Facilities See sub-classifications below
Reverse Vending
Machine
- P P P - - - P P Section 301.14 Recycling
Facilities
Recycling Collection
Facility
- C - - - - - C C Section 301.14 Recycling
Facilities
Transportation, Communication, and Utilities Use Classifications
Communication
Facilities
See sub-classifications below
Antenna and
Transmission Towers,
camouflage facilities
P P P P - - P P P Section 301.20
Telecommunication
Facilities
Antenna and
Transmission Towers,
non-camouflage
facilities
C(14) C(14) C(14) C(14) - - C(14) C(14) C(14) Section 301.20
Telecommunication
Facilities
Broadcasting Facility - M M M - - - M - Section 301.20
Telecommunication
Facilities
Call Center - - - - - - P(5) P(5) P
Recording Studio - - P(6) P(6) - - - P(6) -
Transportation Passenger
Terminals
P(15) P(15) P(15) - - - - - -
Utilities, Minor P P P P P P P P P
Other Applicable Types
Accessory Uses and
Structures
P P P P P P P P P Section 301.01 Accessory
Uses and Structures
Home Occupations P P P P P P - - - Section 301.09 Home
Occupations
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 24/636
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS – DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification DR-N DR-S DR-D D-MX DRM-2 DRM-3 D-PO D-GC D-PS Additional Regulations
Second Dwelling Unit - - - - P P - - - Section 301.16 Second
Dwelling Unit
Nonconforming Use Chapter 307 Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
Temporary Use Section 301.21 Temporary Uses
Specific Limitations:
1. Residential units allowed only on upper floors unless approved with a Conditional Use Permit. Common ancillary areas are allowed on the
ground floor except on Main Street.
2. On Main Street, residential units are allowed only on upper floors unless approved with a Conditional Use Permit.
3. Limited to no more than two rooms in a dwelling rented to not more than a total of four persons and meals are not provided to more than
four boarders.
4. Allowed only on upper floors and limited to 5,000 square feet in size.
5. Limited to 5,000 square feet in size.
6. Provided that such use shall be completely enclosed in a building of soundproof construction.
7. Limited to uses conducted wholly within a building enclosed on all sides including the display, storage, repair, and reconditioning of
vehicles.
8. Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
9. Bulk storage of sand, gravel, or cement is not allowed.
10. Wholesale services are not allowed.
11. Permitted only as accessory to a primary use.
12. No outdoor operations or outdoor storage are allowed.
13. Limited to 25 percent of ground floor area unless additional floor area is approved with a Conditional Use Permit. No square footage
limitation on upper floors.
14. Shall not be located within 300 feet of any R district.
15. Not allowed on Main Street. No repair or storage of vehicles is allowed.
16. Shall not be located within 500 feet of a sensitive use.
SECTION 2. Table 204.02 is hereby amended as follows:
TABLE 204.02: land use Regulations—EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Use Classification PO IP IG IA Additional Regulations
Public and Semi-Public Uses
Colleges and Trade Schools, Public or Private C P - -
Correctional Facility - P P -
Cultural Institutions P - - -
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 25/636
TABLE 204.02: land use Regulations—EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Use Classification PO IP IG IA Additional Regulations
Day Care Centers P P(1) - -
Elderly and Long-term Care P - - -
Instructional Services P P - P
Residential Care Facilities, General C - - - Section 301.15 Residential Care Facilities,
General
Schools, Public or Private P - - -
Commercial Uses
Aircraft Sales, Services, and Storage - - - P
Animal Care, Sales and Services See sub-classifications below
Kennels - M M -
Veterinary Services - P P -
Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services See sub-classifications below
Automobile/Vehicle Repair, Major. - P P - Section 301.04 Automobile/Vehicle Service
and Repair
Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. - P P - Section 301.04 Automobile/Vehicle Service
and Repair
Automobile/Vehicle Washing. - P P - Section 301.05 Auto Service Stations and Car
Washing
Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service, and
Rental
- C P -
Service Station - C C - Section 301.05 Auto Service Stations and Car
Washing
Towing and Impound. - C P - Section 300.09 Outdoor Storage
Banks and Financial Institutions See sub-classifications below
Banks and Credit Unions P P(1) P(1) P(1)
Check Cashing Businesses P - - -
Building Materials and Services - P P -
Business Services P P(1) P(1) -
Cannabis Dispensary - - - P Municipal Code Chapter 15, Article VII
Commercial Entertainment & Recreation See sub-classifications below
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 26/636
TABLE 204.02: land use Regulations—EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Use Classification PO IP IG IA Additional Regulations
Large-Scale - C C C Section 301.02 Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Small Scale - C - - Section 301.02 Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Eating, Drinking, and Smoking Establishments See sub-classifications below
Coffee Shops/Cafes P(2) P(1) P(1) P Section 300.08 Outdoor Seating
Restaurants P(2) P(1) P(1) P Section 300.08 Outdoor Seating; Section
301.02 Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Food and Beverage Retail Sales P(2) P(1) P(1) - Section 301.02 Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries - P P -
Hotels and Motels - C C -
Bed and Breakfasts P(10) - - -
Light Fleet Based Services - P P -
Maintenance and Repair Services - P P -
Medical Facilities See sub-classifications below
Hospital P - - -
Medical Clinic P - - -
Professional/Medical P - - -
Offices See sub-classifications below
General Offices P P P P
Walk-In Clientele P - - -
Parking, Public or Private P(3) P P -
Personal Services P(2) P(1) - -
Retail Sales P(2) P(2) P(2) -
Salvage and Wrecking - C C C Section 300.09 Outdoor Storage
Salvage and Wrecking conducted wholly within a
building
- P P P Section 300.09 Outdoor Storage
Sexually Oriented Business - P P - Section 301.17 Sexually Oriented Businesses
Wholesaling and Distribution - P P P
Industrial Uses
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 27/636
TABLE 204.02: land use Regulations—EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Use Classification PO IP IG IA Additional Regulations
Construction and Material Yards - P P - Section 300.09 Outdoor Storage
Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing - P P P
Industry, General - P P P
Alcohol Manufacture - C(4) C -
Hazardous Waste Management Facilities - C(6) C -
Manufacture, processing, or treatment of materials
which may be obnoxious, offensive or hazardous to
health and safety of persons and property
- - C -
Industry, Limited - P P P
Recycling Facilities See sub-classifications below
Recycling Collection Facility - - P - Section 301.14 Recycling Facilities
Recycling Processing Facility - - P - Section 301.14 Recycling Facilities
Warehousing and Storage See sub-classifications below
Chemical, Mineral, and Explosives Storage - C C C
Indoor Warehousing and Storage - P P P
Personal Storage - P P P Section 301.13 Personal Storage
Transportation, Communication, and Utilities Uses
Communication Facilities See sub-classifications below
Antenna and Transmission Towers, camouflage
facilities
P P P P Section 301.20 Telecommunication Facilities
Antenna and Transmission Towers, noncamouflage
facilities
M(7) M(7) M(7) M(7) Section 301.20 Telecommunication Facilities
Broadcasting Facility - P P P Section 301.20 Telecommunication Facility
Call Center P(2) P P -
Freight/Truck Terminals and Warehouses - P P P
Heliports - C C C
Transportation Passenger Terminals - P P P
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 28/636
TABLE 204.02: land use Regulations—EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Use Classification PO IP IG IA Additional Regulations
Utilities, Major - P P P
Renewable Energy Facility C C C
Solid Waste Collection, Treatment, and Disposal - - P C
Utilities, Minor P P P P
Agriculture and Extractive Uses
Crop Cultivation, Commercial M P P M Section 301.06 Crop Cultivation
Crop Cultivation, Non-commercial - P P -
Mining & Quarrying - - C(6) -
Other Applicable Types
Accessory Uses and Structures P P P P Section 301.01 Accessory Uses and Structures
Additional Uses - - - P(9)
Caretaker Unit - P(8) P(8) -
Nonconforming Use Chapter 307 Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Lots
Temporary Use Section 301.21 Temporary Uses
Specific Limitations:
1. Permitted only as an accessory use that supports industrial uses, business and office parks, and corporate offices.
2. Permitted only as an accessory to a primary office and limited to establishments with a gross floor area less than 5,000 square feet in size.
3. Limited to parking areas for exclusive use of occupants, employees and patrons of the uses, buildings, stores, and businesses located in that zone.
4. Alcohol manufacture must be located more than 500 feet from the nearest residential, or commercial zoning designation as shown on the Official Zoning Map.
5. On-site hazardous waste management facilities must be accessory and incidental to a primary use.
6. In areas designated as Mineral Resource Zones in the General Plan
7. Prohibited within 300 feet of any R district.
8. For agricultural employees, when located on farms or ranches containing more than 10 acres.
9. Additional uses may be allowed with City Council approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
10. Limited to no more than two rooms in a dwelling rented to not more than four persons. Meals may not be provided to more than four boarders.
SECTION 3. Section 301.23 is hereby amended as follows:
301.23 Cannabis Cultivation, Use, and Commercial Activities
Purpose and Intent
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 29/636
1. The City Council, based on evidence presented to it in the proceedings leading to the adoption of this chapter, hereby finds that the cultivation,
preparation, and distribution of cannabis in the city has caused and is causing ongoing impacts to the community. These impacts include
increases in various types of crime due to outdoor grows, damage to buildings containing indoor grows, including improper and dangerous
electrical alterations and use, inadequate ventilation leading to mold and mildew, increased frequency of home-invasion robberies and related
crimes. Many of these impacts have fallen disproportionately on residential neighborhoods, but nonetheless also negatively impact properties in
the commercial districts. These impacts have also created an increase in response costs, including code enforcement, building, land use, fire,
and police staff time and expenses.
2. The City Council finds that the restrictions and/or prohibitions on non-commercial cultivation, commercial marijuana cultivation, marijuana
processing, marijuana delivery, and marijuana dispensaries are necessary for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety, and
welfare for the City and its community. The City Council’s prohibition of such activities is within the authority conferred upon the City Council in
its Charter and state law.
3. The purpose of this article is to restrict non-commercial cultivation, and to restrict and/or prohibit the establishment of commercial cannabis
uses in the City.
Interpretation and Applicability
1. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, preclude a landlord from limiting or prohibiting cannabis cultivation, smoking or
other related activities by tenants.
2. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, burden any defense to criminal prosecution otherwise afforded by California
law.
3. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, exempt any cannabis related activity from any and all applicable local and
state construction, electrical, plumbing, land use, or any other building or land use standards or permitting requirements.
4. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any cultivation, transportation, sale or other use of cannabis that is
otherwise prohibited under California law.
5. All cultivation activities within city limits shall be subject to the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this Code, regardless
of whether the cultivation activities existed or occurred prior to adoption of this section.
Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
1. Accessory Structure. A residential accessory structure shall include any uses that are customarily related to a residence, including garages, greenhouses,
storage sheds, studios, and workshops. Any accessory structure must be compliant with Section 301.01 and any other applicable provisions of the Municipal
Code.
2. “Cannabis” (and/or “Marijuana”) means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, or any other strain
or varietal of the genus of Cannabis that may exist or hereafter be discovered or developed that has psychoactive or medicinal properties, whether growing or
not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not
include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced form the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
incapable of germination. For the purposes of this Code, “cannabis” does not mean “industrial hemp” as defined by Section 11018.5 of the California Health
and Safety Code.
3. “Cannabis accessories” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
4. “Cannabis (or Marijuana) Collective” or “cooperative or collective” includes any group that is collectively or cooperatively cultivating and distributing
marijuana for medical purposes that is organized in the manner set forth in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-Diversion of Marijuana
Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the office of the Attorney General for the state of California, or for the
purposes set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act) of California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 to
11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act).
5. “Cannabis Dispensary” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
6. “Cannabis product” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
7. “Commercial cannabis activity” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
8. “Concentrated cannabis” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
9. “Personal (Non-commercial) Cultivation” means any activity involving the growing, planting, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming, and
includes processing of cannabis when done for individual (noncommercial) purposes.
10. “Delivery” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 30/636
11. “Distribution” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
12. “Manufacture” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
13. “MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as codified in Division 10 of the California Business and
Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.
14. “Medical cannabis dispensary” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
15. “Processing” is defined in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
16. “Sensitive use” means any cemetery, religious institution, school, public building regularly frequented by children, public park, or boys’ club, girls’ club
or similar organization.
D. Severability: If any part of Section 301.23 is held to be invalid or inapplicable to any situation by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this section.
E. Personal (Non-commercial) Cultivation and Other Activities: Personal, non-commercial cultivation and other activities including drying, harvesting,
processing, smoking, and use are restricted pursuant to this Section and/or Chapter 18, Article XI of this Code. Nothing shall in this Section shall
prohibit a person twenty-one (21) years of age of older from engaging in the cultivation of six (6) or fewer live cannabis plants within a single private
residence, or inside an accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence. Alternatively, the six or fewer plants may be grown
outdoors within a locked space that is not visible by normal, unaided vision from a public place or from the surrounding properties. Additionally, the
following requirements apply:
1. There shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at any property, from the public right of way.
2. Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) watts.
3. If grown in an accessory structure, the structure(s) shall at all times meet the requirements of the latest adopted version of the California
Building, Fire, Mechanical, Electrical and Plumbing Codes (collectively California Codes). All required electrical permits must be obtained pursuant
to the California Codes and applicable regulations, and proper permits must be obtained from the Building Division prior to performing any work on
electrical wiring or rewiring.
4. If required by the California Codes, the wall(s) adjacent to the cultivation area shall be constructed with five-eighths inch (5/8”) type X
moisture-resistant drywall;
5. Cannabis cultivation areas shall be secured by a functioning audible alarm at all times during growing seasons;
6. The growing of cannabis outdoors shall comply with setback requirements for the primary residence on the property subject to the zoning
classification of the property.
7. Cannabis plants grown outdoors shall be grown in an area enclosed with a solid view obscuring the fence, secured with self-closing and
locking gates; and
8. Areas for cultivation of cannabis shall be secured, locked, and fully enclosed, and rendered inaccessible to minors.
9. All restrictions set forth in Chapter 18, Article XI, applicable to cultivation, shall be complied with.
F. Prohibited Uses and Activities
1. With the exception of Cannabis Dispensaries as set forth further in this Section, and as regulated in Chapter 15, Article VII, Commercial
cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is expressly prohibited in all zones, specific plans areas, and overlay zones of the city. No person shall
establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow or engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city, unless expressly permitted by this
Section or elsewhere in the Porterville Municipal Code.
2. A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy
real property in the city, unless the commercial activity is expressly permitted by this Code, and the activity at that location has been expressly
authorized by the City in accordance with applicable City regulations and State laws. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to
establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in unauthorized commercial cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that
property owner that is located in the city.
3. Unless expressly authorized by this Code, Subsection 1 above shall prohibit all activities for which a State license is required pursuant to
MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. Accordingly, the city shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any
activity for which a State license is required under the MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time, except for activities expressly
authorized and permitted by the City. The city shall also not issue any local license to a nonprofit entity pursuant to California Business and
Professions Code section 26070.5, except as expressly authorized and permitted by the City.
G. Permitted Use
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 31/636
1. Commercial Cannabis Dispensary uses shall be allowed to be established and operated by Business Owners (as defined in Section 15-85
of this Code), that meet all of the requirements specified in this Section and Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code, in the DR-N, DR-S and Airport
Industrial zone districts of the City, subject to having a valid State license for the operations, having a Regulatory Permit from the City, obtaining a
City Business License, and having entered into a Development Agreement between the Business Owners and the City. Any cannabis dispensary
permitted to be established shall at all times be in compliance with this section and Article VII of Chapter 15 of this Code, as it may be amended
from time to time or repealed and replaced by another section governing Cannabis Dispensary operation, but subject to the terms and conditions
within the applicable Development Agreement.
2. The number of regulatory permits for cannabis dispensaries is limited to no more than one permit, plus an additional permit for every
25,000 residents. The City Council may reserve one of the allowed permits exclusively for a medical cannabis dispensary use, in conformity with the
applicable regulations set forth in Chapter 15, Article VII of this Code.
3. Distance separation from schools. All Cannabis dispensaries shall comply with the distance separation requirements from schools as
required by State law. In addition, a Cannabis Dispensary shall not be located within 600 feet from any existing school or proposed school site as
identified in the General Plan. Measurements shall be from property boundary to property boundary. For purposes of this section, school means
any public or private school providing instruction in kindergarten or grades 1-12, inclusive, but does not include any private school in which
education is primarily conducted in private homes. The distance specified in this section shall be measured in the same manner as provided in
subdivision (c) of Section 11362.768 of the Health and Safety Code unless otherwise provided by law.
4. All building property requirements set forth in Article VII, Chapter 15 shall also apply and are hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth
fully herein.
5. Cannabis Dispensary uses are additionally subject to all setback, signage, and other requirements applicable to the zone classifications
they are located in, in addition to any applicable requirements set forth in Chapter 21 and this Code, as well as the Downtown Design Guidelines, in
applicable zone districts.
H. Enforcement. Any violation of this chapter is subject to any and all penalties as prescribed in the Porterville Municipal Code, in addition to being subject to other
remedies provided by law, including but not limited to, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement action, summary abatement of immediately hazardous conditions, and
all other applicable fines, penalties and remedies. This chapter is adopted to address public health and safety issues, and as such, carries with it an express
legislative intent to be interpreted strictly, enforced with an emphasis on public and community safety, and enforced rigorously in a manner such as to deter further
violations. In any civil action brought pursuant to this article, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing
party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in the Porterville Municipal Code, no provision of Section 301.23 or this Code authorizes a criminal prosecution,
arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71 et seq. or Section 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from
time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under this Code and any penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties
allowable under State law shall govern.
SECTION 4: The Porterville Municipal Code, Section 701.02 is hereby amended as follows:
701.02: LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS:
Aircraft Sales, Services, and Storage. Uses related to the rental, sales and leasing, storage, repair, and washing of aircraft.
Airports. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes, including runways, aircraft storage buildings, public terminal buildings and parking, and
support activities such as airport operations, crew quarters, and air traffic control.
Animal Care, Sales and Services
Kennels. Facilities for keeping, boarding, training, breeding or maintaining for commercial purposes, four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other household
pets not owned by the kennel owner or operator. This classification excludes pet shops and animal hospitals that provide twenty-four (24) hour
accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services.
Pet Stores. Retail sales of animals and/or services, including grooming, for animals on a commercial basis. This classification excludes dog walking
and similar pet care services not carried out at a fixed location, and excludes pet supply stores that do not sell animals or provide on-site animal
services.
Veterinary Services, Small. Medical care for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification allows twenty-four (24) hour accommodation
of animals receiving medical or grooming services but does not include kennels.
Veterinary Services, Large. Medical care for large animals which generally includes agricultural animals, on a commercial basis. This classification
allows twenty-four (24) hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services.
Animal Raising. The raising, grazing, or feeding of animals for animal products, animal increase, or value increase, and dairying as an accessory
use on farms with dairy cattle.
Artists’ Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one (1) of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an
applied art or craft. Incidental retail sales of items produced on the premises is required.
Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Services
Automobile/Vehicle Rentals. Rental of automobiles, including storage and incidental maintenance.
Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Leasing. Sales or leasing of automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trucks, and motor homes, including storage and
incidental maintenance.
Automobile/Vehicle Repair, Major. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, boats and recreational vehicles, including the sale,
installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts, generally on an overnight basis. This classification includes auto repair shops, body and
fender shops, and transmission shops, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvaging and tire retreading or recapping.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 32/636
Automobile/Vehicle Service and Repair, Minor. The service and repair of automobiles, light-duty trucks, boats, and motorcycles, including the
sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes quick-service oil, tune-up, wheel and brake shops, auto
glass services, tire sales and installation, muffler shops and upholstery shops where repairs are made or service provided in enclosed bays and no
vehicles are stored overnight. This classification excludes establishments providing engine repair, body and fender work, vehicle painting, or towing.
It also excludes repair of heavy trucks or construction vehicles.
Automobile/Vehicle Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities.
Emergency Ambulance Services. The location of emergency ambulance service vehicles.
Large Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Service and Rental. Sales, servicing, rental, fueling, and washing of large trucks, trailers, tractors, and
other equipment used for construction, agricultural, or landscape gardening activities. Includes large vehicle operation training facilities. Sales of
new or used automobiles or trucks are excluded from this classification.
Service Station. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing automotive fuels or retailing these fuels in combination with activities, such as
providing repair services; selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories; and/or providing food services.
Towing and Impound. Establishments primarily engaged in towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. These
establishments may provide incidental services, such as vehicle storage and emergency road repair services. (For automobile/dismantling, see
Salvage Yards)
Banks and Financial Institutions
Banks and Credit Unions. Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the
on-site circulation of money, including credit unions, but excluding check-cashing businesses.
Check Cashing Businesses. Establishments that, for compensation, engage in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or
other commercial paper serving the same purpose. This classification also includes the business of deferred deposits, whereby the check casher
refrains from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date pursuant to a written agreement as provided in Civil Code
1789.33. Check Cashing Businesses do not include state or federally chartered banks, savings associations, credit unions, or industrial loan
companies. They also do not include retail sellers engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, such as consumables to retail
buyers that cash checks or issue money order incidental to their main purpose or business.
Bed and Breakfast. A small lodging establishment that offers overnight accommodation and inclusive breakfast, where the host lives at the
establishment.
Building Materials and Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards,
tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their
own use. This definition does not include Contractors’ Yards and hardware stores less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in floor area (see
Retail Sales).
Business Services. Establishments that primarily provide goods and services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing
and copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, equipment rental and leasing, office security, custodial services, photo finishing, and
model building, but excluding vehicle rentals, bulk items, or print shops.
Cannabis Dispensary. See Section 301.23, and the definition for “Dispensary” and “Medical cannabis dispensary” located in Section 15-85 of the
Porterville Municipal Code.
Cemetery. Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains, including
mausoleums, burial places, and memorial gardens.
Clubs and Lodges. Meeting, recreational, or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests. This
classification includes union halls and social clubs.
Colleges and Trade Schools, Public or Private. Institutions of higher education providing curricula of a general, religious or professional nature,
typically granting recognized degrees, including conference centers and academic retreats associated with such institutions. This classification
includes business and computer schools, management training, technical and trade schools, but excludes personal instructional services such as
music lessons.
Construction and Material Yards. Storage of construction materials or equipment on a site other than a construction site.
Commercial Entertainment and Recreation. Provision of participant or spectator entertainment to the general public.
Cinema/Theaters. Facilities for indoor display of films, motion pictures, or dramatic, musical, or live performances. This classification may
include incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Downtown Entertainment. This classification includes facilities such as amusement and theme parks, amphitheaters, facilities with more
than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in building area, including fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball, ice or roller skating
rinks, swimming or wave pools, miniature golf courses, bowling alleys, or archery or indoor shooting ranges. This classification may include
restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Large-scale. This classification includes large outdoor facilities such as amusement and theme parks, casinos, sports stadiums and arenas,
racetracks, amphitheaters, drive-in theaters, driving ranges, golf courses, and facilities with fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more in building
area, including fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball, or large tennis club facilities; ice or roller skating rinks; swimming or wave pools;
miniature golf courses; bowling alleys; archery or indoor shooting ranges; riding stables; campgrounds; stables, etc. This classification may include
restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Small-scale. This classification includes indoor facilities that occupy less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of building area, such as billiard
parlors, card rooms, health clubs, fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball; ice or roller skating rinks; swimming or wave pools; miniature
golf courses, bowling alleys, dance halls, small tennis club facilities, poolrooms, indoor shooting ranges, and amusement arcades. This
classification may include restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 33/636
Community Center. Any noncommercial facility established primarily for the benefit and service of the population of the community in which it is
located. Examples include youth centers and senior centers.
Communication Facilities
Antenna and Transmission Towers.Broadcasting and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms,
as well as structures designed to support one (1) or more reception/transmission systems. Examples of transmission towers include, but shall not
be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone exchange/microwave relay towers, and cellular telephone transmission/personal
communications systems towers.
Broadcasting Facility. Includes radio or television stations. Transmission towers must comply with Series 301.20 Telecommunication Facilities.
Call Centers. Includes customer support, direct sales, order processing, customer service, surveys, research, credit management, help desk,
reservations, billing and accounting, sales and telemarketing. These services are either provided internally by the company for its own use or
provided externally by an outsourcing agency which provide these services for several companies.
Recording Studio. Facility for sound recording which can consist of a studio or live room and control room, where sound is recorded and
manipulated.
Correctional Facility. A building such as a jail or prison used for the confinement of persons held while awaiting trial or for the confinement of
persons convicted of offenses.
Crop Cultivation. The cultivation of tree, vine, field, forage, and other plant crops intended to provide food or fibers. The classification excludes
wholesale or retail nurseries. (see Nurseries and Garden Centers)
Crop Cultivation, Commercial. Results in quantities of crops greater than what could be reasonably consumed in personal use and/or crops that
are produced with the intent to sell commercially.
Crop Cultivation, Non-commercial. Includes orchards and flower and vegetable gardens for personal use.
Cottage Food Operations. A private home food operation where low-risk food products are prepared or packaged for sale to consumers which
complies with California Government Code Section 51035.
Cultural Institutions. Public or non-profit institutions engaged primarily in the display or preservation of objects of interest in the arts or sciences
that are open to the public on a regular basis. This classification includes performing arts centers for theater, dance, and events; buildings of an
educational, charitable or philanthropic nature; libraries; museums; historical sites; aquariums; art galleries; and zoos and botanical gardens.
Day Care Centers. Establishments providing non-medical care for persons on a less than 24-hour basis other than Family Day Care Home. This
classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care facilities for children or adults, and any other day care facility licensed by the
State of California.
Eating, Drinking, and Smoking Establishments. Businesses primarily engaged in serving prepared food, beverages, and/or tobacco for
consumption on or off the premises.
Bars/Night Clubs/Lounges.Businesses serving beverages for consumption on the premises as a primary use and including on-sale service of
alcohol including beer, wine, and mixed drinks. This classification includes establishments that provide dancing or entertainment.
Coffee Shops/Cafes. Establishments that serve nonalcoholic beverages, such as coffee, juices or sodas for consumption on or near the premises,
or a specialty snack, such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, cookies or popcorn.
Restaurants. Establishments where meals are served to customers. This classification includes full-service restaurants with table service as well as
establishments providing limited table service, such as fast-food restaurants, carryout sandwich shops, limited service pizza parlors and delivery
shops, and delicatessen restaurants. This classification excludes establishments that provide dancing or entertainment (see Bars/Night
Clubs/Lounges).
Tobacco Bars. Any business establishment which in whole or in part is dedicated to or includes as part of the business, the smoking of tobacco or
other substances. This classification includes cigar lounges, hookah bars/cafes, tobacco cafes/bars, and smoking parlors.
Elderly and Long-term Care. Establishment that provide twenty-four (24) hour medical, convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by
reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves, and is licensed as a skilled nursing facility by the, including
but not limited to, rest homes and convalescent hospitals, but not Residential Care, Hospitals, or Clinics.
Family Day Care Home. A home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for fourteen (14) or fewer children, in the provider's own
home, for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care home
or a small family day care home as follows.
Large. A home that provides family day care for seven (7) to fourteen (14) children, including children under the age of 10 years who reside
at the home (Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78(b)). A large family day care home may provide care for more than 12 children and up
to and including fourteen (14) children, if all of the following conditions are met (Health and Safety Code Section 1597.465):
1. At least one (1) child is enrolled in and attending kindergarten or elementary school and a second child is at least six (6) years of
age.
2. No more than three (3) infants are cared for during any time when more than twelve (12) children are being cared for.
3. The licensee notifies a parent that the facility is caring for two (2) additional school-age children and that there may be up to
thirteen (13) or fourteen (14) children in the home at one (1) time.
4. The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is
leased or rented.
Small. A home that provides family day care for eight (8) or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at
the home (Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78(c)). A small family day care home may provide care for more than six (6) and up to
eight (8) children, without an additional adult attendant, if all of the following conditions are met (Health and Safety Code Section 1597.44):
1. At least one (1) child is enrolled in and attending kindergarten or elementary school and a second child is at least six (6) years of
age.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 34/636
2. No more than two (2) infants are cared for during any time when more than six (6) children are cared for.
3. The licensee notifies each parent that the facility is caring for two (2) additional school-age children and that there may be up to
seven (7) or eight (8) children in the home at one (1) time.
4. The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is
leased or rented.
Food and Beverage Retail Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include food
markets, convenient markets, groceries, liquor stores, and retail bakeries.
Freight/Truck Terminals and Warehouses. Facilities for local or worldwide freight, courier, local messenger, and postal services by truck or rail.
Funeral Parlors and Mortuaries. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of
the human dead and conducting memorial services. Typical uses include a crematory, columbarium, mausoleum, or mortuary.
Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental
storage and maintenance of vehicles. This classification excludes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities that primarily
provide maintenance and repair services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment (See Utilities, Major).
Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent for permanent or
semi-transient residents on a weekly or longer basis. This classification includes rooming and boarding houses, dormitories, private residential
clubs, and residential hotels intended for long-term occupancy (thirty (30) days or more) but excludes Hotels and Motels, Residential Care, Limited
or General.
Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing. Manufacture of crafts, art, sculpture, stained glass, jewelry, apparel, and similar items using hand tools and
small mechanical devices.
Heliports. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of helicopters, as a primary use. Heliports typically contain one (1) or more helipads and may have
limited facilities such as fuel, lighting, a windsock, or even hangars.
Hotels and Motels. Establishments offering lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as
conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or recreation facilities available to guests or to the general public. This classification includes
motor lodges, motels, hostels, extended-stay hotels, and tourist courts, but does not include rooming houses, boarding houses, or private
residential clubs.
Industry, General. Manufacturing of products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of
such products and materials. This classification includes operations such as biomass energy conversion; food and beverage processing; textile
mills; production apparel manufacturing; photographic processing plants; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood product manufacturing;
paper manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing; primary
metal manufacturing; fabricated metal product manufacturing; and automotive, ship, aircraft, and heavy equipment manufacturing.
Industry, Limited. Establishments engaged in light industrial activities taking place primarily within enclosed buildings and producing minimal
impacts on nearby properties. This classification includes operations such as manufacturing finished parts or products primarily from previously
prepared materials; commercial laundries and dry cleaning plants; mobile home manufacturing; monument works; printing, engraving and
publishing; computer and electronic product manufacturing; furniture and related product manufacturing; and industrial services.
Instructional Services. Establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development such as music, vocal, fitness and
dancing instruction.
Light Fleet-Based Services. Passenger transportation services, local delivery services, medical transport, and other businesses that rely on
fleets of three (3) or more vehicles with rated capacities less than ten thousand (10,000) lbs. This classification includes parking, dispatching, and
offices for taxicab and limousine operations, non-emergency medical transport, local messenger and document delivery services, home cleaning
services, and similar businesses. This classification does not include towing operations (See Automobile/Vehicle Sales and Service, Towing and
Impound) or taxi or delivery services with two (2) or fewer fleet vehicles on-site (See Business Services).
Maintenance and Repair Services. The on-site maintenance or repair of office machines, household appliances, furniture, and similar items. This
classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats (see Automotive Sales and Services) and personal apparel (See Personal
Services).
Massage Establishments. Healing arts
Medical Facilities. These classifications exclude veterinary and animal hospitals (see Animal Care, Sales, and Services).
Hospitals. State-licensed facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons.
Medical Clinic. This classification includes facilities for multiple physicians, medical groups, inpatient or outpatient treatment, including
substance-abuse programs as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.
Professional/Medical. This classification is for the single practitioner; to include offices where medical and dental services are provided
by physicians, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, and similar medical professionals, including, where affiliated with a medical practitioner,
massage therapy.
Mining and Quarrying. The extraction of nonmetallic minerals, including dredging and sand and gravel pit operations. This classification includes
surface mining operations.
Mobile Home Parks. Mobile housing in a planned development with common area amenities. Spaces for mobile homes may be rented, leased or
owned through a subdivision, cooperative, condominium or other form of resident ownership.
Multi-Family Residential. Two (2) or more dwelling units on a lot. Types of multiple family dwellings include duplexes, garden apartments, senior
housing developments, and multi-story apartment buildings.
Nurseries and Garden Centers. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products—such as trees, shrubs, plants,
seeds, bulbs, and sod— that are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow
themselves. Fertilizer and soil products are stored and sold in package form only. This classification includes wholesale and retail nurseries
offering plants for sale.
Offices
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 35/636
General Offices. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, administrative or design services, such as
accounting, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design, investment, and legal offices, excluding banks,
and savings and loan associations (see Banks and Financial Institutions).
Walk-In Clientele. Offices of firms or organizations providing services to the public that rely on heavy pedestrian activity and constant visits by
clients, including real estate offices, landlord-tenant services, credit counseling, and financial tax services.
Park and Recreation Facilities, Public. Parks, playgrounds, fairgrounds, recreation facilities, trails, wildlife preserves, and related open spaces,
all of which are noncommercial. This classification also includes playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools, picnic facilities, tennis
courts, and golf courses, botanical gardens, as well as related food concessions or community centers within the facilities.
Parking, Public or Private. Surface lots and structures for use of occupants, employees, or patrons on the subject site or offering parking to the
public for a fee when such use is not incidental to another activity.
Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, massage
therapy, tattoo parlors, seamstresses, tailors, dry cleaning agents (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service
laundries, photocopying and photo finishing services, and travel agencies.
Public Safety Facilities. Facilities providing public-safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection and emergency medical
services, with incidental storage, and maintenance facilities.
Recycling Facility. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing, transferring and/or processing materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal. A
certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter
Reduction Act. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial
or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. This use type
does not include waste transfer facilities that operate as materials recovery, recycling, and solid waste transfer operations and are classified as
utilities.
Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash
refund or a redeemable credit slip.
Recycling Collection Facility. A use that serves as a neighborhood drop off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but
where the processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on-site.
Recycling Processing Facility. Facilities that receive, sort, store and/or process recyclable materials.
Religious Facilities. A facility for religious worship and incidental religious education and offices, including churches, temples, and other facilities
used primarily for religious services or activities. This classification excludes private schools for primary or secondary education, as defined in this
section, which also may be available for temporary use by the general public or civic, cultural, or educational organizations.
Residential Care Facilities, General. Facilities that require a State license or are State licensed and provide twenty-four (24) hour primarily nonmedical
care and supervision, or skilled nursing services, for more than six (6)persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or
assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or
bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by public or
not-for-profit institutions, including hospices, nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, and convalescent facilities. This category excludes
transitional housing, foster family homes, community service facilities, and any facilities supervised by or under contract with the State Department
of Corrections.
Residential Care Facilities, Limited. Facilities that require a State license or are State licensed and provide twenty-four (24) hour non-medical
care and supervision for six (6) of fewer persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of
daily living, excluding the licensee or members of the licensee’s family or persons employed as facility staff. Living accommodations are shared
living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated
for profit as well as those operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including hospices.
Retail Sales. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes
department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, pet supply stores, small hardware stores (with ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less of
floor area), and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and
services (including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, electronic equipment, records, sporting
goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art galleries, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering,
office supplies, bicycles, video rental, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be
combined with other services such as office machine, computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs. This classification includes
secondhand and wholesale stores.
Swap Meet. Any indoor or outdoor place, in an approved location, or for an approved activity where new or used goods or secondhand personal
property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces.
The term swap meet is interchangeable with and applicable to: flea markets, auctions, open air markets, farmers markets, or other similarly named
or labeled activities; but the term does not include the usual supermarket or department store retail operations.
Salvage and Wrecking. Storage and dismantling of vehicles and equipment for sale of parts, as well as their collection, storage, exchange or sale
of goods including, but not limited to, any used building materials, used containers or steel drums, used tires, and similar or related articles or
property.
Schools, Public or Private. Facilities for primary or secondary education, including public schools, charter schools, and private institutions having
curricula comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California.
Sexually Oriented Business. An establishment or concern that, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers, sells or distributes adultoriented
merchandise, or that offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services, entertainment or performances that have sexual
arousal, sexual gratification, and/or sexual stimulation as their dominant theme, or are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas and are not customarily open to the general public because they exclude minors by virtue of their age. This
classification does not include any establishment offering professional services conducted, operated, or supervised by medical practitioners,
physical therapists, nurses, chiropractors, psychologist, social workers, marriage and family counselors, osteopaths, and persons holding licenses
or certificates under applicable State law or accreditation from recognized programs when performing functions pursuant to the respective license
or certificate. Includes Sexually Oriented Businesses defined in Section 301.17(b), Definitions.
Single Family Dwelling. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one (1) household, and located on a separate lot from any other unit (except
accessory living quarters, where permitted). This classification includes individual manufactured housing units installed on a foundation system
pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 36/636
Detached. A single-family dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit.
Attached. A single-family dwelling unit, located singly on a lot, but attached through common vertical walls to one (1) or more dwellings on abutting
lots. An attached single-family dwelling unit is sometimes referred to as a “townhome.”
Single Room Occupancy. A residential facility where individual secure rooms, which may or may not include cooking facilities, are rented to one
(1) or two (2) person households for a weekly or monthly period of time. This use type is distinct from a Hotel or Motel, which is a commercial use.
Social Service Facilities. Any noncommercial facility, such as homeless shelters, and emergency shelters, that may also provide meals, showers,
and/or laundry facilities. Specialized programs and services related to the needs of the residents may also be provided. This classification
excludes transitional housing facilities that provide living accommodations for a longer term.
Transitional and Supportive Housing. As defined in Section 50675.2 and 50675.14, respectively, of the Health and Safety Code
Transportation Passenger Terminals. Facilities for passenger transportation operations. This classification includes rail stations, bus terminals,
and scenic and sightseeing facilities, but does not include airports or heliports.
Utilities, Major. Generating plants, electric substations, solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery (recycling
processing) facilities, solid waste treatment and disposal, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies or public
utilities.
Utilities, Minor. Facilities accessory to an established use involving only minor structures, such as electrical distribution lines, solar panels and
underground water and sewer lines.
Utilities, Renewable Energy Facility. Facilities including solar, wind or other facility utilizing renewable energy.
Warehousing and Storage. Storage and distribution facilities without sales to the public on-site or direct public access.
Chemical, Mineral, and Explosives Storage. Storage of hazardous materials including but not limited to: bottled gas, chemicals, minerals and
ores, petroleum or petroleum-based fuels, fireworks, and explosives.
Indoor Warehousing and Storage. The storage of general merchandise or refrigerated goods within enclosed buildings. Establishments in this
classification provide facilities to store commercial goods, but do not sell the goods they handle. They may provide a range of services related to the
distribution of goods, including labeling, breaking bulk, inventory control and management, order entry and fulfillment, price marking and ticketing,
and transportation arrangement. However, they always provide warehousing or storage in addition to any logistics services.
Personal Storage. Facilities offering storage for individual use, including mini-warehouses and mini-storage.
Wholesaling and Distribution. Indoor storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale; storage of goods for transfer to retail outlets of the
same firm; or storage and sale of materials and supplies used in production or operation, including janitorial and restaurant supplies. Wholesalers
are primarily engaged in business-to-business sales, but may sell to individual consumers through mail or internet orders. They normally operate
from a warehouse or office having little or no display of merchandise, and are not designed to solicit walk-in traffic.
SECTION 5: The City Council finds the approval of this ordinance is not subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”) pursuant to
CEQA Guidelines Sections 15060(c)(2) – the activity will not result in a direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment, and
15060(c)(3) – the activity is not a project as defined in Section 15378 of the CEQA Guidelines, California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Chapter 3,
because it has no potential for resulting in physical change to the environment, directly or indirectly. Alternatively, the City Council finds the approval of
this ordinance is not a project under CEQA Regulation Section 15061(b)(3) because it has not potential for causing a significant effect on the environment.
SECTION 6: This ordinance shall be in full force and effect not sooner than thirty (30) days from and after the ordinance’s publication and
passage.
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 7th day of May, 2019.
Martha A. Flores, Mayor
ATTEST:
John D. Lollis, City Clerk
By:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 37/636
Patrice Hildreth, Chief Deputy City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from the official hard copy. In the case of any
discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO. 1855
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE
ADDING ARTICLE XI TO CHAPTER 18 OF THE PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL CODE, CONCERNING PERSONAL (NON-COMMERCIAL) CANNABIS
ACTIVITIES INCLUDING DRYING, HARVESTING, PROCESSING, SMOKING, AND USE
WHEREAS, California legislation provides that the City of Porterville has the power to regulate certain cannabis activities, personal use and the drying,
harvesting, processing and smoking of cannabis and cannabis products;
WHEREAS, Ordinance No. 1843 was adopted on November 7, 2017, providing for certain restrictions concerning such use, said regulations were set forth in
Chapter 21 (Development Code) of the Porterville Municipal Code, and the City Attorney has recommended that personal cultivation regulations remain within Chapter
21, and the regulations concerning other activities not related to Development be moved to Chapter 18 of the Municipal Code;
NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE HEREBY ORDAINS as follows:
SECTION 1. Article XI, Sections 18-120 through 18-125 are hereby added to Chapter 18 of the Porterville Municipal Code, as follows:
CHAPTER 18
ARTICLE XI – CANNABIS ACTIVITIES AND USE (NON-COMMERCIAL)
18-120: Purpose and Intent.
1. The City Council finds that restrictions on personal cannabis activities including drying, harvesting, processing, smoking and use are necessary for the
preservation and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare for the City and its community. The City Council’s prohibition of such activities is within the authority
conferred upon the Council in its Charter and State law.
2. The purpose of this section is to restrict personal cannabis activities including drying, harvesting, processing, smoking, and use, consistent with permitted
local regulation under State law.
3. To the extent not covered in this Article, personal, non-commercial cultivation of cannabis is regulated, consistent with applicable State law, pursuant to
Section 301.23 of this Code.
18-121: Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, “cannabis” and/or “marijuana,” “cannabis product,” “cannabis accessories,” “cultivation,” “distribution,” “manufacture,”
“processing,” and “transporting” have the same meanings as defined in Section 301.23 and/or Section 15-85 of this Code.
18-122: Interpretation and Applicability.
1. Nothing in this Article is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, preclude a landlord from limiting or prohibiting cannabis cultivation, smoking
or other related activities by tenants.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 38/636
2. Nothing in this Article is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, burden any defense to criminal prosecution otherwise afforded by California
law.
3. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, exempt any cannabis related activity from any and all applicable local and
State construction, electrical, plumbing, land use or any other building or land use standards or permitting requirements.
4. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any cultivation, transportation, sale or other use of cannabis
that is otherwise prohibited under California law.
5. All personal (non-commercial) cultivation activities are also subject to the provisions of Section 301.23 of this Code.
6. Commercial cannabis activities are restricted and regulated under Chapter 15, Article VII, of this Code.
18-123: Severability.
If any part of this Article is held to be invalid or inapplicable to any situation by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining sections of this Article.
18-124: Personal Activities/Use Restrictions and Prohibitions.
1. To the extent that the following activities are permitted by State law, nothing in this section shall prohibit a person twenty one (21) years of
age or older from:
a. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older, without
compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis not in the form of concentrated cannabis;
b. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to person twenty one (21) years of age or
older, without compensation whatsoever, up to eight grams (8 g) of cannabis in the form of concentrated cannabis;
c. Smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis products except as prohibited by California Health and Safety Code section
11362.3 or other State laws (and as restricted by this section);
d. Possessing, transporting, purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away cannabis accessories to persons
twenty one (21) years of age or older without compensation whatsoever; or
e. Engaging in the cultivation of six or fewer live cannabis plants, as set forth in Section 301.23 of this Code.
2. The use of gas products or other volatile solvent (e.g. CO2, butane, etc.) for cannabis cultivation, processing or manufacture is prohibited.
3. No distribution of cannabis cultivated or processed for personal use shall be allowed other than as authorized by this Code, or required to be
allowed by law.
4. A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy
real property in the City, unless the commercial activity is expressly permitted by this Code, and the activity at the location has been expressly authorized
by the City in accordance with applicable City regulations and applicable State laws.
5. The smoking, ingesting, or use of cannabis or cannabis products is prohibited in all public places, in all locations where smoking tobacco is
prohibited, and on all business properties or within business facilities within the jurisdictional limits of the City, unless otherwise expressly authorized by
City regulation, or required to allowed by State law.
18-125: Enforcement.
Any violation of this Article is subject to any and all penalties as prescribed in the Porterville Municipal Code, in addition to being subject to other
remedies provided by law, including but not limited to, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement action, summary abatement of immediately hazardous
conditions, and all other applicable fines, penalties and remedies. This section is adopted to address public health and safety issues, and as such, carries
with it an express legislative intent to be interpreted strictly, enforced with an emphasis on public and community safety, and enforced rigorously in a
manner such as to deter further violations. In any civil action brought pursuant to this Article, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in the Porterville Municipal Code, no provision of this Article
authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest, or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code section 11362.71 et seq., or section
11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under this Code and any
penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties allowable under State law shall govern.
SECTION 2. CEQA REVIEW. The City Council hereby finds that this ordinance is not subject to review under the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA) pursuant to CEQA Guidelines Section 15061(b)(3) [there is no possibility the activity in question may have asignificant affirmative effect on the
environment]. In addition to the foregoing general exemption, the City Council further finds that the ordinance is categorically exempt from review under
CEQA under the Class 8 categorical exemption [regulatory activity to assure the protection of the environment]. The City Manager is hereby directed to
ensure that aNotice of Exemption is filed pursuant to CEQA Guidelines section 15062 [14 C.C.R. § 15062].
SECTION 3. NO LIABILITY. The provisions of this ordinance shall not in any way be construed as imposingany duty of care, liability or
responsibility for damage to person or property upon the City of Porterville, or anyofficial, employee or agent thereof.
SECTION 4. SEVERABILITY. If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance, or its application to
any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, or its application to any
other person or circumstance. The City Council of the City of Porterville hereby declares that it would have adoptedeach section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or unenforceable.
SECTION 5. CONSTRUCTION. The City Council intends this ordinance to supplement, not to duplicate or contradict, applicable state and federal
law and this ordinance shall be construed in light of that intent. To the extent the provisions of the Porterville Municipal Code as amended bythis
ordinance are substantially the same as provisions in the Porterville Municipal Code existing prior to theeffectiveness of this ordinance, then those
amended provisions shall beconstrued as continuations of the earlier provisions and not as new enactments.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 39/636
SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE DATE. The foregoing ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days from the date of the passage hereof. Prior to
theexpiration of fifteen (15) days from the enactment hereof a certified copy of this ordinance shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk pursuant to
Government Code section 36933(c)(1) and a summary shall be published once in the Porterville Recorder, a newspaper printed and published in the
City of Porterville, State of California, together with the names of the Council members voting for and against the same.
PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 16th day of April, 2019.
Martha A. Flores, Mayor
ATTEST:
John D. Lollis, City Clerk
By: __________________________________
Patrice Hildreth, Chief Deputy City Clerk
PREFACE
The Porterville City Code, originally published by Michie City Publications Company and later supplemented by Book Publishing Company, has been kept
current by regular supplementation. In 2005, Sterling Codifiers began providing supplement service for the City Code.
This City Code of the City of Porterville, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to and including ordinance 1848, passed August 7,
2018, and resolution 44-2014, passed July 1, 2014. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede the
provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City office in order to ascertain whether any
particular provision of the Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 794
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE ADOPTING BY REFERENCE THAT CERTAIN PUBLICATION ENTITLED "THE CODE OF THE CITY
OF PORTERVILLE, CALIFORNIA", AS PUBLISHED BY MICHIE CITY PUBLICATIONS COMPANY OF LOS ANGELES, 1963.
An ordinance of the city of Porterville, California adopting a revision and codification of the ordinances of the city entitled "The Code of the City of
Porterville, California", providing for the repeal of certain ordinances not included therein with certain exceptions, and for other purposes hereinafter set
out.
The council of the city of Porterville do ordain as follows:
Section 1. There is hereby adopted by the city council of the city of Porterville that certain code entitled "The Code of the City of Porterville, California",
containing certain ordinances of a general and permanent nature as compiled, consolidated, codified and indexed in chapters 1 to 25, both inclusive, of
which code not less than three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the city clerk.
Section 2. The provisions of such code shall be in force on and after May 22, 1964, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature in force on
October 3, 1962, and not contained in such code are hereby repealed from and after May 22, 1964, except as hereinafter provided.
Section 3. The repeal provided for in the preceding section of this ordinance shall not affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before May 22, 1964; nor shall it affect any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or
any judgment rendered prior to May 22, 1964; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution promising or authorizing the issue of any bonds of
the city of any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall it affect the annual tax levy; nor shall it affect
any right or franchise conferred by ordinance or resolution of the city on any person, or corporation; nor shall it affect any ordinance adopted for purposes
which have been consummated; nor shall it affect any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect;
nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to the salaries of the city officers or employees; nor shall it affect any ordinance annexing territory to the city; nor
shall it affect any ordinance naming, renaming, opening, accepting or vacating streets or alleys in the city; nor shall it affect any ordinance relating to
zoning; nor shall it affect any ordinance adopted on final reading and passage after October 2, 1962; nor shall if affect any of the following ordinances or
amendments thereto; ordinance 686 accepting the requirements of section 13522 of the Penal Code relating to training law enforcement officers; sections
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 40/636
4311, 4312, 4321, 4322, 4323, 4324, 4325, 4326, 4327, 4328, 4329 of the Ordinance Code pertaining to privies and cleaning septic tanks; sections 10411
to 10431 of the Ordinance Code pertaining to the master plan and setback lines; ordinance 388 pertaining to property taxation and comprising Sections
2111 through 21136 of the Porterville Ordinance Code; Ordinance Nos. 470 and 606, being sections 2211 through 2251 of the Porterville Ordinance Code,
pertaining to sales and use taxes.
Section 4. Whenever in the code adopted by this ordinance or in any other ordinance of the city or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any
officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or if any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific
penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such code or any other ordinance of the city or such rule, regulation or order shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Except where otherwise provided, every day any violation of such Code or any other ordinance of the city or such rule, regulation or order shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 5. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this ordinance
and the code hereby adopted are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this ordinance or the code hereby adopted shall
be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this ordinance or the Code hereby adopted.
Section 6. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect thirty (30) days from and after its publication and passage.
Adopted April 21, 1964.
PORTERVILLE, CALIFORNIA
CITY CHARTER
Sec. 1. Name Of City; Perpetual Succession.
The municipal corporation now existing and known as the "City Of Porterville" shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate, as at present, in fact
and in law, by the name of the "City Of Porterville," and by such name shall have perpetual succession.
Sec. 1.1. City Motto.
"In God We Trust" shall be designated as the official motto of the city of Porterville. (6-24-2008)
Sec. 2. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the city of Porterville shall continue as now established until changed in some manner authorized by law.
Sec. 3. Rights And Liabilities Of Cities; Prior Contracts, Liabilities, Etc., Continued In Effect.
The city of Porterville shall remain vested with and continue to have, hold, and enjoy, all property, rights of property, and rights of action of every nature
and description, now pertaining to said municipality, and is hereby declared to be the successor of the same. No right, liability, pending suit or prosecution
on behalf of, or against, the city shall be affected by the adoption of this charter. All contracts entered into by the city prior to the taking effect of this charter
shall continue in full force and effect.
Sec. 4. General Powers Of City; Official Seal.
The city of Porterville, by and through its council and other officials, shall have and may exercise all powers necessary or appropriate to a municipal
corporation and the general welfare of its inhabitants, which are not prohibited by the constitution, and which it would be competent for this charter to set
forth particularly or specifically; and the specifications herein of any particular powers shall not be held to be exclusive or any limitation upon this general
grant of power. General powers of the city include, but are not limited to, the powers necessary or appropriate to promote the health, welfare and
education of its inhabitants. The city shall have and use a common seal and the official seal hereinbefore adopted and now in use by said city shall
continue to be the official seal of said city. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 4.1. Intergovernmental Powers.
The city may exercise and perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by agreement or otherwise,
with any one or more states or any agency of California, or any governmental jurisdiction or nonprofit corporation thereof, or the United States or any of its
agencies or instrumentalities. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 4.2. Liberal Interpretation.
The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall
not be construed as limiting in any way any of the powers granted by this charter. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 5. When Elections To Be Held; Special Elections; Procedure For Elections For Local Improvements Or Levies Of Assessment Or Bonded
Indebtedness.
General municipal elections shall be held in said city at the same time as the general election for federal offices in the state of California under and
pursuant to the general laws of the state of California governing elections in charter cities, so far as the same may be applicable, and except as herein
otherwise provided. All other municipal elections that may be held by authority of this charter or of general law shall be known as special municipal
elections, and shall be held, substantially as in this charter provided for general municipal elections; providing, however, that special elections to authorize
any municipal or local public improvement, or the levy of assessment therefor, or to create a municipal bonded indebtedness, shall be held in conformity
with any general law of the state relative thereto under which any such proceeding is instituted by the council, in case such general law provides for the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 41/636
procedure and manner of holding elections thereunder. (4-6-1971; 4-5-1977; 3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 6. Initiative, Referendum And Recall.
Ordinances may be initiated, or the referendum exercised on ordinances passed by the council, under and in accordance with the constitution and general
laws of the state. Any elective officer may be recalled from office under and pursuant to the provisions of the constitution and general laws, provided that a
special election shall be held at the same time as the recall election, in accordance with the constitution and general laws of the state, for the purpose of
electing officers to fill the place or places of the officers sought to be recalled. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Sec. 7. Elective Officers To Be Residents.
In order to be eligible to hold any elective office in the city of Porterville, a person must be a resident and elector therein, and shall have resided in said city
for at least thirty days next preceding the filing of their nominating papers, or equivalent declaration or candidacy, and be an elector at the time of said
filing. (4-6-1971; 4-5-1977; 3-4-2003)
Sec. 8. Elective Officers.
The elective officers of the city of Porterville shall be five councilmen, who shall be elected from the city at large at a general municipal election therein.
Sec. 9. Legislative Body; Composition; Election; Term; Compensation; Ineligibility For Other City Office; President Of Council; Vice-President;
Installation Of Newly Elected Officers; Powers To Be Exercised By Council.
The legislative body of the city shall consist of five persons elected at large, which body shall be known as the council.
The members of the council shall be elected by the qualified voters of the city at a general municipal election to be held in the said city at the same time as
the general election for federal offices for the state of California. They shall hold office for the period of four (4) years from and after the Monday next
succeeding the day of their election and until their successors are elected, and qualified; provided the respective terms of any council member presently
serving or elected at the time of the adoption of this amendment shall be extended one additional year to the even-numbered year following the expiration
of their respective terms. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
The members of the council shall each receive the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each council meeting actually attended; the mayor shall receive the
sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each meeting of the council actually attended, provided, however, that the members of the council shall not receive
compensation for more than seven meetings in any one calendar month. In addition, the council shall be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred for
authorized city business. (4-6-1971)
The members of the council shall not be eligible to any other office or employment with the city.
The council shall reorganize at its next meeting following each municipal election and shall choose one of their number to serve as president of the council
to be known as mayor. At this time the council shall also choose one of their number to serve as vice-president, and he/she shall act as mayor pro tempore
in case of the absence, sickness or other disability of the mayor. The mayor and mayor pro tempore shall serve a two year term, but either may be
removed at any time by a majority vote of the council. If the council removes the mayor prior to the expiration of his/her term pursuant to this provision, the
council shall choose one of their number to serve as mayor until the next organizational meeting. (3-4-2003)
The council shall meet at its usual meeting place on the first Monday after any municipal election, duly canvass the returns and declare the result thereof,
and install the newly elected officers, if any.
All powers granted to and vested in the city of Porterville by law or by the provisions of this charter, shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be
exercised by the council to be designated the "Council Of The City Of Porterville." The council shall be the governing body of the city and subject to the
express limitations of this charter shall be vested with all the powers necessary or convenient for a complete and adequate system of municipal
government, consistent with the constitution of the state. (4-6-1937)
Amendment note - The third paragraph of § 9 was amended April 6, 1971. Formerly said section allowed each council member the sum of $5.00 for each
meeting actually attended, for not more than two meetings in any one month.
Sec. 9.1. Public Participation.
The council shall continue to encourage the organization of and communication with representative neighborhood groups throughout the city to encourage
citizen participation, to seek advice and input and to provide information to the public relative to city matters and affairs. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 10. Time And Place Of Council Meetings; Meetings To Be Open To Public; Council To Adopt Rules For Conduct Of Its Own Proceedings.
The council shall provide by ordinance for the time and place of holding its meetings. Special meetings shall be called in accordance with the provisions of
general law. There shall be at least one (1) regular meeting in each month. Any regular meeting may be adjourned to a date and hour certain, and such
adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes. (4-6-1971)
Except for special meetings with the legislative bodies of other political subdivisions, or informational meetings held within a community in accordance with
the Brown act where no action is to be taken, all meetings of the council shall be held at or on publicly-owned facilities, unless by reason of fire, flood, or
other disaster, or lack of seating capacity, the public-owned facilities cannot be used for that purpose, and all meetings shall be open to the public. The
council shall adopt rules for conducting its proceedings and may punish its members or other persons present at any meeting for disorderly conduct. (4-2-
1963; 3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 10 was amended April 6, 1971, by changing the manner of calling special meetings. Formerly the council
provided by ordinance "the manner in which its special meetings may be called." The second paragraph of § 10 was amended March 4, 2003 to allow
meeting outside city hall.
Sec. 11. Quorum; Compelling Attendance At Meetings.
A majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and postpone the
consideration of or action upon, pending business in like manner. Attendance at meetings of absent members of the council may be compelled in such
manner and under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 42/636
Sec. 12. How Council Acts On Legislative Matters; Resolutions; Records Of Votes; Requirement That All Members Vote; How Ordinances
Headed; Ordaining Clause; Ordaining Clause Of Ordinances Passed By Initiative; When Ordinances To Be Passed; Publication; Effective Date
Of Ordinances; Certain Matters Required To Be Passed By Ordinance; Repeal Of Ordinances; Revision Of Ordinances; Ordinances To Be
Signed By Mayor And Attested By Clerk.
The council shall act in legislative matters by ordinance or resolution only. Other action of the council, unless herein otherwise provided, may be taken by
resolution, motion, or order.
The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the record of the proceedings of the council. Upon
the request of any member of the council, the ayes and noes shall be taken and recorded upon any vote. All members present at any meeting must vote;
provided that no such member of the council shall cast a vote when to do so would be contrary to the applicable provisions of state law, including the laws
pertaining to conflict of interest. (3-4-2003)
No ordinance or resolution shall be passed without receiving the affirmative votes of at least three members of the council.
Each ordinance shall be headed by a brief title which shall indicate the purport thereof.
The ordaining clause of all ordinances adopted by the council shall be, "The Council of the City of Porterville do ordain as follows:"
The ordaining clause of all ordinances passed by the vote of the electors of the city, through the exercise of the initiative shall be, "The People of the City
of Porterville do ordain as follows:"
No ordinance shall be passed by the council at any time other than at a regular meeting, and until its publication, in a manner and for a time period as
determined and set forth by ordinance. (7-1-2014)
Except an ordinance calling or otherwise relating to an election, no ordinance passed by the council of the city of Porterville, except when otherwise
specially required by the laws of the state, and except an ordinance for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, which contains a
declaration of, and the facts constituting its urgency and is passed by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of the council, and no ordinance granting a franchise, shall go
into effect before thirty (30) days from its final passage.
Except as otherwise provided by general law, or this charter, no action providing for the granting of any franchise, or for the establishing or changing fire
zones, or for the imposing of any penalty, shall be taken except by ordinance. (3-8-1983)
No ordinance, or portion thereof, shall be repealed except by ordinance. No ordinance shall be revised, reenacted or amended by reference to its title only;
but the ordinance to be revised or reenacted, or the section or sections thereof to be amended, or the new section or sections to be added thereto shall be
set forth and adopted according to the method provided in this section for the enactment of ordinances, and such revision, re-enactment, amendment, or
addition, shall be made by ordinance only.
All ordinances shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk.
Sec. 13. Legislative Officers; Administrative Officers; Other Officers And Commissions; Consolidation Of Offices.
The legislative officers of the city of Porterville shall consist of five (5) members of the council, one of whom shall act as mayor. In addition, there shall be
the following administrative officers who shall be appointed by the council: a city manager, a city attorney and a city clerk.
The council may, by ordinance provide for such other officers as deemed necessary and the council may further establish by ordinance commissions
deemed by it to be necessary or proper to aid in the orderly administration of the city of Porterville.
All members of commissions and legislative committees shall be appointed by the council. The council may appoint members to other boards or
committees. Administrative officers may appoint members to temporary administrative committees. (3-4-2003)
The council may, at any time, when in its judgment, the interest of the city so demands, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote thereof, consolidate by ordinance two or
more city administrative offices and place the same in charge of one such officer. (4-2-1963; 4-6-1971; 3-8-1983)
Sec. 14. Official Bonds; Where Filed.
When in this charter not otherwise prescribed, the council shall determine which officers shall give bonds for the faithful performance of their official duties,
and shall fix the amount of said bonds. Such officers before entering upon their official duties, shall execute a bond to the city in the penal sum required,
which bond shall include any other office of which they may be ex-officio incumbent. Said bonds shall be approved by the council, filed with the city clerk,
and paid for by the city; provided, however, that the bond of the city clerk when approved as aforesaid shall be filed with the city treasurer. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the authorization or furnishing of a blanket bond to assure the honesty or faithful performance of any of its officers or employees. (3-
4-2003)
Sec. 15. Oath Of Office.
Every officer and employee of the city, before entering upon the duties of his/her office shall take and subscribe the oath of offices as provided for in the
constitution of the state, and shall file the same forthwith with the city clerk. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Sec. 16. Vacancies In Office; When Offices Declared Vacant.
A vacancy in any legislative office, from whatever cause arising excluding any vacancy created due to a successful recall election, shall be filled by
appointment by the council, such appointee to hold office until the next general municipal election, when a successor shall be chosen by the electors for
the unexpired term; provided, that if the council fails to agree or for any other reason does not fill such vacancy within thirty days after the same occurs,
then such vacancy shall be filled by the mayor; provided, however, that if for any reason the seats of a majority of the council shall become vacant, then
the city clerk shall call a special election at once to fill the vacancies for the unexpired terms, and the same shall be conducted substantially in the manner
provided for general municipal elections. (3-4-2003)
If, without permission from the city council, any legislative officer of the city shall remove from the city or absent himself/herself therefrom for more than
forty-five (45) days consecutively, or shall fail to attend five (5) consecutive regular city council meetings unless prevented from attending by sickness (but
in no case for a period exceeding ninety (90) days), his/her officer shall thereupon become vacant. If for said forty-five (45) day period any legislative
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 43/636
officer shall willfully fail or refuse to perform the duties of his office, though able to do so, or shall fail to qualify, or shall resign, or be convicted of a felony or
a crime of moral turpitude, or be adjudged mentally incompetent, his/her office shall thereupon become vacant. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 17. Appointment And Removal Of Officers And Employees; Grounds Of Removal; Hearing Prior To Removal.
Except as may be otherwise in this charter provided, the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the council shall be required for the appointment of or the
removal of any administrative officer for cause. "For cause" includes, but is not limited to, refusal to perform the duties of his/her office, being adjudged
mentally incompetent, or being convicted of a felony or crime of moral turpitude. The administrative officer is entitled to a hearing before the council on the
validity of the grounds providing the basis for removal for cause. (3-8-1983; 3-4-2003)
The council may remove any of its administrative officers at its pleasure, without cause stated or at hearing had, by the affirmative vote of four members
cast in favor of such removal, and the determination of the council in such matters shall be final and conclusive. (3-8-1983)
Editor's note - Prior to its complete restatement by an amendment adopted March 8, 1983, § 17 had been amended February 5, 1935, and April 6, 1971.
Sec. 17-A. Retirement Age For City Employees.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 17A. Retirement Age For City Employees Effective April 2, 1975.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 18. Compensation Of Appointive Officers And Employees; Limitation As To Least Amount Of Compensation; Fees Abolished.
The council shall fix the compensation of all appointees and employees except officials and members of boards, commissions and committees serving
gratuitously. Said compensation shall be fixed, increased or changed by resolution, adopted by a three-fifths (3/5) vote of the council. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
The duties or the minimum compensation of any appointive official shall not be so established by the council as to in effect abolish the office.
The salary of any appointive official or employee of the city shall cease forthwith with his/her removal or resignation from office or employment, provided,
however, that the city manager may be entitled, if authorized by the city council, to severance pay in an amount not to exceed the equivalent of 12 months'
salary, subject to any other restrictions set forth by state law. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
No officer or employee shall be allowed any fee, perquisite, emolument, or stipend, in addition to, or save as embraced in the salary or compensation fixed
for such office by the council, if a council appointee, or the manager if a manager appointee, and all fees received by such officers or employees in
connection with his/her official duties shall be paid by him/her into the city treasury, and a written report made of same, provided, however, that rewards
which have been publicly offered for the apprehension of criminals may be received by the officer or officers making the apprehension, after deducting
therefrom any expense that the city may have sustained in the matter. (2-5-1935; 4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note - The first and fifth (now fourth) paragraphs of § 18 were amended April 6, 1971. Formerly compensation was fixed, increased or
changed by ordinance. The former second paragraph of § 18, which authorized the city manager to fix the compensation of his appointees, was repealed.
Sec. 19. Duties Of The Mayor Generally.
The mayor shall be the executive head of the city. In case of riot, insurrection, extraordinary emergency, or other disaster, he/she shall be responsible for
making a public declaration of a state of emergency and shall assume all other responsibilities required of him/her pursuant to the city's disaster plan. (3-4-
2003)
In the name and on behalf of the city, he/she shall sign all contracts, deeds, bonds and other legal instruments in which the city is a party. (3-4-2003)
He/she shall represent the city at all ceremonial functions of a social or patriotic character when it is desirable or appropriate to have the city represented
officially thereat. (2-5-1935; 3-4-2003)
In the absence of the mayor, for whatever reason, the vice president of the council shall assume the duties as mayor pro tempore. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 20. City Attorney; Qualification; Duties; Assistant Attorney.
The city attorney shall be an attorney-at-law, admitted to practice as such before the supreme court of the state, and who has been in actual practice
therein for at least three years next preceding his/her appointment. All other things being equal, an attorney who has had special training or experience in
municipal corporation law shall be appointed to this office if practicable. The city attorney shall be legal advisor of the council, and all other city officials.
He/she shall prosecute all violations of city ordinances and shall draft all contracts and other legal documents and instruments, required by the council or
the city manager. He/she shall perform such other legal services as the council may direct and shall attend all meetings of the council unless excused
therefrom by three members thereof or by the mayor.
When from any cause the city attorney is unable to perform the duties of his/her office, he/she may, with the consent of the council, appoint some other
qualified attorney to temporarily act in his/her place and whenever in the judgment of the council, the interests of the city require it, it may employ assistant
counsel.
The city attorney shall deliver all books, records, papers, documents and personal property of every description, owned by the city, to his/her successor in
office, and the city shall provide a means of safe-guarding the same.
He/she shall possess such other powers, and perform such additional duties, not in conflict with this charter as may be prescribed by ordinance. (3-4-
2003)
Sec. 21. City Manager; To Become Resident; Powers And Duties; Bond.
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government. The city manager shall establish residency in the city of Porterville within a
reasonable period of time within the discretion of the council. His/her powers and duties shall be as follows:
(a) To see that all ordinances are enforced.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 44/636
(b) To appoint except as otherwise provided in this charter, all heads of departments, subordinate officials and employees, and remove the same, except
as otherwise herein provided, and have general supervision and control over the same.
(c) Repealed. (4-6-1971)
(d) To see that all the provisions of all franchises, permits, and privileges granted by the city are fully observed, and report to the council any violation
thereof.
(e) To act, as purchasing agent for the city, should he/she be so appointed by the council.
(f) To attend all meetings of the council unless excused therefrom by the council or mayor.
(g) To examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the conduct of any officer or employee of the city.
(h) To keep the council advised as to the needs of the city.
(i) To devote his/her entire time to the interests of the city.
(j), (k) Repealed. (4-6-1971)
(l) Repealed. (3-4-2003)
(m) To possess such other powers and perform such additional duties as are prescribed by this charter, or may be prescribed by ordinance. (2-5-1935)
(n) Repealed. (4-6-1971)
Sec. 22. City Manager Pro Tem.
In case of an illness, scheduled vacation or scheduled absence from the city of the city manager, for a period of up to thirty (30) days, the individual
designated as the deputy city manager shall serve as city manager pro tem. In the event that a deputy city manager has not been designated or the
deputy city manager is otherwise unable to serve, the city manager shall appoint one of the existing directors of the city departments to serve as city
manager pro tem. (3-4-2003)
In the case of any other absence, excluding a vacancy of the city manager position, from the city of the city manager, or his/her temporary disability to act
as such, the council shall appoint a city manager pro tem, who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the city manager during such
absence or disability only; provided, however, that a city manager pro tem shall have no authority to appoint or remove any city department director except
with the unanimous formal approval of all of the members of the council. In the event that the city manager position is vacant, the council shall appoint a
city manager or acting/interim city manager in accordance with sections 13 and 17 of this charter. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 23. City Clerk; To Be Clerk Of The Council When So Appointed; Duties; To Keep Corporate Seal.
The city clerk shall be clerk of the council when so appointed by the council. (3-4-2003)
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to attend all sessions of the council and keep a full and correct record of the proceedings of each of said bodies. The
proceedings of the council shall be kept in a book marked "Minutes of the Council." He/she shall keep a book marked "Ordinances" into which he/she shall
copy all city ordinances certifying that each such copy is a full and correct copy of the original ordinance, and stating that the same has been published as
required by law. Said record copy, so certified, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents of the ordinance, and of its passage and publication and shall
be admissible as such evidence in any court or proceedings. Such record shall not be filed but shall be returned to the custody of the city clerk. He/she
shall also keep a book marked "Resolutions," into which he/she shall copy all resolutions passed by the council. Both the books containing ordinances and
resolutions, shall be adequately and comprehensively indexed. He/she shall conduct promptly, and keep a systematic record of all correspondence
between the council and third parties relating to city business.
He/she shall be the keeper of the corporate seal of the city, and shall affix the same to instruments or writings requiring authentication. He/she shall safely
keep all records, documents, ordinances, resolutions, books and such other papers and matters, as may be regularly delivered into his/her custody or
required by law or ordinance to be filed with him/her. (4-2-1963; 4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note _ The first paragraph of § 23 was amended April 6, 1971 by the addition of the words "when so appointed by the council." The former
fourth paragraph of § 23 relating to the clerk's duties as assessor, was repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 24. Director Of Finance; Payment Of Demands; To Check Annual Tax Roll.
The city manager shall appoint the director of finance of the city, who shall serve as the general accountant of the city. He/she shall receive and preserve
in his office all accounts, books, vouchers, documents and papers relating to the accounts of the city, its debts, revenues and other financial affairs. He/she
shall keep an account of all moneys paid into and out of the treasury; and keep informed as to the exact condition of the treasury at all times. (4-6-1971)
Every demand upon the treasury, before its approval by the council, must be presented to the director of finance, who shall satisfy himself/herself whether
the money is legally due, and its payment authorized by law. If satisfactory, he/she shall draw a warrant upon the treasury for the payment thereof. Every
demand approved by the director of finance shall specify on its face the several items composing it, with the amounts and dates thereof. The approval of
the council shall not be necessary to draw warrants for the payment of regular salaries of officials and employees of the city, or for payment of any
obligation previously authorized by law, or by resolution or order of the council. (4-6-1971)
He/she shall render each month a statement to the council showing the financial condition of the city, and annually a like statement covering all of the
financial transactions of the city during the year previous.
After the annual tax roll has been completed, and before it is deposited with the collector, the director of finance shall make a check of the roll correcting
any errors that may be found and endorse same with his/her approval. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note _ The first, second and fourth paragraphs of § 24 were amended April 6, 1971. Formerly the auditor was the general accountant of the
city who performed the duties set out in the section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 45/636
Sec. 25. City Treasurer; Appointment; Duties; Bond.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 26. Repealed April 2, 1963.
Sec. 27. Chief Of Police; Duties; Appointment And Removal Of Subordinates; To Make Rules And Regulations.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 28. Fire Chief; Appointment; Duties And Powers.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 29. Collector; Duties.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 30. City Engineer; Powers And Duties.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 31. Office Of Purchasing Agent Authorized; Duties Of Heads Of Offices To Submit Estimates To Agent; Duties Generally; Competitive
Bidding; Preference To Local Merchants.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 32. Street Superintendent.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 33. Qualifications Of Health Officer; Duties.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 34. Vacations.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 35. Additional Duties Of Officers.
Besides the duties herein specified, all officers and boards shall perform such other appropriate duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or the general
laws.
Sec. 36. Officers And Employees To Continue In Office Until Successor Elected Or Qualified.
Until the election or appointment and induction into office of the officers and employees in this charter provided for, the present officers and employees
shall without interruption, continue to perform the duties of their respective offices and employments for the compensation provided by existing ordinance
or laws.
Sec. 37. Resignations From Office; Candidates For Office Not Required To Resign From Other Office Prior To Appointment Or Qualification;
When Resignation Effective.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 38. Officers And Boards Having Power To Administer Oaths And Issue Subpoenas; Contempt Proceedings.
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 39. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of July of each year, or at such other time as may be fixed by ordinance. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 40. Taxation To Conform To General Laws Of The State.
Except as otherwise herein provided the council shall, by ordinance, provide a system for the assessment, equalization, levy, and collection of taxes,
which, as nearly as may be, shall conform to the system provided by the general laws of the state; provided, that all sales for delinquent taxes shall be
made to the city of Porterville. Should the council fail to fix the tax rate within the time prescribed, then the tax rate of the previous year shall constitute the
rate for the current year.
Sec. 41. Board Of Equalization.
Repealed March 4, 2003.
Sec. 42. Annual Tax Levy To Be Affixed.
The council, not later than its second regular meeting in August, shall fix a rate of taxation sufficient to raise the amounts established by council action
pursuant to section 44. The council shall notify the county assessor who shall thereupon compute and carry out the amount of tax so levied on each parcel
of property contained in the assessment roll for the city. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Amendment note - On April 6, 1971, § 42 was amended by changing the meeting date from the first regular meeting in September to the second regular
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 46/636
meeting in August.
Sec. 43. Limitation On Tax Levy.
Repealed March 4, 2003.
Sec. 44. Limitation On Special Tax Levies; Enumeration Of Purposes For Which Special Taxes May Be Levied.
The council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes, in addition to the taxes herein or by general law authorized to be levied and collected, sufficient
to pay and maintain the sinking fund of the bonded indebtedness of the city; and for the following purposes: (4-6-1971)
(a) For the support and maintenance of the fire department, for fire protection purposes, at the rate of not more than three mills on each dollar of the
assessed valuation of the real and personal property within the city; (4-6-1971)
(b) For the acquisition, construction and maintenance, as the case may be, of permanent public improvements, of real property, of public buildings and
structures, and of public offices, including equipping and furnishing the same, at the rate of not more than two mills on each dollar thereof;
(c) For the maintenance and support of free public libraries and reading rooms in said city, at the rate of not more than two mills on each dollar thereof.
(d) For the maintenance and support of free public parks and playgrounds in said city, at the rate of not more than two mills on each dollar thereof;
(e) For music, entertainment, and promotion, at the rate of not more than one mill on each dollar thereof. (2-5-1935; 4-5-1949)
Amendment note - The first paragraph and subsection (a) of § 44 were amended April 6, 1971. In the first paragraph the words "at not to exceed the
following rates" was deleted. In subsection (a), the rate was changed from five mills to three mills and the firemen's relief fund was eliminated as a
purpose.
Sec. 45. Taxes And Assessments To Constitute A Lien; Foreclosure.
All taxes and assessments levied, together with any percentages imposed for delinquency and cost of collection, shall constitute liens on the property
assessed; every tax upon the personal property shall be a lien upon the real property of the owner thereof. The liens provided for in this section shall
attach as of the first Monday in March each year and may be enforced by actions to foreclose such liens in any court of competent jurisdiction, or by a sale
of the property affected and the execution and delivery of all necessary certificates and deeds therefor, under such regulations as may be prescribed by
ordinance; provided that when real estate is offered for sale for city taxes due thereon the same shall be sold to the city in like case and manner, and with
like effect and right of redemption as it may be struck off and sold to the state when offered for sale for county taxes; and the council shall have power to
provide by ordinance for the procedure to be followed in such sales to the city and redemption thereafter.
Sec. 46. Disposition Of City Money.
All moneys collected for the city by any officer or department thereof shall be paid into the treasury daily if possible, and at least once each week.
Sec. 47. Application Of Surplus Bond Money.
All moneys derived from the sale of bonds, including premiums and accrued interest, shall be applied to the purposes for which the bonds were voted.
After such purposes have been fully completed and paid for, any remaining surplus shall be transferred to the bond and interest redemption fund.
Sec. 48. Payment Of City Money; Expenditures And Indebtedness; Presentation Of Demands; Warrants On Treasury.
No money shall be expended on behalf of the city, for any purpose, unless and until the same shall have been authorized by a majority vote of the council;
provided that following every council election, the city council may, by a majority vote, adjust the amount of money that may be expended on behalf of the
city, without prior specific council authorization. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
The city council, by resolution by a majority vote of the council, shall establish the maximum amount of money to be expended on behalf of the city without
first requiring specific council authorization, except as otherwise provided for in this charter; provided further that said maximum amount once established
by resolution shall not be adjusted until after each general council election. (7-1-2014)
No indebtedness shall be incurred on behalf of the city, for any purpose, unless and until the same shall have been authorized by resolution by a four-fifths
(4/5) vote of the council; provided that following every council election, the city council may, by a four-fifths majority vote, adjust the amount of
indebtedness that may be incurred, on behalf of the city, without prior specific council authorization. (7-1-2014)
The city council, by resolution approved by a four-fifths vote of the council, shall establish the maximum amount of indebtedness to be incurred on behalf
of the city without first requiring specific council authorization, except as otherwise provided for in this charter; provided further that said maximum amount
once established shall not be adjusted until after each general council election, and then only by resolution by a four-fifths majority vote. (3-4-2003; 7-1-
2014)
Indebtedness evidenced by general obligation bonds shall be incurred by the city only if approved by the city council and authorized by the voters as
required by the constitution and general laws of the state. (7-1-2014)
All demands against the city shall, before being paid, be presented to and approved by the proper board, commission or officer, as herein provided.
Demands for which no appropriation has been made shall be presented to the city manager, provided, that any person dissatisfied with the refusal of the
city manager to approve any demand, in whole or in part, may present the same to the council, and the approval of such demand by the council shall have
the same effect as its approval by the city manager; and provided further, that if the council shall provide for other boards or commissions, it may make
provision for the presentation to and approval by any such board or commission of demands for liabilities incurred by them. (7-1-2014)
The council may provide for a revolving cash fund as authorized by ordinance by four-fifths majority vote of the council; provided that effective January 1,
2004, and following every council election thereafter, the city council may, by a four-fifths majority vote, adjust the revolving cash fund. The amount shall
be paid to the city manager, and used by him/her for the payment in cash, of expenditures provided for in the budgets that cannot conveniently be paid
otherwise. He or she shall account to the council for all payments by him or her out of said fund when making demand for the replenishment of the same,
and at such other times as the council may require, and they shall thereupon be charged against the proper appropriations. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 47/636
All demands approved by the proper board, commission or officer shall be presented to the director of finance, who shall examine the same, and if the
amount thereof is legally due and there remains on his books an unexhausted balance or an appropriation against which the same may be charged,
he/she shall approve such demand and draw and sign his warrant on the treasurer therefor, payable out of the proper fund. Objections of the director of
finance to any demand may be overruled by the council, and the director of finance shall thereupon draw his warrant as directed by the council. Such
warrants, when presented to the treasurer, shall be paid by him/her out of the fund therein designated, if there be sufficient money in such fund for that
purpose. A warrant not paid for lack of funds shall be registered, and all registered warrants shall be paid in the order of registration when funds are
available therefor; all such registered warrants shall bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum. The director of finance shall draw his/her
warrants for payment of municipal or other bonds payable out of the funds in the treasury upon presentation and surrender of the proper bonds or coupons
without approval of anybody or officer. The council may make further regulations by ordinance regarding the presentation, approval and payment of
demands against the city. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 49. Monthly Financial Reports Required.
All officers required by this charter or by ordinance to submit monthly financial reports to the council, shall submit the same in duplicate, and upon their
approval by the council, one of each of such duplicate reports shall be posted forthwith in the office of the city clerk in such manner as to be readily
accessible to the public, and shall remain so posted until the approval by the council of the next succeeding financial report when the same procedure
shall be followed in relation thereto. The council, in addition to such posting, may, in its discretion, cause any of such reports to be published at any time.
Sec. 50. Approving Illegal Claims To Forfeit Office.
Every officer who shall wilfully approve, allow or pay, any demand on the treasury not authorized by law, shall be liable to the city individually and on
his/her official bond for the amount of the demand so approved, allowed, or paid, and shall forfeit his/her office and be forever disbarred from holding any
position in the service of the city.
Sec. 51. Annual Budget Contents; Publication.
Not later than thirty days before the end of the city's fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the council an estimate of the expenditures and revenues
of the city departments for the ensuing year. This estimate shall be compiled from detailed information obtained from the several departments on uniform
blanks to be furnished by the manager. (4-6-1971; 3-4-2003)
Sufficient copies of such estimate shall be prepared and submitted that there may be copies on file in the office of the council for inspection by the public,
unless the council shall publish the same in a newspaper.
After duly considering the estimate and making such corrections or modifications thereto as shall seem advisable to it, the council shall by resolution adopt
a general budget and such resolution shall operate as an appropriation of funds to the amounts and for the purposes set forth in the budget so adopted. At
any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the council, by a vote of three (3) members, may amend or supplement so as to authorize the transfer of
unused balances for one purpose to another purpose or to appropriate available revenues not included in the budget. (3-4-2003)
Amendment note - On April 6, 1971, the first paragraph of § 51, was amended by deleting the second sentence relating to classification of the estimated
expenditures.
Sec. 51A. General Reserve Fund; Purposes.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 52. Uniform Accounts And Reports.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 53. Written Investment Policy.
The city manager shall recommend and the city council by resolution shall adopt a policy to govern the investment of all city monies, which policy shall be
consistent with applicable state law and shall, at a minimum, provide for the investment of all monies in such a manner as to assure the preservation and
safety of principal and the integrity of record keeping; identify the types of allowable investments; and provide for the safekeeping of securities. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 54. Applicability Of General Laws.
All general laws of the state applicable to municipal corporations now or hereafter enacted, and which are not in conflict with the provisions of this charter
or the ordinance of the city hereafter enacted shall be applicable to the city. The council may adopt and enforce ordinances which in relation to municipal
affairs, shall control as against general laws of the state.
Sec. 55. Repealed April 2, 1963.
Sec. 56. Public Library.
The free public library of the city of Porterville shall be established, conducted, carried on, managed and operated in accordance with rules, regulations
and ordinances passed and adopted by the council of the city of Porterville. (4-7-1959)
Sec. 57. Park Commission; Composition; Term; Powers And Duties; Authority To Accept Donations, Legacies Or Bequests.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 58. Pensions.
The council shall have and is hereby granted full power and authority to establish, regulate, maintain, revise and amend, a retirement, disability, death
benefit and pension system, or either or any of them, for its elective and appointive officers and employees of the city of Porterville and their dependents.
Authority and power is hereby vested in the city of Porterville, its council, its officers, agents and employees to do and perform any act or exercise any
authority granted, permitted or required whereby the city of Porterville may fully participate in a retirement, disability, death benefit and pension system for
its employees.
A system for retirement, disability, death benefit and pension rights for employees and their dependents authorized by this section when established by the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 48/636
council, shall not be terminated without securing the approval of a majority of the electors of the city of Porterville at an election held therefor, except as
may be permitted by applicable state law. (4-6-1971; 7-1-2014)
The city shall levy and collect taxes sufficient to pay all costs and expenses required to be paid by the city of Porterville to enable the city of Porterville to
participate in any such retirement, disability, death benefit or pension system established, set up or maintained by, for or on behalf of the city of Porterville
and the limitations of section forty-three of the charter of the city of Porterville, with respect to levying and collecting of municipal taxes, shall not apply to
any tax authorized by this article. (4-9-1951; 4-10-1961)
Amendment note - The second paragraph of § 58 was amended April 6, 1971, by eliminating the former first sentence pertaining to employees of the
Porterville Public Library.
This section shall be construed in accordance with the California constitution and shall be deemed to allow the city to create, eliminate, or modify its
pension and retiree healthcare benefits to the fullest extent permitted by the California constitution and applicable law. (7-1-2014)
Sec. 59. Employment Of Certified Public Accountant To Audit City Books.
The city council shall employ a certified public accountant annually to investigate the accounts and transactions of all city officers and employees having
the collection, custody or distribution of public money or property, or the power to approve, allow or audit demands on the city treasury. (2-5-1935; 4-2-
1963; 4-6-1971)
Amendment note - On April 6, 1971, § 59 was amended by the addition of the word "council" following the second word of the section.
Sec. 60. Financial Interests Prohibited.
City officers and employees are prohibited from having a financial interest in any contract, sales or purchases in accordance with applicable state law. (3-
4-2003)
Sec. 61. Competitive Bidding For Contract Work For Erection, Improvement And Repair Of Public Buildings, Etc., Where The Amount Is In
Excess Of Five Thousand Dollars.
When a required expenditure exceeds five thousand dollars, it shall be contracted for and let to the lowest responsible bidder after notice. (4-6-1971)
As used in this section public project means a project for the erection, improvement and repair of public buildings and works; work in or about streams,
embankments, or other work for protection against overflow; street sewer work except maintenance or repair; furnishing supplies or materials for any such
project, including maintenance or repair of streets, sewers or water lines.
The council may reject any or all bids presented and may, at its discretion, readvertise for other bids, or, the council may, after rejecting bids, determine
and declare by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of all of its members that the work in question may be more economically or satisfactorily performed by day labor, or
the labor or materials purchased at a lower price in the open market and after the adoption of a resolution to this effect it may proceed to have the same
done in the manner stated without further observance of the foregoing provisions of this section.
The notice inviting sealed bids shall set a date for the opening of bids; the first publication shall be at least ten (10) days before the date of the opening of
the bids; shall be published at least twice not less than five (5) days apart in the official newspaper selected by the council.
In case of a great public calamity, such as an extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other disaster, the council may, by resolution passed by a vote of
four-fifths (4/5) of its members, determine and declare that the public interest or necessity demands the immediate expenditure of public money to
safeguard life, health, or property, and thereupon they may proceed without advertising for bids or receiving the same, to expend, or enter into a contract
involving the expenditure of any money required in such emergency, on hand in the city treasury and available for such purpose. (4-10-1961)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 61 was amended April 6, 1971 by increasing the amount from $2,500.00 to $5,000.00.
Sec. 62. Public Improvements.
The improvement widening and opening of streets, the planting, care, and maintenance of trees, and the making of any other public improvement may be
done and assessments therefor may be levied in conformity with and under the authority conferred by general laws; provided, however, that the council
may by ordinance adopt a procedure for the improvement and repair of streets, alleys or other public places, the laying of pipes, or conduits or for the
planting, care or maintenance of trees, or for the removal of dirt, rubbish, weeds and other rank growth and materials which may injure or endanger
neighboring property or the health or the welfare of inhabitants of the vicinity, from buildings, lots and grounds and the sidewalks opposite thereto and for
making and enforcing assessments against property benefitted or affected thereby, or from which such removal is made, for the cost of such
improvements or removal and may make such assessments a lien on such property superior to all other claims or liens thereon, except state, county and
municipal taxes, but no such ordinance shall prevent the council from proceeding under general laws for said purposes.
Sec. 63. Franchises; Limitation On Renewals.
Every franchise or privilege to construct, maintain, or operate, any means or method of transportation in or over any street, lane, alley or other public place
within the city or to lay pipes or conduits, or erect poles or wires or other structures in or across any such public way or place, for the transmission of gas,
electricity, or other commodity, or for the use of public property or places now or hereafter owned by the city, shall be granted under and in pursuance of
the general franchises; provided, no new franchise or the renewal of any existing franchises shall be granted except upon the condition that at least two
percent of the gross annual receipts derived from the use of such franchise shall be paid to the city. In all cases the applicant for a franchise shall advance
the cost of advertising the same.
Every such franchise shall require the grantee thereof to agree to a joint use of its property with others, wherever practicable, and nothing herein shall be
construed as prohibiting the council from requiring other conditions in granting the same not inconsistent with the constitution and general laws. No
franchise or privilege so granted shall be sold, leased, assigned or otherwise alienated, without the express consent of the council given by ordinance and
subject to referendum.
Sec. 64. When Franchise Required.
No person, firm, or corporation shall exercise any franchise or privilege, except to the extent he or it may be entitled to do so by the constitution of the
state, or of the United States, in, upon, under, over, or along any street, public way, or public place in the city without having first obtained a grant therefor
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 49/636
as provided in this charter and by general law.
Sec. 65. Newspaper Advertising And Printing.
The council shall advertise annually for the submission of sealed proposals or bids from newspapers of general circulation in the city, for the publication of
all ordinances and other legal notices required to be published. The newspaper to whom such contract is awarded shall be known and designated as the
official newspaper. The rates for publishing public notices shall not exceed the customary rates charged for publishing legal notices of a private character.
(3-4-2003)
Contracts for legal advertising shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, provided no contract for legal advertising shall be awarded to any
newspaper except a daily newspaper of general circulation, as defined by the Government Code. (4-6-1971)
Amendment note - The first paragraph of § 65 was amended April 6, 1971 by inserting the word "legal" before the word, "advertising"; by substituting
"Government Code" in lieu of "Section 4460, of the Political Code." The former third paragraph reading, "Required printed office supplies may be
purchased either through bids and contract, or by purchase in the open market," was repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 66. Public Records; Delivery And Safekeeping Of Documents.
The public shall have access to public records kept and maintained by the city in accordance with the law. (3-4-2003)
Sec. 67. Interference With Performance Of Duties Of City Manager; Interference By City Manager In Elections.
No member of the council shall in any manner attempt to influence or coerce the city manager in the making of any appointment or the purchase of
supplies in accordance with applicable state and federal law. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
The council shall deal with the administrative functions of the city through the city manager. The council shall only have direct contact with the directors of
the city's departments for the purpose of asking questions. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Any city council member violating the provisions of this section, or voting for a resolution or ordinance in violation of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall cease to be a council member. Additionally, any city council member violating this section may be subject to civil
remedies as specified in section 74. (7-1-2014)
Section 67.1. Political Activities By Legislative And Administrative Officers, Employees.
Political activities of and campaign contributions by the city's legislative officers, administrative officers, and employees shall be governed in accordance
with applicable state and federal law. All legislative and administrative officers and all city employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities
during working hours. City officers and employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities at their work place. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Furthermore, city officers and employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities on city properties, provided this prohibition does not pertain to
property that is otherwise open to the public for the purpose of engaging in political activities. (3-4-2003; 7-1-2014)
Sec. 68. Leases Of City Property.
In every lease of city property the basic amount of rental shall be fixed by the council.
All indentures of lease shall provide that the council may terminate the same at its pleasure and repossess the premises therein described upon three
months' notice thereof and upon paying to the lessee the market value of any improvements made or put upon said premises by the lessee. The market
value of such improvements shall be determined by a board of appraisers consisting of one appraiser appointed by the council, and a lessee appraiser
appointed by the lessee.
In the event of their failure to agree upon the market value of the improvements within thirty days from and after their appointment, said two appraisers
may appoint a third appraiser as a member of said board, and the determination of the majority of said board of appraisers, as to the market value of the
improvements, shall be final and conclusive and binding on all concerned. Should the two appraisers appointed by the council and the lessee respectively,
fail for forty days from and after their appointment to agree upon the market value of the improvements or to appoint a third appraiser, then upon the
petition in writing of either party to any such lease, a judge of the superior court of Tulare County is hereby empowered to appoint the third appraiser upon
such board; provided, however, that the council shall not terminate any such lease or repossess any such premises except for a public use and purpose;
provided, further, that no lease of city property shall be made for a maximum term of more than fifty years. (4-2-1963; 4-6-1971)
Amendment note - The second paragraph of § 68 was amended April 6, 1971, by substituting "maximum term" in lieu of "term" in the last proviso clause.
Sec. 69. Inventory Of City Property.
At the time for preparing and submitting the budget, as prescribed by this charter, a complete inventory of all personal property belonging to the city shall
be prepared and filed with the city clerk, and such inventory shall be submitted to the council by the city manager at the time of the submission of the
annual budget. Such inventory shall be prepared under the direction of the city manager, and all chief officials and department heads of the city shall be
responsible for making and transmitting to the city manager a full and correct inventory of all city personal property in their possession or under their
control.
Sec. 70. Equipment.
Repealed April 6, 1971.
Sec. 71. Zoning Authorized.
The council of the city of Porterville shall have the power to establish such zoning systems within the city as may in its judgment be most beneficial, and in
such zoning systems may prohibit the erection or maintenance of any class or classes of buildings within certain areas, and may classify, and reclassify
the zones established. The council may also prescribe the character of materials and methods of construction of buildings erected within any zone area,
and may establish setback lines as it may consider necessary and proper. (4-6-1971)
Sec. 72. Suspension Of Employees From Office And Fines.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 50/636
Repealed March 8, 1983.
Sec. 73. Natural Or Other Disasters.
The city shall have in place a disaster plan, consistent with county, state and federal policies, to be implemented in the event of an emergency or disaster.
Sec. 74. Violations.
This section shall apply only if a penalty/violation is not otherwise explicitly provided for in the charter. A violation of any provision of this charter shall be a
misdemeanor with maximum fines and imprisonment as allowed by law, except that such violation may be prosecuted as an infraction, at the discretion of
the city attorney. (7-1-2014)
Any violation of this charter may be prosecuted in the name of the people of the state of California or may be redressed by the city through any legal or
equitable remedies; including but not limited to civil action and/or injunction, or administrative citation in accordance with adopted city ordinances. To the
fullest extent allowed by law, civil remedies may be utilized in addition to or as an alternative to criminal enforcement. (7-1-2014)
The city shall be authorized to recover its full costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, for the enforcement of any violation of this charter or municipal
code. The city council is authorized to adopt any necessary or appropriate ordinances to implement this section of the charter. (7-1-2014)
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1-1: HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED:
This code shall be known as the CODE OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE, CALIFORNIA, and may be so cited. This code may also be cited as the
"Porterville city code". (Ord. Code § 1)
1-2: DESIGNATION AND CITATION OF AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
Any ordinance adding to this code or amending or repealing any provision of this code may be designated as an addition or amendment to, or repeal of,
this code. (Ord. Code § 1.2)
1-3: CONSTRUCTION OF CODE:
The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed to effect its objects and to promote justice. (Ord. Code § 6)
1-4: DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances of the city, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise:
CITY: The area within the territorial city limits of the city of Porterville and such territory outside of this city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by
virtue of any constitutional provision or any law.
CODE: The Porterville city code.
COMPUTATION OF TIME: The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last day is a holiday and then it is also excluded.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Porterville.
COUNTY: The county of Tulare of this state.
DAY: The period of time between any midnight and the midnight following.
DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME: "Daytime" is the period of time between sunrise and sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
DEPARTMENT, BOARD, COMMISSION, AGENCY, OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE: When used herein shall mean a department, board, commission, agency,
officer or employee of the city of Porterville.
GENDER: The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
IN THE CITY: Shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has, or shall hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 51/636
other regulatory powers.
JOINT AUTHORITY: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of
such persons or officers.
MONTH: A calendar month.
NUMBER: The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
OATH: Includes affirmation.
OFFICIAL TIME: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean Pacific Standard Time or daylight saving time whichever may be in current
use in the city.
OR, AND: "Or" may be read "and", and "and" may be read "or", if the sense requires it.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by entirety,
of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: A natural person, firm, corporation, organization, company, association, business trust, joint stock company, partnership, joint venture, club, or
the agent, servant, manager, officer, employee or lessee of any of them.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every species of property, except "real property", as defined in this section.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING: Next before and next after, respectively.
PROCESS: Includes a writ or summons issued in the course of judicial proceedings of either a civil or criminal nature.
PROPERTY: Shall include real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
SHALL, MAY: "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when the signer or subscriber cannot write, such signer's or subscriber's name being written near the
mark by a witness who writes his own name near the signer's or subscriber's name; but a signature or subscription by mark can be acknowledged or can
serve as a signature or subscription to a sworn statement only when two (2) witnesses so sign their own names thereto.
STATE: The state of California.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of,
such building or land, either alone or with others.
TENSES: The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present.
WEEK: Seven (7) consecutive days.
WRITING: Includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record
is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
WRITTEN: Includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed or multigraphed.
YEAR: A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
The provisions of sections 13 and 1645 of the Civil Code of the state are hereby adopted in the interpretation of words and phrases, unless otherwise
provided in this code.
Words and phrases used in this code and not specifically defined shall be construed according to the context and approved usage of the language. (1963
Code)
1-5: PROVISIONS CONSIDERED AS CONTINUATIONS OF EXISTING ORDINANCES:
The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing provisions relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
reinstatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Ord. Code § 2)
1-6: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time of the repeal, for any offense committed under the ordinance repealed. (1963 Code)
1-7: SEVERABILITY OF PARTS OF CODE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 52/636
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any
court, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council would have adopted this code and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions
be invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. Code § 12)
1-8: CATCHLINES OF SECTIONS:
Chapter, article, division and section headings contained in this code shall not govern, limit, modify or affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions
of this code. (Ord. Code § 7)
1-9: GENERAL PENALTY; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any requirement of this code.
B. Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any requirement of this code is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless such violation is specifically
deemed an infraction, or unless the city makes a determination to prosecute as an infraction with the concurrence of the city attorney.
C. Whenever this code makes any act or omission unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act
or omission.
D. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor or infraction under the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise made herein, shall be punishable
by a fine or by imprisonment as set forth in chapter 2, article XIV of this code.
E. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is
committed, continued or permitted by such person; and he shall be punished accordingly.
F. Any person charged with an infraction shall be subject to division 17, chapter 2, article 2 of the California Vehicle Code as it relates to promises to
appear and the fixing of bail. (Ord. 1537 § B1, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1720 § 1, 5-1-2007)
1-10: VIOLATIONS OF CODE DEEMED NUISANCES; SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
In addition to the penalties provided in section 1-9 of this chapter, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by this city, summarily abated as such; and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded
as a new and separate offense. (Ord. Code § 13.6)
1-11: LABOR ON PUBLIC WORKS DURING IMPRISONMENT:
All persons confined in the city jail under a fine or judgment of imprisonment rendered in a criminal action or proceeding may be required to perform labor
on the public works or ways in the city, or public works or ways owned by or operated by the city and under such rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the chief of police and the city manager. (Ord. Code § 13.3)
1-12: HOW NOTICES TO BE GIVEN:
Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions are otherwise specifically made herein, such notice may be given
either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to
such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the
matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (Ord. Code § 14)
1-13: PROOF OF NOTICE:
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of this city or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18)
years, which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Ord. Code § 14.1)
1-14: TERRITORIAL LIMITS OF APPLICATION OF CODE1:
This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside this city over which the city
has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (Ord. Code § 8)
1-15: PROCEDURE FOR ARREST; ARRESTING OFFICER DEFINED:
For the purpose of sections 1-16 to 1-19 of this chapter, the terms "arresting officer" and "officer" mean any policeman of the city and any other employee
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 53/636
of the city whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city and who is authorized by the city manager to use the
citation procedure established by sections 1-16 to 1-19 of this chapter in the performance of his enforcement duties. (Ord. 668 § 1)
1-16: PROCEDURE FOR ARREST; ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
Except as provided in section 1-15 of this chapter, the provisions of sections 853.5 through 853.8 of the Penal Code of the state, as amended, are hereby
adopted by this section and made a part of this code as though fully set forth. (Ord. 1537 § B2, 8-6-1996)
1-17: PROCEDURE FOR ARREST; NOTICE TO APPEAR WHEN PERSON NOT TAKEN IMMEDIATELY BEFORE MAGISTRATE:
A. Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the city and such person is not immediately taken
before a magistrate as required or permitted by the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare, in triplicate, a written notice to appear in
court containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged, and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in
court.
B. 1. The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least twenty one (21) days after the arrest, except that the court having jurisdiction over the
offense charged may authorize the arresting officer to specify on the notice that an appearance may be made before the time specified.
2. In the case of juveniles, the court having jurisdiction over the offense charged may require the arresting officer to indicate on the notice "to be
notified" rather than specifying a specific date pursuant to subsection B1 of this section.
C. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:
1. Before a judge of a justice court or a municipal court in Tulare County who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the
arrest is made; or
2. Upon the demand of the person arrested before a judge of a justice court or a municipal court at the county seat of Tulare County; or before a judge
in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed. This subsection applies only if the person arrested resides, or the
person's principal place of employment is located, closer to the county seat than to the municipal court or other magistrate nearest or most
accessible to the place where the arrest is made; or
3. Before an officer authorized by the city or the court of judicial district to receive a deposit of bail.
4. Before the juvenile court, a juvenile court referee, or a juvenile traffic hearing officer within the county in which the offense charged is alleged to have
been committed, if the person arrested appears to be under the age of eighteen (18) years. The juvenile court shall by order designate the proper
person before whom the appearance is to be made.
D. The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person, and the arrested person, in order to secure a release, must give his
written promise so to appear in court or before a person authorized to receive a deposit of bail, by signing two (2) copies of the notice which shall be
retained by the officer. The officer may require the arrested person, if this person has no satisfactory identification, to place a right thumbprint, or a left
thumbprint, or fingerprint if the person has a missing or disfigured right thumb, on the promise to appear. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith
release the person arrested from custody. The thumbprint or fingerprint provided by the arrested person shall not be used to create a database.
1. Any person who signs a written promise to appear with a false or fictitious name is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the
charge upon which he was originally arrested.
E. The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a copy of the notice with the magistrate or before a person authorized by the magistrate or judge to receive
a deposit of bail specified therein and a copy with the chief of police, sheriff or other superior officer of the arresting officer. Thereupon bail shall be set
and the matter dealt with according to law. (Ord. 1537 § B3, 8-6-1996)
1-18: PROCEDURE FOR ARREST; VIOLATION OF PROMISE TO APPEAR; UNLAWFUL:
Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the charge upon which he was originally
arrested. (Ord. 668 § 1)
1-19: CLAIMS:
A. Authority: This section is enacted pursuant to section 935 of the California Government Code.
B. Claims Required: All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the government claims act, California Government Code
section 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this section, "claims") shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by part
3 of division 3.6 of title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own
terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this section.
C. Form Of Claim: All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No
claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall
contain the information required by California Government Code section 910.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 54/636
D. Claim Prerequisite To Suit: In accordance with California Government Code sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this
section and acted upon the city prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied
with the requirements of subsection B of this section.
E. Suit: Any action brought against the city upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of sections 940_949 of the California Government
Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city shall conform with the requirements of section 950_951 of the California Government Code.
(Ord. 1737, 3-18-2008)
1-20: CITY SEAL2:
A common seal of the city is hereby adopted and described as follows:
Two (2) branches of oranges intertwined at the top, in the central space, and in the margin surrounding the same the words: "City of Porterville,
Incorporated May 7th, 1902". (Ord. Code § 1151)
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Chapter Article I
CITY COUNCIL1
2-1: TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS2:
Pursuant to section 10 of the City Charter, regular meetings of the Porterville City Council shall be held on the first and third Tuesday of each month in the
City Hall, at 291 North Main Street in the City. The regular meetings will commence at five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M., with closed session commencing at
five thirty o'clock (5:30) P.M., and open session commencing at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M. (Ord. 1792, 10-16-2012)
2-1.1: DECLARATION OF PURPOSE:
The City Council of the City hereby declares the purpose of sections 2-1.2 through 2-1.5 of this article is to further the purposes of the California Voting
Rights Act of 20013, as amended. (Ord. 1845, 5-15-2018)
2-1.2: BY-DISTRICT ELECTIONS FOR CITY COUNCIL:
A. Members of the City Council shall be elected by-district in five (5) single-member districts. One member of the City Council shall be elected from each
district by the voters of that district alone. Each member of the City Council shall serve a four-year term until his or her successor is qualified.
B. The City Council member elected to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City
Council must reside in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued. (Ord. 1845,
5-15-2018)
2-1.3: CITY COUNCIL DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
A. The boundaries and identifying number of each of the five (5) City Council districts shall be as described on the City Council District Map which is on file
in the City as exhibit A, and incorporated by this reference.
B. The City Council districts described in subsection A of this section shall continue in effect until they are amended or repealed in accordance with law.
The boundaries of the City Council districts shall be reapportioned from time to time as required by applicable law. (Ord. 1845, 5-15-2018)
2-1.4: IMPLEMENTATION OF BY-DISTRICT ELECTIONS:
A. The by-district system of elections shall be implemented, beginning at the general Municipal election held in November 2018, as follows:
1. Members of the City Council shall be elected in Districts 1 and 2 beginning at the general Municipal election in November 2018, and every four (4)
years thereafter; and
2. Members of the City Council shall be elected in Districts 3, 4, and 5 beginning at the general Municipal election November 2020, and every four (4)
years thereafter.
B. No term of any member of the City Council that commenced prior to the effective date of this section shall be affected by the adoption of sections 2-1.1
through 2-1.5 of this article. (Ord. 1845, 5-15-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 55/636
2-1.5: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause of sections 2-1.1 through 2-1.5 of this article is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of sections 2-1.1 through 2-1.5 of this article. The City
Council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified herein, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1845, 5-15-
2018)
2-2: SPECIAL MEETINGS; NOTICE:
Special meetings of the City Council may be called by a written notice signed by the Mayor, or three (3) members of the City Council, and mailed or
personally delivered to each member of the City Council and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in
writing, not less than twenty four (24) hours prior to the time fixed for such special meeting as specified in Government Code section 54956 et seq. (Ord.
1537 § B4, 8-6-1996)
2-3: RULES OF ORDER4:
The proceedings of the City Council shall be governed under "Robert's Rules of Order" on all matters pertaining to parliamentary law, but no ordinance,
resolution, proceeding or other action of the City Council shall be invalidated or the legality thereof otherwise affected by the failure or omission to observe
or follow such rules. (Ord. Code § 1272)
2-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT AT MEETINGS; REMOVAL OF OFFENDER5:
Any member or other person using profane, vulgar, loud or boisterous language at any meeting, or otherwise interrupting the proceedings, who refuses to
be seated or keep quiet when ordered to do so by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem of the City Council, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of
the Chief of Police, upon order of the presiding officer, to eject any such member or person from the Council room. (Ord. 1537 § B5, 8-6-1996)
2-5: CITIZENS ADDRESSING COUNCIL:
Any citizen may arise and address the City Council on any business specially concerning them or affecting their interests, but preference will be given to
those who have first presented matters in the form of a written communication or who have personally notified the President of the Council of their desire
to speak. (Ord. Code § 1274)
2-6: CONDUCT OF COUNCIL MEMBERS GENERALLY:
The members of the City Council shall remain seated while participating in discussions and at all times during any meeting. They shall address their
remarks to the President and other members of the City Council and not to the citizens who may happen to be in attendance. (Ord. Code § 1275)
2-6.1: INTERFERENCE WITH PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER:
A. As set forth in section 67 of the City Charter, no member of the City Council shall in any manner attempt to influence or coerce the City Manager in the
making of any appointment or the purchase of supplies in accordance with applicable State and Federal law.
B. The City Council shall deal with the administrative functions of the City through the City Manager. The City Council shall only have direct contact with
the Directors of the City's departments for the purpose of asking questions. No City Council member shall give an order or orders to any subordinate of
the City under the jurisdiction of the City Manager or other such officers, either publicly or privately.
C. Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalty and enforcement provisions set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, section 1-9 of this
Code. (Ord. 1795, 3-5-2013)
2-6.2: POLITICAL ACTIVITIES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS, ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES:
A. As set forth (and unless otherwise specified) in section 67.1 of the City Charter, political activities of, and campaign contributions by, the City's legislative
officers, administrative officers, and employees shall be governed in accordance with applicable State and Federal law.
B. All City legislative officers, administrative officers, and employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities during working hours.
C. All City officers and employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities at their workplace. Furthermore, all City officers and employees are
prohibited from engaging in political activities on City property, provided this prohibition does not pertain to property that is otherwise open to the public
for the purpose of engaging in political activities.
D. Violations of this section shall be subject to the penalty and enforcement provisions set forth in this Code, including, but not limited to, section 1-9 of this
Code, in addition to any applicable State and Federal laws restricting said activities. (Ord. 1795, 3-5-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 56/636
2-7: ORDER OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHED:
The order of business to be followed in conducting the regular meetings of the City Council shall be established by resolution. (Ord. Code § 1276; Ord. 850
§ A, 1-4-1966; Ord. 1119 §§ A, B, 9-20-1977)
2-8: SUSPENDING ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The regular order of business may be suspended by a majority vote for the accommodation of nonresidents who may have business before the City
Council, or for any other purpose. (Ord. Code § 1276.1)
2-8.1: REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY:
A. It is hereby found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the City in accordance with the provisions of
the Community Redevelopment Law.
B. Said Redevelopment Agency is hereby established pursuant to section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the Porterville
Redevelopment Agency. Said Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized to transact business and exercise its power under provisions of the
Community Redevelopment Law.
C. Pursuant to the provisions of section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, this City Council hereby declares itself to be the Redevelopment
Agency of the City.
D. The City Council hereby finds and determines that the designation of the City Council as the Redevelopment Agency will serve the public interest and
promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to
implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 1227 §§ 1 - 4, 2-17-1981)
Chapter Article II
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
2-9: ENUMERATED GENERALLY; AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER TO HIRE AND FIX COMPENSATION1:
In addition to the officers provided in the charter of the city, there shall be the following subordinate officers, assistants, deputies and employees:
Building inspector and firemen of the fire department to such number as shall be determined by the city manager, with the approval by the city council;
Traffic officers, and such other police officers to such number as shall be determined by the city manager, with the approval of the city council.
The city manager shall also be authorized to hire and fix the compensation of such employees, assistants and laborers as may be necessary. (Ord. Code
§ 1311.1)
2-10: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1125, 1-19-1978)
2-11: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
2-12: UNIFORM OF POLICE OFFICERS; IMPERSONATION OF POLICE OFFICERS:
A. A standard official uniform for all police officers of the city is hereby established and set up under the following specifications:
Blue shirt.
Blue pants.
Blue cap.
B. Any person, other than a duly appointed or elected police officer of the city who at any time wears the standard approved uniform of a police officer of
the city, or any part of such uniform or a uniform or part of a uniform similar thereto is guilty of a misdemeanor.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, not a duly appointed or elected police officer of the city to state or represent either by word, act or deed that such
person is a police officer of the city. (Ord. Code § 1391.1)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 57/636
2-13: UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY WHICH COMES INTO POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; INVENTORY:
All unclaimed personal property which shall come into the possession of the police department of the city shall be inventoried and a copy of such
inventory, signed by the chief of police, shall be filed with the administrative services director, or designee. (Ord. 1537 § B6, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 1, 9-17-
2002)
2-14: UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY WHICH COMES INTO POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; INVENTORY;
SALE AFTER RETENTION PERIOD; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS:
All unclaimed personal property which shall come into the possession of the police department shall be held for a period of three (3) months, four (4)
months for bicycles, and if unclaimed at the end of such period shall be sold at public auction, by the chief of police, or his duly authorized representative,
to the highest bidder for cash and the proceeds of such sale shall be deposited with the city treasurer to the credit of the general fund of the city. If any
property is determined to be needed for a public use, such property may be retained by the city and need not be sold. (Ord. 1537 § B7, 8-6-1996)
2-15: UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY WHICH COMES INTO POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT; INVENTORY;
NOTICE OF SALE:
Before making any such sale, pursuant to section 2-14 of this article, notice of such sale shall be given by the chief of police, or his representative, at least
five (5) days before the time fixed, by one publication of a notice of the time and place of sale, and the articles of personal property to be sold, in a
newspaper of general circulation published in the city. (Ord. 1537 § B8, 8-6-1996)
2-16 _ 2-21: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
2-21.1: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1222 § A, 10-28-1980)
2-21.2: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1221 § A, 10-28-1980)
2-21.3: RESERVE, AUXILIARY POLICEMEN:
A. The chief of police of the city of Porterville is hereby vested with authority to appoint or deputize reserve, auxiliary or deputy policemen.
B. Any individual so appointed shall be called a "reserve officer" and shall serve in the legal capacity of a reserve officer of the city of Porterville only during
a specific police department assignment as from time to time designated by the chief of police or his authorized appointee. (Ord. 1128 §§ 1, 2, 12-20-
1977)
Chapter Article III
LOCAL PLANNING
2-22: CREATED:
There is hereby created and established a city planning agency, the same to be known as the city council. (Ord. Code § 1441; Ord. 1360 § A(2), 8-19-
1986)
2-23: COMPOSITION:
The planning agency shall consist of the city council. (Ord. 735 § 1; Ord. 1360 § A(3), 8-19-1986)
2-24: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 666, 2-2-1960)
2-25: DUTIES GENERALLY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 58/636
The city council, as the planning agency, shall have all of the power and authority and be subject to all of the duties, acts and responsibilities as provided
by the "zoning and planning law" of the state and the general laws of the state, as are now in full force and effect or which shall hereafter be in full force
and effect. (Ord. Code § 1443; Ord. 1360 § A(4), 8-19-1986)
2-25.1: EMPLOYEES; APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL:
A. Consultants: The appointment and removal of consultants employed by the city for the purpose of advising, aiding or otherwise assisting the planning
agency of the city shall be vested in the city council.
B. Other Employees: All other employees of the planning agency including, but not limited to, assistants, deputies and clerks shall be appointed and may
be removed by the city manager in accordance with the charter of the city and all ordinances and regulations pertaining thereto. (Ord. 753 §§ 1, 2, 1-
15-1963; Ord. 1360 § A(5, 6), 8-19-1986)
Chapter Article IV
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
2-26.1: APPOINTMENT; JURISDICTION:
A duly appointed employee of the prevention division of the fire department, the code enforcement officer shall be authorized to perform the enforcement
duties identified in this article and as otherwise defined in this code. The code enforcement officer will work closely with members of other departments,
including public works, community development, parks and leisure services, finance, and police. The code enforcement officer shall be under the
supervision of the fire chief. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 5-1-2007)
2-26.2: DUTIES:
The duties of the code enforcement officer shall include, but are not limited to, issues involving property maintenance by abating hazardous conditions
which threaten the life, health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 5-1-2007)
2-26.3: ENFORCEMENT:
The code enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of all applicable state and city codes including, but not limited to, this code, the California Health
and Safety Code, uniform fire code, uniform building code, uniform housing code and uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, as said
codes may from time to time be amended. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 5-1-2007)
2-26.4: COMPLIANCE:
The code enforcement officer shall work with property owners/residents to obtain voluntary compliance. However, the code enforcement officer shall also
have authority to issue citations and pursue other legal remedies as necessary and as authorized by local or state law. (Ord. 1720 § 2, 5-1-2007)
Chapter Article V
MUNICIPAL SERVICE CHARGES GENERALLY
2-27: CONSOLIDATED BILLING:
Service charges for water, sewer rental, garbage disposal and refuse collection, sanitary inspections in connection with the collection and removal of
garbage, refuse and waste matter and special disposal of the rates and charges therefor as established by any provision of this code, ordinance or
resolution of the council shall be billed to the consumer or customer on one bill or statement. (Ord. 717 § 1)
2-28: INCLUSION OF UNPAID PERMIT, LICENSE, ETC., FEES:
If any provision of this code, ordinance or resolution of the council provides for and requires the payment by any customer or consumer of the municipal
services enumerated in section 2-27 of this article for any permit, connection fee, license, or charge or cost for any sewer enterprise, sewer service,
garbage, refuse removal, water service enterprise, meter or distribution lines, the city manager is authorized to include any unpaid charge for the same in
the municipal service statement referred to in section 2-27 of this article. (Ord. 717 § 2)
2-29: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT:
If all or any part of the statement or bill referred to in section 2-27 of this article rendered by the city to the customer or consumer is not paid, with all
penalties and interest, at the time, form and manner set forth in the provision, ordinance or resolution of the council establishing the same, the city may
discontinue any and all service or services for which such statement or bill is incurred or is rendered. (Ord. 717 § 3)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 59/636
2-30: USE OF SERVICE AFTER DISCONTINUANCE:
If any municipal service referred to in section 2-27 of this article is discontinued by reason of failure on the part of the consumer or customer to pay the
same as required by any provision of this code, ordinance or resolution of the city council, it is hereby declared unlawful for any consumer or customer to
receive any part of the service so discontinued without making application for and receiving a permit to do so from the city. (Ord. 717 § 4)
Chapter Article VI
FUNDS OF THE CITY1
2-31: RESERVE AND DESIGNATED FUNDS:
2-31.1: "BUDGET STABILIZATION" RESERVE FUND:
It shall be the policy of the city of Porterville to establish reserve funds that shall be used for the purpose to mitigate, should it occur, onetime annual
budget revenue shortfalls (actual revenues less than projected revenues) due to changes in the economic environment and/or actions by the
county/state/federal government that have a material effect on the city's revenues; and/or expenditures that will result in future efficiencies and/or
budgetary savings. The "budget stabilization" reserve fund shall be maintained at a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of general fund annual budgeted
operating expenditures (excluding onetime expenditures), and may only be appropriated by formal city council action with not less than four-fifths (4/5) of
those voting in agreement. If the city council takes action due to making a finding(s) of material effects as stated above, it shall include findings of material
effects as further specified in section 2-31.7 of this article. Should the fund's balance fall below ten percent (10%) of annual budgeted operating
expenditures, then a plan will be established to replenish the fund to the required level within three (3) fiscal years. An initial balance shall be appropriated
from the current unallocated reserve as of the date of adoption hereof in an amount equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the budgeted general fund
expenditures for fiscal 2011-2012. (Ord. 1787, 4-3-2012)
2-31.2: "CATASTROPHIC/EMERGENCY" RESERVE FUND:
It shall be the policy of the city of Porterville to establish reserve funds that shall be used for the purpose to mitigate costs associated with unforeseen
emergencies, including natural disasters or catastrophic events. Should unforeseen and unavoidable events occur that require the expenditure of city
resources beyond those provided for in the annual budget, formal city council action with not less than four-fifths (4/5) of those voting in agreement, is
required of a budget amendment confirming the nature of the emergency and authorizing the appropriation of reserve funds. The
"catastrophic/emergency" reserve fund shall be maintained at a minimum of ten percent (10%) of general fund annual budgeted operating expenditures
(less onetime expenditures). Should the fund's balance fall below ten percent (10%) of annual budgeted operating expenditures, then a plan will be
established to replenish the fund to the required level within five (5) fiscal years. An initial balance shall be appropriated from the current unallocated
reserve as of the date of adoption hereof in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the budgeted general fund expenditures for fiscal 2011-2012. (Ord.
1787, 4-3-2012)
2-31.3: "FACILITY DEFERRED MAINTENANCE/EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT" DESIGNATED FUND:
It shall be the policy of the city of Porterville to establish designated funds that shall be used for the exclusive purpose of providing funds to support
onetime city facility deferred maintenance and/or equipment replacement costs (excluding vehicles), such as, but not limited to, HVAC units, roofing,
parking lot overlays, painting, plumbing, electrical, and doors/windows. The city council, by means of a resolution, may add, modify, or delete specific
deferred maintenance or equipment replacement categories. The "facility deferred maintenance/equipment replacement" designated fund shall have no
minimum balance, but shall accumulate funds until appropriated by formal city council action. The fund shall receive an allocation of one-third (1/3) of
audited general fund unassigned fund balance (actual revenues more than actual expenditures). An initial balance shall be appropriated from the current
unallocated reserve as of the date of adoption hereof in an amount equal to one-third (1/3) of the current unallocated reserve balance as of the date of
adoption hereof after the funding of the budget stabilization reserve fund, the catastrophic/emergency reserve fund, and the initial funding of the special
purpose reserve fund, have been deducted from the initial unallocated reserve fund balance. (Ord. 1787, 4-3-2012)
2-31.4: "CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION/IMPROVEMENT" DESIGNATED FUND:
It shall be the policy of the city of Porterville to establish designated funds that shall be used for the exclusive purpose of providing funds to support new
capital construction and/or improvement projects as identified in the city's ten (10) year capital improvement plan. The "capital construction/improvement"
designated fund shall have no minimum balance, but shall accumulate funds until appropriated by formal city council action. The fund shall receive an
allocation of one-third (1/3) of audited general fund unassigned fund balance (actual revenues more than actual expenditures). An initial balance shall be
appropriated from the current unallocated reserve as of the date of adoption hereof in an amount equal to one-third (1/3) of the current unallocated reserve
balance as of the date of adoption hereof after the funding of the budget stabilization reserve fund, the catastrophic/emergency reserve fund, and the initial
funding of the special purpose reserve fund, have been deducted from the initial unallocated reserve fund balance. (Ord. 1787, 4-3-2012)
2-31.5: "INFRASTRUCTURE DEFERRED MAINTENANCE/IMPROVEMENT" DESIGNATED FUND:
It shall be the policy of the city of Porterville to establish designated funds that shall be used for the exclusive purpose of providing funds to support
onetime city infrastructure deferred maintenance and/or improvement costs, such as, but not limited to, streets/alleys, bridges, sewer, water, storm drain,
and curb/gutter/sidewalk. The city council, by means of a resolution, may add, modify, or delete specific infrastructure deferred maintenance/improvement
categories. The "infrastructure deferred maintenance/improvement" designated fund shall have no minimum balance, but shall accumulate funds until
appropriated by formal city council action. The fund shall receive an allocation of one-third (1/3) of audited general fund unassigned fund balance (actual
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 60/636
revenues more than actual expenditures). An initial balance shall be appropriated from the current unallocated reserve as of the date of adoption hereof in
an amount equal to one-third (1/3) of the current unallocated reserve balance as of the date of adoption hereof after the funding of the budget stabilization
reserve fund, the catastrophic/emergency reserve fund, and the initial funding of the special purpose reserve fund, have been deducted from the initial
unallocated reserve fund balance. (Ord. 1787, 4-3-2012)
2-31.6: "SPECIAL PURPOSES" RESERVE FUND:
It shall be the policy of the city of Porterville to establish reserve funds as a line item of the annual city council budget that shall be used for the purpose of
providing funds to support onetime city special events, projects, and/or purposes that benefit the community. The "special purposes" reserve fund shall be
maintained at a minimum of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), and may only be appropriated by formal city council action with four-fifths (4/5) of
those voting in agreement. Should the fund's balance fall below one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in a fiscal year, then the general fund will
replenish the fund to the minimum required level at the beginning of the following fiscal year. An initial balance in the amount of one hundred thousand
dollars ($100,000.00) shall be appropriated from the current unallocated reserve as of the date of adoption hereof. (Ord. 1787, 4-3-2012)
2-31.7: "FORMAL CITY COUNCIL ACTION" FOR APPROPRIATIONS:
For the purposes of sections 2-31.1 through 2-31.6 of this article, formal city council action shall require adoption of a resolution. Said resolution shall
contain the basis for a finding (or findings) of materiality if required by any provision in this article. Additionally, said resolution shall include finding(s) that
the appropriation is within the intent and purpose of the designated and reserve funds including, where appropriate, one or more findings that the purpose
of the appropriation is within the defined purpose of the designated and reserve funds whether or not explicitly stated in this article. (Ord. 1787, 4-3-2012)
2-32: SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND; CREATED:
To comply with the provisions of sections 2100 through 2127 of the Streets And Highways Code of the state with particular reference to section 2113
thereof, there is hereby created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gas tax street improvement fund". (Ord. 1537 § B9, 8-6-
1996)
2-33: SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND; CREATED; MONIES PAID INTO FUND:
All monies received by the city from the state under the provisions of sections 2100 through 2127 of the Streets And Highways Code for the acquisition of
real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into
the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 1537 § B10, 8-6-1996)
2-34: SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND; CREATED; EXPENDITURE OF MONIES IN FUND:
All monies in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions
of sections 2100 through 2127 of the Streets And Highways Code of the state. (Ord. 1537 § B11, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article VIA
REVENUE BONDS
Division 1. Generally
2-34.1: REVENUE BOND LAW:
A. This section shall be known as the CITY OF PORTERVILLE REVENUE BOND LAW, and is enacted by the council of the city of Porterville under and
pursuant to the powers granted and reserved to the city of Porterville under sections 3 and 5 of article XI of the constitution of the state of California
and sections 4 and 54 of the charter of the city of Porterville, and is enacted for the purpose of establishing a procedure for the issuance and sale of
revenue bonds of the city of Porterville for certain purposes. This section shall constitute a special procedure for the carrying out and enforcement of
the rights and powers belonging to the city of Porterville and such procedure shall control and be followed in the issuance and sale of revenue bonds
as in this section so provided. This section fixes and establishes the entire procedure for the issuance and sale of said revenue bonds and no other law
shall be applicable thereto.
B. Whenever the public interest and necessity so require, the council of the city of Porterville may, acting under this section, by ordinance or ordinances
issue revenue bonds to provide funds for the acquisition, construction, improving or financing of:
1. Any "enterprise" as that term is defined in the revenue bond law of 1941 hereinafter referred to; or
2. Any enterprise comprising a revenue producing improvement, system, plant or plants, work, facilities or undertaking used for or useful in both the
collection, treatment or disposal of sewage, waste or storm water, including drainage, and in the obtaining, conserving, treating and supplying of
water for domestic use, irrigation, sanitation, industrial use, fire protection, recreation, or any other public or private uses.
The procedure for the issuance of such revenue bonds shall (except as herein otherwise expressly provided) be the procedure set forth in the revenue
bond law of 1941 (commencing with section 54300 of the California Government Code), and by this reference, with the exception hereinafter stated,
the provisions of said law are incorporated herein; provided, however, that no election to authorize the issuance of such revenue bonds shall be
required or held, and to that end sections 54380 through 54387 of said Government Code are not incorporated herein and shall not be applicable to the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 61/636
issuance of such revenue bonds; and provided further, that the term "enterprise" shall have the meanings specified in this subsection B rather than the
meanings specified in section 54309 of said Government Code.
C. Reference is hereby made to three (3) copies of chapter 6 of division 2 of title 5 of the Government Code of the state of California known as the
"Revenue Bond Law Of 1941" and filed in the office of the city clerk of the city of Porterville on October 3, 1972, and said chapter 6 of division 2 of title
5 of the Government Code of the state of California as aforesaid now on file with said city clerk is hereby adopted by reference excepting therefrom
article 3 of said chapter 6 and excepting as hereinabove provided. (Ord. 1026 §§ 1 _ 3, 11-7-1972)
Division 2. Financing Industrial And Commercial Projects
2-34.2: GENERAL STATEMENT; DEFINITIONS:
This division, sections 2-34.2 through 2.34.22 of this article, shall be known as the CITY OF PORTERVILLE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT REVENUE
BOND LAW (sometimes hereafter referred to as "this division"), and is enacted by the council of the city under and pursuant to the powers granted and
reserved to the city under sections 3 and 5 of article XI of the constitution of the state of California and sections 4 and 54 of the charter of the city, and is
enacted for the purpose of establishing a procedure for the issuance and sale of revenue bonds of the city for certain purposes. This division shall
constitute a special procedure for the carrying out and enforcement of the rights and powers belonging to the city and such procedure shall control and
shall be followed in the issuance and sale of the revenue bonds as in this section so provided. This article fixes and establishes the entire procedure for
the issuance and sale of said revenue bonds and no other law shall be applicable thereto. Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires,
the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of words and phrases used in this division.
ACQUIRE: Acquire, construct, improve, furnish, equip, remodel, repair, reconstruct or rehabilitate.
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES: The reasonable and necessary expenses incurred by the city in the administration of the provisions of this division,
including, without limitation, fees and costs of paying agents, indenture trustees, attorneys, consultants and others.
APPLICATION: An application submitted by a company pursuant to this division to obtain financing for a project under a project agreement.
BOND: The bonds, including principal (premium, if any) and interest, authorized to be issued by the city under this division, including a single bond, a
promissory note or notes, or other instruments evidencing an indebtedness of obligation. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, bonds include any
security issued hereunder, including any guarantee of such security by any person given in relation to an issue of bonds, which satisfy the following
criteria:
A. Are issued as part of an issue all or a major portion of the proceeds of which are to be used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried on
by any person who is not an exempt person within the meaning of the internal revenue code of 1954, as amended; and
B. The payment of the principal or interest on which (under the terms of such obligation or any underlying arrangement) is, in whole or in major part:
1. Secured by any interest in property used, or to be used, in a trade or business or in payments in respect of such property; or
2. To be derived from payments in respect of property, or borrowed money, used or to be used in a trade or business.
C. Are issued as part of an issue substantially all of the proceeds of which are to be used, with respect to any one or more of such facilities (none of
which shall be deemed to be restricted in scope because of the provisions of any other state law), to provide:
1. For the acquisition or development of land as the site for an industrial park;
2. For any facilities meeting the criteria set forth in subsections A and B of this definition which the city can finance hereunder under the
exemptions in the internal revenue code of 1954, as amended, commonly known as the "small issue exemptions";
3. Residential real property for family units;
4. Sports facilities;
5. Convention or trade show facilities;
6. Airports, docks, wharves, mass commuting facilities, parking facilities, or storage or training facilities directly related to any of the foregoing;
7. Sewage or solid waste disposal facilities or facilities for the local furnishing of electric energy or gas;
8. Air or water pollution control facilities;
9. Facilities for the furnishing of water for any purpose if:
a. The water is or will be made available to members of the general public (including electric utility, industrial, agricultural, or commercial users);
and
b. Either the facilities are operated by a governmental unit or the rates for the furnishing or sale of the water have been established or approved
by the state or political subdivision thereof, by an agency or instrumentality of the United States, or by a public service or public utility
commission or other similar body of the state or political subdivision thereof;
10. For any other facilities which the city can finance hereunder without violating the applicable federal laws and regulations promulgated
thereunder pertaining to industrial development bonds.
The above definitions of the words "bonds" and "bond" shall be construed to include all of the types of industrial development bond facilities that can
be financed on a tax exempt basis under the applicable federal laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder, the details thereof, although also
incorporated in such laws and regulations, being omitted herein for the sake of brevity; and, it is intended that the definition in this division will be
amended to correspond with any changes in said federal laws (but not in the regulations or in the details of such laws). It is not intended, by including
any of the above definitions, to contravene any provisions of the city charter and such definitions shall be so construed. Furthermore, some of the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 62/636
above items are furnished by privately owned public utilities or private concerns, and it is not intended to, nor shall any proceedings be conducted
under those provisions, without the consent of the privately owned public utility or other private concern involved, as the case may be; or
D. Are issued as part of an issue substantially all the proceeds of which are to be used with respect to any one or more of such facilities (none of which
shall be deemed to be restricted in scope because of the provisions of any other state law) to provide facilities (for example, hospitals) which are to
be used directly or indirectly in any trade or business carried on by any person who is an exempt person within the meaning of the internal revenue
code of 1954, as amended; and any company, who so qualifies as an exempt person, may submit an application for financing hereunder; and any
company, who does not so qualify as an exempt person, may submit an application for financing of facilities for operations by such an exempt
person, it being the intent of this division to encourage all enterprises, either within or without the city, which broaden the employment opportunities
for residents of the city and which serve the residents of the city and so make it a more attractive place for industrial and commercial ventures. While
bonds issued to provide facilities described in this subsection do not fall within the definition of "industrial development bonds" as set forth in the
internal revenue code of 1954, as amended, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, such bonds shall be treated as industrial development
bonds for purposes of this division and may be issued substantially in the manner set forth herein pursuant to appropriate proceedings being taken
therefor.
BOND PROCEEDS: All amounts received by the city upon sale or other disposition of any bonds.
BONDHOLDER OR HOLDER OF BONDS OR ANY OTHER SIMILAR TERM: a) Any person who shall be the holder of any outstanding bond payable to
bearer; or b) the registered owner or his duly authorized attorney, trustee, representative or assigns of any outstanding bond which shall at the time be
registered so as to be payable other than to bearer. For the purpose of bondholders' voting rights or consents, bonds owned by the city shall not be
counted.
CITY: The city of Porterville, California, a charter city in the state existing under and exercising powers pursuant to the city charter.
CITY CHARTER: The charter of the city of Porterville, state of California, as amended from time to time.
COMPANY: A person, partnership, corporation, whether for profit or not, trust, or other private enterprise of whatever legal form, for which a project is
undertaken or proposed to be undertaken pursuant to this division, and may include more than a single enterprise.
COST: As applied to any project, may include, without limitation, any or all of the following:
A. The cost of construction, improvement, remodeling, rehabilitation, repair and reconstruction.
B. The cost of acquisition, including right in land and other property, both real and personal and improved and unimproved, and franchises, and
disposal rights.
C. The cost of demolishing, removing, or relocating any building or structures on lands so acquired, including the cost of acquiring any lands to which
such buildings or structures may be moved or relocated.
D. The cost of machinery, equipment and furnishings, and of engineering and architectural surveys, plans, and specifications.
E. The cost of consultant services, including, without limitation, legal, financial, engineering, accounting, and auditing, necessary or incident to a project
and of the determination as to the feasibility or practicability of undertaking such project.
F. The cost of financing, including, without limitation, interest to be paid on the bonds prior to, during and for a reasonable period after completion of a
project, underwriter's discount, loan fees, and reserves for securing principal and interest payments and for extensions, enlargement, additions,
repairs, replacements, renovations, and improvements.
G. The cost of acquiring or refinancing existing obligations incurred in connection with a project, and the reimbursement to any governmental entity or
agency, or any company, of expenditures made by or on behalf of such entity, agency, or company that are costs of such project hereunder, without
regard to whether or not such expenditures may have been made before or after the undertaking of a project by the city or delivery of bonds, all to
the extent that such costs may be legally paid from bond proceeds.
H. The cost of making relocation assistance payments by the company and/or the city, as the case may be, all as provided by state law.
I. Any other items necessary or convenient for the project, whether or not included within the above categories.
Except in the case of a company qualifying as an exempt person under section 501 of the internal revenue code of 1954, as amended, "cost" shall not
otherwise include working capital for a company.
FACILITIES OR FACILITY: Property suitable for any one or more of the activities or uses described in this division for which bonds can be issued, and
includes incidental facilities and appurtenances and appurtenant work.
GOVERNMENTAL DEPARTMENT: Any commission, department, or agency of the state or the United States of America with which, under any other act,
the offer, issuance, or sale of the bonds is subject to authorization, qualification or registration.
HEALTH FACILITIES: A structure or building suitable for use as a hospital; clinic; nursing home; home for the aged or infirm; place providing healthcare;
laboratory; laundry; nurses', doctors', or interns' residence; ambulatory care center; place for administrative offices; place in which to conduct research;
place in which to house maintenance equipment and supplies; storage place; place in which to locate utilities; auditorium; dining hall; place for food service
and preparation; place in which to house firefighting equipment; place in which to provide mental and physical healthcare and dental care; nursing school;
medical teaching school; and place in which to house offices; parking lots, garages, and buildings or structures in which to house supporting services; and
all necessary, useful, and related furnishings, equipment, machinery, and appurtenances, including, without limitation, the acquisition, preparation, and
development of all lands necessary or convenient as a site or sites for any of the foregoing.
PROCEEDINGS: The actions taken by the city in undertaking, carrying out, and completing a project, including, without limitation, the project agreements,
indenture, bonds, and resolutions.
PROJECT: The acquisition, financing or refinancing of facilities as authorized by this division.
PROJECT AGREEMENTS: The agreements between the city and a company respecting a project, and may include, without limitation, leases, subleases,
options to, and installment or other contracts of, purchase, loan, and guarantee agreements, notes, mortgages, deeds of trust, and security agreements.
PROPERTY: Any land, easements, rights of way, air rights, water rights, disposal rights, and any other rights, hereditaments, or profits of whatever kind
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 63/636
and nature, improvements, buildings or other structures, and any personal property, and includes, but is not limited to, machinery and equipment, whether
or not in existence or under construction, and interests in any of the foregoing necessary, incidental or convenient in connection with a project.
RESOLUTION OF ISSUANCE: A resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds by the city as further provided in section 2-34.14 of this article.
REVENUES: All rents, purchase payments, and other income derived by the city from, or with respect to, the sale, lease, or voluntary or involuntary
disposition of, or repayment of loans with respect to property, bond proceeds, and any receipts derived from the investment of any such income or
proceeds in any fund or account of the city, but does not include receipts designated to cover administrative expenses.
STATE: The state of California. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.3: PUBLIC PURPOSE:
The city is hereby authorized and directed to engage in the issuance of bonds for the accomplishment of one or more of the public purposes which it is the
declared policy of this city to achieve, all as provided in this division. Such purpose or purposes shall be deemed to constitute a public purpose or
purposes of the city in which the city has a peculiar and unique interest, and the exercise of the powers recognized in this division shall be deemed to be in
the performance of an essential governmental function and also a municipal affair as those terms are defined by California law. Findings as to the reasons
for the adoption of this division, the public purposes to be achieved thereby and other matters pertinent to this division are set forth in resolution 9572, of
the council, which is incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.4: CONTRACT RESTRICTIONS:
A. No attorney or firm of attorneys employed as counsel by a company may serve as legal counsel, including bond counsel, to the city in connection with
any project or proposed project for such company. No attorney or firm of attorneys employed as counsel by an underwriter may serve as legal counsel,
including bond counsel, to the city in connection with any project or proposed project for the company involved.
B. No person or firm employed as financial consultant, advisor or underwriter by a company may serve as financial advisor to the city, and no financial
advisor to the city for a particular issue of bonds may purchase or agree to purchase bonds from the city unless such bonds are offered by the city at a
public sale upon publication of a notice inviting bids. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.5: POWERS:
The city is recognized to have all powers pursuant to and as may be limited by the city charter which are necessary or appropriate for carrying out the
purposes of this division, including, without limitation, the following powers, together with all powers incidental thereto:
A. To acquire property by purchase, exchange, gift, lease, contract, or otherwise, including eminent domain.
B. To maintain property.
C. To dispose of property by lease, sale, exchange, donation, release, relinquishment, or otherwise.
D. With respect to property, to:
1. Charge and collect rent under any lease;
2. Sell at public or private sale, with or without public notice;
3. Sell at a premium or discount above or below appraised value or for a nominal consideration;
4. Sell on an installment payment or a conditional sales basis;
5. Convey, or provide for the transfer of, property without further act of the city, upon exercise of an option; and
6. Sell at a fixed or formula price, and receive for any such sale the note or notes of a company and mortgages, deeds of trust, or other security
agreements respecting such property;
provided, however, this subsection shall be operable only to the extent permitted by the city charter.
E. To encumber property, including funds, whether then owned or thereafter acquired.
F. To advance funds secured by loan agreements and charge and collect interest on such funds.
G. To exercise all rights and to perform all obligations of the city under the project agreements and resolution of issuance, including the right, upon any
event of default by or the failure to comply with any of the obligations thereof by the lessee, purchaser, or other company thereunder, to dispose of all
or part of the property to the extent authorized by the project agreements or resolution of issuance.
H. To borrow money and issue its bonds for the purpose of paying all or part of the costs of a project, provided in this division.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 64/636
I. To pledge the revenues or any portion thereof, and all other rights, as security for the payment of any bonds so issued and for performance of obligations
under a resolution of issuance.
J. To contract and pay compensation for professional legal, financial and other services.
K. To refund outstanding bonds when there is a finding that such refunding will be of benefit to a company or holders of such bonds, subject to the
provisions of the proceedings for the issuance thereof to the extent permitted by law.
L. To invest and reinvest funds, including bond proceeds, pending application thereof to the purposes for which such bonds shall have been issued,
subject to the provisions of the proceedings for the issuance thereof.
M. To acquire and hold obligations of any kind and pledge or assign the same as further security.
N. To fund administrative expenses:
1. By the establishment and collection of application processing and other fees in such amounts as may be established by the council from time to
time;
2. By the acceptance of funds and other aid from governmental sources authorized to provide such funds or aid;
3. By the acceptance of contributions from business, trade, labor, community and other associations; and
4. By other legal means.
O. 1. To make a loan and/or loans to a company pursuant to a resolution of issuance and a project agreement, and such loan or loans may be secured by
a mortgage or such other security interests as deemed advisable by the city, may contain the unconditional promise of the company to so make
payments or may be guaranteed by such other means as approved by the city;
2. To lease facilities and/or property to a company with an option for the company to purchase such facilities and/or property at the end of the lease
term at such price as may be determined by the city;
3. To enter into lease-leaseback financings with companies on such terms as may be provided in the resolution of issuance and the project
agreements; and
4. To enter into installment sale agreements with a company for facilities constructed by the city, with title to pass from the city to such company upon
entering into such agreement or upon payment in full of the principal and interest on bonds.
P. To exercise the city's right of eminent domain in implementing the intent of the city by adopting this division, to the extent possible and in the manner
required in the city charter and applicable state laws. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.6: NONOPERATION:
The city shall not have the power to operate any facilities as a business. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.7: REQUEST FOR APPLICATIONS; PUBLICATION; ADVERTISEMENTS:
Upon this division becoming effective, the city clerk shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, a notice setting forth substantially the
following:
A. That the city has duly adopted and approved this division seeking to promote industrial growth within the city so as to encourage increasing long term
employment for the residents thereof;
B. That on and after the effective date hereof, the city will accept applications on forms approved by the city from companies interested in entering into
project agreements for the financing of facilities hereunder; and
C. That the city will review such applications and determine the feasibility of each project so submitted, and will undertake to commence the financing
thereof as soon as practicable. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.8: RULES, REGULATIONS AND FORMS:
The council shall provide, by resolution, rules and regulations setting forth the details of the procedures for the implementation of this division, including
therein, without limitation, a form of application, the criteria for evaluation and approval of the applications, the procedures for processing applications and
the deposits, fees and charges to be made hereunder and the uses of same, or any fund or funds derived therefrom. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.9: APPLICATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 65/636
Private industrial, manufacturing or commercial concerns may apply for financing pursuant to this division by filing an application with the city on such
forms and with the city as specified pursuant to section 2-34.8 of this division and shall include, without limitation, all information necessary to evaluate the
financial reliability and stability of the enterprise, to verify that long term employment of local residents, will, in fact, be increased, and to determine that the
city will receive a substantial benefit that exceeds any detriment incurred. The application shall also include the following:
A. An estimate of the maximum amount of bonds proposed to be issued, of the sources of amounts otherwise required for the project, and an itemization
of the estimated costs and any other expenses;
B. The application shall be supplemented with a commitment by the company to comply, and/or to assist the city in complying, with all state and federal
laws in the issuance of the bonds, including, without limitation, the making of any required application to a governmental department, for authorization,
qualification, or registration of the offer, issuance, or sale of the bonds, and any amendments thereto, and any permit or other authorization of such
governmental department, prior to the delivery by the city of such bonds;
C. The application shall be supplemented with a commitment by the company to cause and/or to assist the city in causing to be printed any prospectus or
other written or printed communication proposed to be published in connection with the issuance, offer, or sale of bonds, prior to the delivery by the city
of such bonds, and, if deemed necessary by the city, following the delivery of such bonds;
D. All commitments by the company shall specifically provide for the company to pay all expenses in connection with the issuance, offer or sale of the
bonds, whether or not they are finally issued, to hold the city harmless from any and all expenses and liabilities related thereto and to pay items on an
ongoing basis so that neither the city, nor its advisors, attorneys, employees and the like will accumulate any claims against the city; and
E. All additional information, agreements and undertakings as the city may require which are submitted to the city by a company shall be reproduced in
written, printed, or other tangible form, shall be supplied in as many copies as the city prescribes and shall be deemed supplements or amendments to
the application. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.10: PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS:
A. Applications for projects by companies not reasonably in accordance with the requirements of this division need not be accepted and further processed.
B. Receipt of any application in no way obligates the city to preliminarily undertake the project proposed.
C. Upon receipt of any applications, the city shall review each application and shall determine compliance with the purposes of this division and with the
criteria established pursuant hereto, and such review shall include the making of the appropriate determinations, including, without limitation, the
determination that it is likely that the undertaking of the project by the city will be a substantial factor in the accrual of each of the public benefits from
the use of the facilities as proposed in the application.
D. Upon an affirmative determination under subdivision C of this section, a copy of the application, as then amended or supplemented, so certified by the
city clerk, shall be entered into the records of the city, and a notice of the acceptance of the application naming the company, stating the estimated
maximum bond issue and briefly summarizing the proposed project, shall be published pursuant to section 6061 of the Government Code.
E. The company, not the city, shall be deemed the proposer of any project, a copy of the application for which is filed pursuant to section 2-34.9 of this
division.
F. Upon such approval, and certification thereof by the city clerk, all proceedings necessary to comply with the California environmental quality act (CEQA)
of 1970, as amended, any zoning, building code or other requirements of law shall be taken or completed, as the case may be, at the expense of the
company. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.11: PRELIMINARY UNDERTAKING:
A. A project shall be deemed to have been preliminarily undertaken by the city when the application has been reviewed, processed as above set forth, the
affirmative determinations above required have been made, the approval of the city has been obtained, a period of thirty (30) days from the date of
publication of the notice referred to in subsection 2-34.10D of this article has expired, and no requests have been received by the city clerk for a public
hearing pursuant to the publication of such notice. Should requests be received for a public hearing on the matter, the council shall hold such a hearing
as soon as is reasonably practicable. A further notice shall be given of such public hearing pursuant to section 6061 of the Government Code. If, after
such public hearing, the council decides to proceed, the project shall be deemed to have been preliminarily undertaken; provided, however, nothing
herein shall be deemed to commit the city to proceeding, if as result of the public hearing, the council decides not to proceed.
B. Preliminarily undertaking a project in no way obligates the city to undertake a project by entry into project agreements.
C. The council may decide to hold the public hearing referred to in subsection A of this section, and if so, the thirty (30) day waiting period in subsection A
of this section shall not apply.
D. The council may, as it deems necessary in certain instances, approve any particular application, regardless of the form thereof, without complying with
sections 2-34.7 and 2-34.8 of this article, and subsections A, B and C of this section. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 66/636
2-34.12: UNDERTAKINGS:
The city shall undertake projects by entry into project agreements in substance not inconsistent with the following:
A. The company shall comply with all legal requirements relating to the project and the operation, repair and maintenance of the facility, including:
1. Obtaining any rezonings or variances, building, development, environmental and other permits and approvals, and licenses and other entitlements
for use, without regard to any exemption for public projects;
2. Securing the issuance of any certificates of need, convenience, and necessity or other certificates or franchises required by the state;
3. Qualifying and/or registering any nonexempt issue, offer, or sale of any bonds or other security proposed to be issued by the company or others
(including the city) in connection with the project; and
4. Providing satisfactory evidence of compliance with this section.
B. The company shall provide, or cause to be provided by others, all amounts required for the project and all property of the project which are not to be
provided as or by expenditure of bond proceeds, and in the case of any such amounts and property which the company proposes to cause to be
provided by others, as by contract, grant subsidy, loan, or other form of assistance, shall provide satisfactory evidence that such amounts and property
will be provided when required.
C. Expenditure of bond proceeds shall be supervised to ensure proper application to the project.
D. The company shall, at its own expense, insure, repair and maintain the facility, pay such taxes with respect to its interests in the property of the project
as is then required by law, and pay any assessments and other public charges secured by liens, upon such interests as constitute the tax base for
property taxation (regardless of any exemption which may be provided from property taxes), on the same basis as other property of similar character.
E. The amounts payable by a company to, or for, the benefit of the city shall, in the aggregate, not be less than amounts sufficient:
1. To pay any bonds that shall be issued by the city to pay the costs of the project, and
2. To pay those administrative expenses which relate to the administration of the project agreements, the resolution of issuance and the bonds.
F. The term of the project agreements shall extend at least until the date on which all such bonds and all other obligations incurred by the city in connection
with a project shall have been paid in full or adequate funds for such payment shall have been otherwise provided.
G. Such additional provisions as in the determination of the city are necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this division, including, without
limitation, provisions:
1. For payments by a company which include amounts for administrative expenses, in addition to the amounts which the agreement is required to
obligate the company to pay, which are incurred by the city subsequent to the preliminary undertaking of the project by the city.
2. For payment before a facility exists or becomes functional, or after a facility has ceased to exist or be functional to any extent and from any cause.
3. For payment regardless as to whether or not the company is in possession or is entitled to be in possession of the facility.
4. Relating to the carrying out and completion of the project, including the allocation of responsibility between the city and the company regarding the
acquisition of property, the making of other purchases, and the contracting for construction of the project, with or without competitive bidding, and the
payment therefor.
5. That some or all of the obligations of a company shall be unconditional and shall be binding and enforceable in all circumstances whatsoever,
notwithstanding any other provision of law.
6. Relating to the use, maintenance, repair, insurance, and replacement of property of the project, such as the city and the company deem necessary
for the protection of themselves or others, including, but not limited to, liability insurance, indemnification, and events of default.
7. That the company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against the claims and demands of all persons arising in any manner from the project,
the project agreements, the facilities, the property, its operation, maintenance, repair and the like, including, without limitation, alleged violations of
any state or federal law relating thereto or relating to this article or any acts taken under this article.
8. For the payment of fees, charges, or deposits for the purpose of establishing and maintaining such common reserve fund or funds as may be
deemed necessary or desirable to secure the city's bonds issued hereunder, pursuant to rules and regulations governing the derivation, operation
and use of such common reserve fund or funds. One or more common reserve funds may be established by the city for any or all of its bonds. The
liability of any such common reserve fund with respect to any single issue of bonds of the city may not exceed the sum of the unpaid principal,
interest, and premium, if any, of the outstanding bonds of such issue. Each common reserve fund established pursuant to this section shall be
established by the administrative services director or designee. All interest or other increment earned by investment or deposit of monies in such
fund shall be credited to, and deposited in, such fund.
H. The company shall provide for the payment of any relocation assistance required by law and shall reimburse the city, as the case may be, for relocation
assistance services.
I. Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, projects developed pursuant to this division shall be consistent with the requirements of the general
plan of the city and any applicable redevelopment plan.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 67/636
J. In any project agreement entered into by the city for the financing or refinancing of health facilities, the company shall agree that, to the extent feasible,
the company shall pass through to the patients at such health facilities in the form of lower patient charges, the interest cost savings achieved by the
company as a result of the city issuing bonds for the financing or refinancing of such health facilities.
K. In any project agreement entered into by the city for the financing or refinancing of health facilities, the company shall agree to obtain all necessary
health planning approvals with respect to the health facilities proposed to be financed or refinanced by the city. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981; Ord. 1614
§ 1, 9-17-2002)
2-34.13: NONAGENCY:
No company shall, by reason of any project agreement, be deemed the agent of the city in the carrying out of such agreement. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.14: RESOLUTION OF ISSUANCE:
The issuance of bonds shall be authorized by the council by a resolution of issuance. The resolution of issuance may contain such terms and conditions of
the bonds as the council deems advisable and in accordance with the provisions of this division, including, but not limited to:
A. The type, denominations, terms and maturities of the bonds as the city may deem appropriate.
B. For the bonds to be in either registered or bearer form either as to principal or interest or both and carry such conversion and reconversion privileges as
the city may deem appropriate.
C. For bonds to be payable as serial or term bonds in such installments as may be set forth therein and at such time or times not exceeding forty (40)
years from the date thereof.
D. For the bonds to be payable in such mediums and at such place or places within or without the state as the city may deem appropriate.
E. For the bonds to bear interest at such rate or rates (or variable rates, as the case may be) per annum not to exceed those specified in the proceedings,
payable at such time or times and at such place or places within or without the state and evidenced in such manner as the city may deem appropriate.
F. For the bonds to be exchangeable for, or issuable in lieu of, such bonds.
G. For bonds to be signed on behalf of the city by facsimile signature of the mayor and by manual signature of the city clerk, and the seal of the city shall
be impressed, imprinted and reproduced thereon. The interest coupons on the bonds shall be signed by facsimile signature of the city clerk. The
foregoing officers shall be authorized and directed to sign the bonds and coupons in accordance with this section. If any city official whose manual or
facsimile signature appears on the bonds or coupons ceases to be such member or officer before delivery of the bonds, such signature is as effective
as if such official had remained in office. In lieu of the manual signature of the city clerk on the bonds, they may be authenticated by the manual
signature of a duly authorized officer of the trustee on the particular bond issue involved.
H. If deemed advisable by the city, there may be retained in the proceedings an option to redeem prior to maturity all or any part of any bonds as may be
specified in such proceedings, at such price or prices and after such notice or notices and on such terms and conditions as may be set forth in such
proceedings and as may be briefly recited in the bond. Nothing in this division shall be construed to confer on the city any right or option to redeem any
bonds, except as may be provided in the proceedings under which they shall have been issued.
I. For the fixing and collection of revenues.
J. For the creation and maintenance of special funds from such revenues, including reserve and sinking funds.
K. For limitations on expenditures of bond proceeds.
L. For the procedure by which any contract represented by bonds may be amended or abrogated.
M. For the acts and omissions which shall constitute, and the rights and remedies available in, an event of default. In such an event of default, the
obligations of the city may be enforced by mandamus, by the appointment of a receiver, by foreclosure of, or sale under, any resolution of issuance, by
injunction, by specific performance, by equitable relief, or by any one or more of such remedies, or any other appropriate remedy authorized by law.
N. Limitations on the issuance of additional bonds, the terms upon which additional bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of outstanding
bonds.
O. The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of bonds the holders of which
must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be given.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 68/636
P. For the payment of administrative expenses or other expenses of the city.
Q. Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a default in the duties of the city to holders of the bands, and providing the rights and
remedies of such holders in the event of default.
R. Issuing bonds in temporary form pending preparation of bonds in definitive form, at which time such temporary bonds shall be exchanged for definitive
bonds in bearer or fully registered form.
S. For any additional matters authorized to be included in the indenture provisions of a resolution of issuance or which relate to the security, protection, or
remedies of bondholders, or which tend to make the bonds more marketable.
T. The bonds to contain such provisions not inconsistent with this division as the city may deem appropriate which are for the protection of the city or the
bondholders or which tend to make the bonds more marketable. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.15: INDENTURE PROVISIONS IN RESOLUTION OF ISSUANCE:
In the discretion of the city, any bonds issued under the provisions of this division may be secured by indenture provisions in the resolution of issuance by
and between the city and a corporate trustee or trustees, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within the state,
and the resolution of issuance may contain such provisions which are customarily found in indentures, including, without limitation, the provisions
hereinafter set forth. Such resolution of issuance may vest in bondholders the right to remove and appoint a new trustee or trustees. The trustee or
trustees may, at any time, own all or any part of the bonds, unless otherwise provided in the resolution of issuance. Such resolution of issuance may vest
in such trustee or trustees, in trust or as agents, as provided therein and as consistent with other provisions of this section, property, rights, powers and
duties, and may provide that the revenues and any other rights be pledged as security for repayment of the bonds, subject to such agreements with
bondholders as may then exist. Such resolution of issuance may contain covenants of the city as to the acquisition of property, the disposition of any
property, or part thereof, the subjecting of additional property to the lien thereof, the issuance of additional bonds, the custody, investment and application
of all monies, the creation and maintenance of reserves, the disposition of insurance or condemnation proceeds, and the use of surplus bond proceeds.
Any such resolution of issuance may define events of default thereunder, which may include events of default by a company under the project agreements,
may specify the action to be taken by the city upon an event of default, may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee or
trustees, and may restrict the individual right of action by bondholders. In addition, any such resolution of issuance may contain such other provisions as
the city may seem reasonable and proper and which relate in any way to the security or protection of bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out
the provisions of such resolution of issuance shall be treated as an administrative expense. Any interest in property established by any resolution of
issuance shall be valid and binding from the date thereof, and any revenues or amounts to cover administrative expenses received by, or on behalf of, the
city thereunder shall immediately be subject to the lien thereof without any further act, which lien shall be valid and binding as against all persons,
irrespective of notice, without any filing or recording except a filing in the records of the city. All revenues, excepting (unless otherwise provided) bond
proceeds, shall further be deemed to be trust funds and all revenues shall be held and applied solely as provided in such resolution of issuance, but no
bondholder shall, as such, be in any manner obligated to see to the proper application thereof. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.16: FURTHER PROVISIONS REGARDING BONDS:
All bonds issued by the city for a project shall be special obligations only of the city, payable solely from the revenues or from the other sources specified in
the proceedings. In addition and without limitation to the other provisions of this division:
A. The bond may be executed and delivered by the city at any time and from time to time.
B. The issuance by the city of one or more issues of bonds for one or more purposes shall not preclude it from issuing other bonds in connection with the
same project or any other project, subject to such agreements with bondholders as may then exist.
C. Any bonds of the city issued hereunder at any time outstanding may, at any time, and from time to time, be refunded by the city by the issuance of its
refunding bonds in such amount as the city may deem necessary or appropriate. Bonds may be issued as one issue for refunding and other authorized
purposes. Any refunding may be effected whether the bonds to be refunded shall have then matured or shall thereafter mature, either by sale of the
refunding bonds and the application of the bond proceeds to the purchase or redemption of the bonds to be refunded thereby, or by the exchange of
the refunding bonds for the bonds to be refunded thereby with the consent of the holders of the bonds so to be refunded and with such cash
adjustments as may be agreed, and regardless of whether or not the bonds proposed to be refunded shall be payable at the same date or different
dates or shall be due serially or otherwise, and, notwithstanding any other provision of the law, the proceedings for the issuance of such refunding
bonds may provide for the payment into an escrow fund of such monies, together with the interest to be earned thereon, which will be sufficient to pay
the principal of, and interest and premium, if any, on the bonds so refunded to the earliest or subsequent date of redemption, purchase or maturity of
such refunded bonds.
D. Each bond shall be deemed to be an investment security under the Uniform Commercial Code as adopted by the state and a negotiable instrument,
subject only to any provisions thereof for registration or other provisions restricting transfer, and shall be deemed to have been issued for an authorized
purpose of the city in the exercise of the powers pursuant to this division, provided that the city so determines in the proceedings and such
determination is recited in the bond. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.17: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
Any and all bonds issued pursuant to this division shall be issued in compliance with all state laws as well as federal laws and regulations relating to the
issuance of securities and federal laws and regulations relating to the exemption from federal income taxation. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 69/636
2-34.18: SALE OF BONDS:
Bonds may be sold at such prices and in such manner as the council may direct, at public or private sale. Such bonds may be sold at, above, or below the
par or face value thereof, but the sale price shall not be less than the percentage of the par or face value of the bonds specified in the proceedings. (Ord.
1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.19: NO CITY DEBT:
A. None of the bonds issued by the city pursuant to this division shall be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city, or a pledge of the faith and
credit of the city, but shall be payable solely from the revenues and other funds, if any, provided therefor in the proceedings.
B. The issuance of bonds shall not directly or indirectly or contingently obligate the city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatsoever therefor or to
make any appropriation for their payment.
C. All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the following effect:
Neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the City of Porterville is pledged to the payment of the principal of, premium, if any, or interest on
this bond, nor is the City of Porterville in any manner obligated to make any appropriation for payment.
D. Neither the council nor any persons executing the bonds shall, in any event, be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the
issuance of such bonds.
E. The bonds shall be a special obligation of the city, and the city shall, under no circumstances, be obligated, to pay bonds or project costs (other than
administrative expenses), except from revenues and other funds received under the project agreements for such purposes, nor to pay administrative
expenses except from funds received under project agreements for such purposes, or from funds which are made available as otherwise authorized by
law. All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement of their special obligation nature. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.20: NET EARNINGS:
Any net earnings realized by the city pursuant to this division shall inure solely to the benefit of the city and not to the benefit of any company or other
private person. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
2-34.21: MISCELLANEOUS:
A. This division, being necessary for the welfare of the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its purposes.
B. The city pledges and agrees with the holders of any bonds issued, and with those companies which may enter into project agreements pursuant to the
provisions of this division relating to such bonds, that the city will not amend this division so as to adversely affect vested rights of the holders of such
bonds or the companies executing project agreements relating thereto until the obligations evidenced by such bonds are fully met or discharged and
such project agreements are fully performed or discharged on the part of the city; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude such
alteration or change:
1. If there will be no impairment of the contracts represented by such bonds, based upon a finding made by the council after a public hearing and the
receipt of appropriate opinions and evidence relating thereto;
2. If, and when, adequate provision shall have been made for the protection from impairment of the contracts represented by such bonds and project
agreements; or
3. To amend this division so as to make it more efficient, cure ambiguities, defects, inconsistent provisions, clarify matters or questions arising under
this division, take advantage of new legal or conceptual developments or otherwise improve this division and the application thereof to the benefit of
the city and its citizens; and such right to so alter or change is hereby reserved.
C. An action may be brought pursuant to chapter 9 (commencing with section 860) of part 2 of title 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to determine the
validity of bonds, proceedings, project agreements or indentures, including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the legality of all
proceedings theretofore taken, or proposed to be taken in such proceedings, pursuant to this division; and all of such matters respecting which an
action may be brought pursuant to such chapter 9 shall be subject to the provisions thereof regarding validity, limitation of actions, and incontestability.
D. This division provides a complete and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized hereby, but the authorizations shall be regarded as
supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws; provided, however, that, in the exercise of any of the powers conferred, including
powers relating to the offer, issuance and sale of bonds, under the provisions of this division, the city need not comply with the provisions of any law
applicable to the exercise of similar powers except as referred to in this division.
E. Except to the extent that a particular word or phrase is otherwise specifically defined in this division, the definition of each word or phrase shall
constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it, or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be.
Words of the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter genders. Words importing the singular number include the plural number and vice
versa. Words importing persons shall include corporations and associations, including public bodies, as well as natural persons. The terms "hereby",
"hereof", "hereto", "herein", "hereunder", and any similar terms used in this division, refer to this division. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 70/636
2-34.22: STATEMENT OF POLICY, SEVERABILITY:
The council hereby declares that the ordinance enacting this division is an exercise of the power granted to the city by the constitution of the state of
California and is an exercise by the city of its powers as to municipal affairs, and this division shall be liberally construed to be valid under the constitution
of the state of California and the constitution of the United States of America. If any section, paragraph, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase of this
division shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid, such judgment shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portion of this division. The council hereby declares it would have adopted this division and each and every other
section, paragraph, subdivision, sentence, clause or phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, paragraphs, subdivisions,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this division may be held to be unconstitutional, unenforceable or invalid. (Ord. 1232 § 1, 4-21-1981)
Chapter Article VII
EXPENDITURES, INDEBTEDNESS, AND REVOLVING CASH FUND
2-35: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditure or purchase of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall not require specific council authorization. Any expenditure or purchase of
five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall first require specific council authorization as provided by section 48 of the charter of this code. (Ord. 1642
§ 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. 1744, 7-15-2008)
2-36: INDEBTEDNESS:
Any indebtedness to be incurred by the city of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall not require specific council authorization. Any indebtedness
to be incurred by the city of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more shall first require specific council authorization as provided by section 48 of the
charter of this code. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. 1744, 7-15-2008)
2-37: REVOLVING CASH FUND:
A revolving cash fund in the amount of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) is hereby established pursuant to section 48 of the charter of this
code. (Ord. 1642 § 1, 11-18-2003; Ord. 1744, 7-15-2008)
2-38: EMERGENCY EXPENDITURES/APPROPRIATIONS:
An appropriation and/or expenditure of up to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) is authorized without additional prior council approval, if: a) the
city manager has requested that such an appropriation/expenditure be made; b) the mayor has determined that the circumstances for the request
constitute an extraordinary emergency, meaning that there is an immediate need to make such appropriation/expenditure for the preservation of the public
peace, health or safety; and c) the city manager notifies the council of the specific appropriation/expenditure in writing. (Ord. 1704 § 1, 10-3-2006)
Chapter Article VIII
PROCEDURE OF COMPLIANCE WITH ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT OF 1970
2-50: PROCEDURE ESTABLISHED:
A. The term "project" as used in this section shall be defined to include, but shall not be limited to, the following: public works projects, private construction,
all construction permits (including building, electrical and plumbing permits), use permits, leases of city property, variances, general plan amendments,
changes of zone, parcel maps and subdivisions.
B. The council, or parcel map committee, by resolution shall make a finding as to what projects intended to be carried out in the city of Porterville do not
have a significant impact on the environment.
C. All other projects not previously found by the council or parcel map committee, as not having a significant effect on the environment, shall be subject to
the following:
1. Said projects shall be tentatively approved by community development director or designee, building inspector, or public works director or designee,
if the city official granting tentative approval finds that the project is in accord with the general plan.
2. Upon the granting of tentative approval of a project any permit, license, or other entitlement may be issued subject to the condition that the same
may be revoked, rescinded, canceled or set aside by the city council, and the applicant for any permit, license, or other entitlement shall
acknowledge in writing that the same is issued or granted conditionally and any exercise of any right or privilege under the provisions of any permit,
license, or other entitlement shall be solely at the risk of applicant.
3. The council shall by resolution establish standards and guidelines to enable the community development director or designee, building inspector, or
public works director or designee to make a tentative finding that a project is in accord with the general plan.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 71/636
4. Any project receiving tentative approval under the provisions of subsection B of this section and any project denied tentative approval shall be
referred to the city council and the council shall make a finding that said project is or is not in accord with the general plan, and if not, whether said
project may have a significant effect on the environment.
5. Any project that is found by the council not to be in accord with the general plan and does have a significant effect on the environment and for which
tentative approval has also been granted and for which a conditional permit, license, or other entitlement has been issued then the same shall be
canceled, and the applicant shall be informed of said cancellation in writing. (Ord. 1537 § B12, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 §§ 2, 3, 4, 9-17-2002)
Chapter Article IX
INTERNAL CITY AUDITS
2-73: PURPOSE:
The city council shall conduct internal audits for the purpose of managing the city's independent auditor, and reviewing the annual audit and the
comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR) prior to the submission of these documents to the city council. (Ord. 1703 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-74: AUDIT COMMITTEE:
A. Committee Established; Membership: An audit committee is hereby established consisting of one member of the city council and one member of the
public (both to be appointed by the city council), the city manager, the city attorney, and the chief financial officer.
B. Duties:
1. The internal city audit committee shall manage the work of the independent auditor, reviewing both the annual audit and the comprehensive annual
financial report (CAFR) prior to submission to the city council. The audit committee shall also manage special studies when assigned by the city
council.
2. When called upon to do so by the mayor or any other member of the audit committee, the audit committee shall meet to review any other financial
matter of the city.
3. The audit committee may, upon its own motion, establish and adopt bylaws or rules of order to govern the proceedings of the committee. (Ord. 1703
§ 1, 10-3-2006)
Chapter Article X
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2-83: ADOPTION:
In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, and to comply with applicable laws relating to the administration
of the personnel process, the personnel system set out in this article is hereby adopted. (Ord. 1283 § 1, 6-21-1983)
2-84: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used to administer the personnel system shall be defined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 1283 § 2, 6-21-1983)
2-85: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager shall administer the city personnel system and may delegate any of the powers and duties to a personnel director or may delegate the
appointing authority granted by the city council to any other officer or employee of the city, or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed
under contract. The city manager shall:
A. Act as the appointing authority for the city.
B. Administer all provisions of this article and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council.
C. Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules.
D. Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan.
E. Have the authority to discipline employees in accordance with this article and the personnel rules of the city.
F. Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and
grading of tests; the certification of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the competitive service; and performing
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 72/636
any other duty that may be required to administer the personnel system. (Ord. 1283 § 3, 6-21-1983)
2-86: COMPETITIVE SERVICE:
The provisions of this article shall apply to all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:
A. Elective officers.
B. The city manager.
C. The city attorney.
D. Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees.
E. All department heads, and management employees as indicated in the city pay and employee benefit plan.
F. Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical or any other services.
G. Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firemen.
H. Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake
which threatens life or property.
I. Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. "Regularly employed in permanent
positions" means an employee hired for an indefinite term into a budgeted position, who is regularly scheduled to work no less than nine hundred sixty
(960) hours per year, and has successfully completed the probationary period and has been retained as provided in this article and the personnel rules.
J. Any position primarily funded under a state or federal employment program.
K. Employees not included in the competitive service under this section, who shall serve at the pleasure of their appointing authority. (Ord. 1283 § 4, 6-21-
1983)
2-87: ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF RULES:
Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system, including:
A. Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service, including
employment standards and qualifications for each class.
B. Appropriate announcement of the selection process and acceptance of applications for employment.
C. Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment.
D. Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointment.
E. Establishment of probationary testing periods.
F. Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter.
G. Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service.
H. Separation of employees from the city service.
I. The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel records for purposes of accounting and legal requirements.
J. The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. (Ord. 1283 § 5, 6-21-1983)
2-88: APPOINTMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 73/636
Appointments to vacant positions in the competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be
based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by competitive examination. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the
selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates such as achievement and
aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or any
combinations of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical, medical and
psychological tests may be given as a part of any examination.
In any examination the city manager or his/her designee may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards
therefor.
The appointing authority of employees in the competitive service is the city manager. The city manager may delegate the appointing authority to any other
officer or employee of the city. (Ord. 1283 § 6, 6-21-1983)
2-89: PROBATIONARY PERIOD:
All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than six (6) months or longer as determined by
the personnel rules. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing. (Ord. 1283 § 7, 6-21-
1983)
2-90: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on the effective date of this article (July 21, 1983), shall have served continuously in
such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his class, shall
assume regular status in the competitive service in the position held on such effective date without qualifying test and shall thereafter be subject in all
respects to the provisions of this article and the personnel rules.
Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary
periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment.
(Ord. 1283 § 8, 6-21-1983)
2-91: DEMOTION, DISMISSAL, REDUCTION IN PAY, SUSPENSION, REPRIMAND:
The city manager or any appointing authority shall have the authority to demote, discharge, reprimand, reduce in pay or suspend any regular employee for
cause in accordance with procedures included in the personnel rules. (Ord. 1283 § 9, 6-21-1983)
2-92: RIGHT OF APPEAL:
Any employee in the competitive service shall have the right to appeal a demotion, reduction in pay, suspension or discharge for disciplinary or medical
reasons, except in those instances where the right of appeal is specifically prohibited by this article or the rules adopted thereunder.
All appeals shall be processed in accordance with the requirements and procedures as set forth in the personnel rules adopted pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 1283 § 10, 6-21-1983)
2-93: LAYOFF AND REEMPLOYMENT:
Layoff and reemployment actions shall follow the process outlined in the personnel rules. (Ord. 1283 § 11, 6-21-1983)
2-94: POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state law and any local provision adopted pursuant to state law. (Ord. 1283
§ 12, 6-21-1983)
Chapter Article XI
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
2-105: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
In accordance with the California industrial development financing act (title 10, commencing with section 91500 of the Government Code of the state of
California) (the "act"), this city council hereby finds and declares that there is a need for an industrial development authority to function in the city of
Porterville. (Ord. 1300 § 1, 2-21-1984)
2-106: FUNCTION:
This city council hereby further declares that an industrial development authority shall function in the city of Porterville, in accomplishment of the purposes
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 74/636
provided in the act, and to carry out and complete projects and perform and exercise derivative obligations and powers as set forth in the act. (Ord. 1300
§ 2, 2-21-1984)
2-107: BOARD OF DIRECTORS:
This city council hereby further declares itself to be the board of directors of such industrial development authority; and all the rights, powers, privileges,
duties, liabilities, disabilities and immunities vested in such a board under the act shall be vested in this city council as such board. (Ord. 1300 § 3, 2-21-
1984)
2-108: NAME OF AUTHORITY:
This authority established in the city of Porterville by the act and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers thereunder by this article shall be
known as the "industrial development authority of the city of Porterville". (Ord. 1300 § 4, 2-21-1984)
Chapter Article XII
FEES AND CHARGES/COST CONTROL SYSTEM1
2-110: INTENT:
It is the intent of the city council that the cost of all city services shall be ascertained and reported to the city council annually and that fees and charges for
such services shall be adopted by the council annually, or at such other times as otherwise set forth herein, following a public hearing. (Ord. 1402 § 1, 6-7-
1988)
2-111: DEFINITION OF COSTS:
"Costs" shall include the following:
A. All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and
operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies, and any other direct expenses.
B. All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations,
communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational
proration system.
C. Fixed assets recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the
current estimated cost of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the
difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, which also shall be
calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the
asset.
D. General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city council, city manager, city clerk, city attorney, finance
department, purchasing, personnel, community promotion, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire city organization as now
organized and as it may be reorganized at any time in the future, which costs are not distributed by any other direct or indirect charging system.
Overhead shall be prorated between tax financed services and fee financed services on the basis of such percentage so that each of taxes and fees
and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs.
E. Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as
enumerated in subsections A, B and C of this section.
F. Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond,
certificate, or securities issues or loans. Any required coverage factors of added reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a
cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. (Ord. 1402 § 1, 6-7-1988)
2-112: FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES:
A. Review Of Costs For Services: The city manager, administrative services director, or his designee, and each city department head, under the direction
of the city manager, shall review the costs for services provided by the city and shall provide for council consideration a resolution containing
recommended fees and service charges for each service provided by the city. Council shall act pursuant to section 2-113 of this article.
B. Contents Of Fees Schedule: Such fee schedule shall not only specify rates, but also what percentage of the rates will be used for maintenance and
operation and for capital reserve. (Ord. 1402 § 1, 6-7-1988)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 75/636
2-113: STATUTORY PUBLIC HEARING:
Pursuant to California Government Code sections 66016, 66017 and 66018, the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in such Government
Code sections 66016, 66018 and 6062a, and the city council periodically, and at least annually, shall receive, at a public regularly scheduled meeting, oral
and written presentations concerning the fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral or written presentation, and public
meeting shall be provided by the city council prior to taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be
held annually, in conjunction with the city's annual budget process and hearing. (Ord. 1537 § B13, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article XIII
CONTRACTOR DEBARMENT PROCESS
2-114: STANDARDS OF RESPONSIBILITY AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
A. The covenant of good faith and fair dealing is contained in every city contract, and city contractors and subcontractors shall at all times deal in good
faith with the city and shall submit invoices for payment, claims, requests for equitable adjustments, requests for change orders, requests for contract
modifications, or requests of any kind seeking compensation on a city contract, only upon good faith, honest evaluation of the matter which is the
subject thereof. The city requires in all of its procurement procedures that all persons who submit bid proposals or offer to enter into a contract with the
city to do so truthfully and in good faith, and shall not attempt to mislead the city with respect to the following, including, but not limited to, records
regarding the nature or quality of the work performed under the contract, payroll records, classification of employees on payroll records, and payment
of prevailing wages where called for by the contract. All city contractors and subcontractors shall adhere to all applicable laws and regulations,
including, but not limited to, city ordinances/policies regarding nondiscrimination, gifts to city officials, and conflict of interest regulations. Additionally, all
city contractors and subcontractors shall comply with all city policies applicable to the contract to which they are a party. Finally, all city contractors and
subcontractors shall adhere to the highest standards of performance and workmanship in the performance of work on city contracts.
B. The city intends to accept bids or responses to requests for proposals or qualifications from, award contracts to, execute contracts with, consent to
subcontracts, or do business in any way only with responsible persons. Debarment and suspension are discretionary actions that, taken in accordance
with this article, are appropriate means to effectuate this policy. Debarment and suspension are designed to protect the city by ensuring full and open
competition by having contractual relationships only with responsible persons.
C. The serious nature of debarment and suspension requires that these sanctions be imposed only in the public interest for the city's protection, not for
purposes of punishment, and only for the grounds listed and in accordance with procedures set forth in this article. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-115: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall mean:
ADEQUATE EVIDENCE: Information sufficient to support the reasonable belief that a particular act or omission has occurred.
AFFILIATE: A person who:
A. Is the assignee, successor, subsidiary of, or parent company of, another person; or
B. Is a controlling stockholder; or
C. Has the same or similar management of the debarred corporate or other legal entity; or
D. Directly or indirectly controls, or has the power to control, another person, or is directly or indirectly controlled by another person. Indicia of control
include, but are not limited to, interlocking management or ownership, identity of interests among relatives, shared facilities and equipment, common
use of employees; or a business entity organized following the debarment, suspension, or proposed debarment of a person which has the same or
similar management, ownership or principal employees as the contractor that was debarred, suspended or proposed for debarment; or the debarred
person or the business entity created after the debarment, suspension or proposed debarment operates in a manner designed to evade the
application of this article or to defeat the purpose of this article.
AGENCY: The redevelopment agency of the city of Porterville.
BIDDER: A person who has submitted a bid, proposal or other document seeking award of a contract.
CONTRACT: Any written agreement between the city and another person. It also includes a public works contract. It also includes a city issued purchase
order.
CONTROLLING STOCKHOLDER: A stockholder who:
A. Owns more than twenty five percent (25%) of the voting stock of a corporation; or
B. Notwithstanding the number of shares that the stockholder owns, has the power to direct or control the direction of the management or policies of a
corporation.
DEBAR OR DEBARMENT: The disqualification of a person from:
A. Bidding on a contract; or
B. Submitting responses to city's requests for proposals or qualifications; or
C. Being awarded a contract; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 76/636
D. Executing a contract; or
E. Participating in a contract as a subcontractor, material supplier, or employee of a prime contractor or another subcontractor for a period of time
specified by the debarment hearing board following a hearing.
F. Directly or indirectly (e.g., through an affiliate) submitting offers for, or executing contracts, or subcontracts with, the city; or
G. Conducting business with, or reasonably may be expected to conduct business with, the city as an employee, agent, or representative of another
person.
DEBARMENT HEARING BOARD: A board established by the city to hold hearings, take evidence, and to make determinations about debarment for the
city.
DEPARTMENT: A city department organized under authority of the city manager.
FINAL CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: A city issued evaluation of a person's overall performance on a public works
contract. This evaluation is generally issued subsequent to completion of performance on the public works contract. It does not include performance
evaluations, final performance evaluations, or partial construction contractor performance evaluations.
FINAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: A city issued final evaluation of a person's overall performance on a contract which is generally issued
subsequent to completion of performance on the contract. It includes final construction contractor performance evaluations. It does not include
performance evaluations or partial construction contractor performance evaluations.
MANAGEMENT: The officers, partners, owners, foremen or other individuals responsible for the financial and operational policies and practices of a
person.
PARTIAL CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: A city issued evaluation of a person's performance on a specific public
works contract. It includes only evaluations issued during performance of a public works contract. It does not include final construction contractor
performance evaluations.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: A city issued evaluation of a person describing the person's performance on a specific contract. It includes evaluations
issued during performance of a contract and partial construction contractor performance evaluations. It does not include final performance evaluations or
final construction contractor performance evaluations.
PERSON: Has the same meaning as that in section 1-4 of this code. In addition, if a person is a corporate or other legal entity, it includes individuals who
constitute the person's management. It also includes any individual or other legal entity that:
A. Directly or indirectly (e.g., through an affiliate) submits offers for or is awarded, or reasonably may be expected to submit offers for or be awarded, a
contract, or a subcontract under a contract; or
B. Conducts business, or reasonably may be expected to conduct business, with the city as an agent or representative of another person.
PREPONDERANCE OF THE EVIDENCE: Proof by information that, compared with that opposing it, leads to the conclusion that the fact at issue is more
probably true than not.
PRIME CONTRACTOR: A person who enters a contract directly with the city.
PUBLIC WORKS CONTRACT: A contract for the construction, reconstruction or repair of public buildings, streets, utilities, and other public works.
RELATIVE: A. An individual related by consanguinity within the second degree as determined by the common law; or
B. A spouse; or
C. An individual related to a spouse within the second degree as determined by the common law; or
D. An individual in an adoptive relationship within the second degree as determined by the common law; or
E. Any individual considered to be "family" in commonly understood terms of the word.
SUBCONTRACTOR: A. A person who contracts directly with a prime contractor but not directly with the city; or
B. Any person under contract with a prime contractor or another subcontractor to provide any service, materials, labor or otherwise perform on a
contract. Subcontractor includes a trade contractor or specialty contractor.
SUSPEND OR SUSPENSION: The debarment of a person for a temporary period of time pending the completion of an investigation and any proceedings
before a debarment hearing board and any appeals therefrom.
WILFULLY FAILED TO COOPERATE: A. Intentionally failed to attend a hearing and/or give testimony; or
B. Intentionally failed to provide documents, books, papers, or other information upon request of the city manager, the debarment hearing board, or the
city council. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-116: SCOPE OF ARTICLE:
A. This article establishes procedures for determining whether a person is to be debarred or suspended.
B. This article sets forth the grounds for debarment and suspension.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 77/636
C. This article provides that a list of debarred and suspended persons is to be created and maintained by the city manager. It further spells out the
consequences of a person's debarment and suspension. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-117: INVESTIGATION:
A. Initiation Of Proceedings: The city manager may initiate debarment proceedings. If debarment proceedings are initiated, the city manager shall cause
an investigation to be conducted.
B. Written Findings: If, upon investigation, it is determined that an act or omission which can give rise to debarment may have occurred, written findings
shall be made containing the grounds for debarment as well as a recommendation. If it is determined that no act or omission which can give rise to
debarment occurred or can be proven, written findings shall be made to that effect. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-118: DEBARMENT HEARING BOARD TO BE ESTABLISHED:
Upon receipt of a recommendation for debarment from a city department and request for a hearing by the person consistent with the provisions of this
article, the city manager shall appoint a fair and impartial board called a debarment hearing board to hear and determine whether a person should be
debarred. The city manager shall appoint three (3) individuals to serve on each debarment hearing board. These individuals shall be unbiased and may be
city employees, but shall not be employees who have participated in the decision to recommend the debarment nor are subject to the authority, direction or
discretion of employees or have participated in the decision to recommend debarment. The debarment hearing board shall follow procedures set forth in
this article and shall make decisions based on evidence taken at a hearing. The debarment hearing board's scope of authority and duties are set forth in
this article. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-119: SUSPENSION ONCE CITY MANAGER DECIDES TO RECOMMEND DEBARMENT:
A. Authority To Suspend: Once a determination has been made by the city manager that adequate evidence exists supporting debarment, the city
manager may suspend the person pending any written request for further proceedings and a debarment decision where the city manager finds that
doing so is in the public interest.
B. Notice Of Suspension: The city manager shall notify the person of the suspension in accordance with section 2-120 of this article, pending any
proceedings and decision by the debarment hearing board or city council's ruling on the matter.
C. Term Of Suspension: Once the city manager has suspended a person, the suspension shall continue until the time, set forth in section 2-120 of this
article, for requesting a hearing before the debarment hearing board has run and the proposed debarment goes into effect, the debarment hearing
board makes a final decision on the proposed debarment, or until there has been a final ruling by the city council following an appeal of a permanent
debarment decision, if any appeal is filed. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-120: REQUEST FOR HEARING; NOTICES:
A. Contents Of Notice; Request For Hearing: The city manager shall provide written notice as specified in subsection B of this section to the person. If
debarment is recommended, the notice of proposed debarment shall contain the following: 1) notice that debarment is being considered; 2) the basis
for the proposed debarment; 3) the potential consequences of the debarment; and 4) the city's procedures governing debarment. Within fifteen (15)
days after receipt of the notice of proposed debarment, the person may submit a written request to be heard, in person or through a representative.
Failure of the person to submit to the city a written request to be heard within the time provided by this section, or failure of the person to appear for a
requested hearing, shall be deemed consent by the person to the proposed debarment, and the person shall automatically be deemed debarred.
B. Method Of Delivering Notice: Whenever a notice is required to be delivered under this article, the notice shall be delivered by any of the following
methods. Service is effective as described herein unless different provisions are specifically stated to apply:
1. Personal delivery; service shall be deemed effective on the date of delivery; or
2. Certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice may be sent by regular mail. If a notice that is sent by
certified mail is returned unsigned, then delivery shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail, provided the notice that was sent by regular mail
is not returned. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing; or
3. Publication; service shall be deemed effective on the first date of publication.
C. Proof Of Delivery: Proof of delivery of notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city or by declaration under penalty of
perjury of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years. The proof of delivery shall show that delivery was done in conformity with this article or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
D. Failure To Receive Notice; Effect: The failure of any person to receive any notice served in accordance with this article shall not affect the validity of any
debarment proceedings. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-121: GROUNDS FOR DEBARMENT:
A. A final conviction, including a plea of nolo contendere, or final unappealable civil judgment of any one or more of the grounds listed in subsections A1
through A4 of this section constitutes grounds for permanent debarment of the person who is subject to, or is the affiliate of the person who is subject
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 78/636
to, the criminal conviction, plea, or civil judgment:
1. Under any state or federal statute or municipal ordinance for embezzlement, theft, fraudulent schemes and artifices, fraudulent schemes and
practices, bid rigging, perjury, forgery, bribery, falsification or destruction of records, receiving stolen property or any offense indicating a lack of
business integrity or business honesty which affects the person's or its affiliate's responsibility; or
2. For commission of a criminal offense arising out of obtaining or attempting to obtain a public or private contract or subcontract, or in the performance
of such contract or subcontract; or
3. For violations of California Government Code sections 84300(c) and 84301 (sections of the California political reform act requiring disclosure of true
campaign donor), as they exist on May 15, 1996, or as amended thereafter, which violations occurred on or after May 15, 1996, and which violations
occur with respect to a city election; or
4. For a conviction under federal or state antitrust statutes involving public contracts or the submission of offers or bid proposals.
B. A fair political practices commission enforcement order against a person, either following a hearing or by stipulation, that makes a finding of a violation
of California Government Code sections 84300(c) and 84301, as those sections exist on May 15, 1996, or as amended thereafter, which violation
occurred on or after May 15, 1996, and which violation occurred with respect to a city election, constitutes grounds for permanent debarment of the
person who is subject to, or is the affiliate of the person who is subject to, the enforcement order.
C. Any one of the following acts or omissions by a person also constitute grounds for permanent debarment:
1. The person committed any offense, took any action, or failed to take an action, which indicates a lack of business integrity and which could directly
affect the reliability and credibility of performance of the person on future contracts with the city; or
2. The person committed collusion with any party or parties in the submission of any bid or for the purpose of preventing any other bid being made; or
3. The person has committed any corrupt practice in bidding for or in any way seeking award of a contract, or has committed any corrupt practice in
any way relating to a city contract; or
4. The person was established to, or operates in a manner designed to, evade the application of this article or to defeat the purpose of this article.
D. Any two (2) or more of the following acts or omissions by a person constitute grounds for debarment of that person for no less than three (3) years and
up to and including permanently:
1. The person unjustifiably refused to properly perform or complete contract work or warranty performance; or
2. The person unjustifiably failed to honor or observe contractual obligations or legal requirements pertaining to the contract; or
3. The person used substandard materials, or has failed to furnish or install materials in accordance with contract requirements, even if the discovery of
the defect is subsequent to acceptance of the project and expiration of the warranty thereof, if such defect amounts to intentionally deficient or
grossly negligent performance of the contract under which the defect occurred; or
4. The person committed a violation of the drug free workplace act of 1988 (41 USC sections 701-707); or
5. The person wilfully failed to cooperate in the investigation or hearing of the proposed debarment; or
6. The person performs, or fails to perform, a contract in such a way that environmental damage results or a violation of environmental laws or permits
is committed; or
7. The person practices unlawful discrimination in employment, and the person has not taken corrective action after sufficient notice by the city; or
8. The person has committed an act or omission of so serious or compelling a nature that:
a. It affects the present responsibility of the person to be awarded a contract or to participate as a subcontractor in a contract; or
b. It affects the integrity of the procurement process.
9. Any one of the following acts or omissions by a person listed in subsection E of this section.
E. The following acts or omissions by a person constitute grounds for debarment of that person for no less than one year:
1. The city issued the person two (2) or more performance evaluations from the city with a rating of unsatisfactory within a two (2) year period.
2. The city has issued the person a final performance evaluation with a rating of unsatisfactory.
3. The person has failed to timely submit bond, contract documents, insurance documents or any other item required by the city, acceptable to the city
which conform to bid, request for proposal and/or contract requirements.
4. The person submitted two (2) or more claims of computational or other error in a bid to the city within a two (2) year period. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-
2006)
2-122: DEBARMENT PROCEEDINGS BEFORE DEBARMENT HEARING BOARD OR CITY COUNCIL:
The proceedings shall be as informal as is compatible with the requirements of justice. The debarment hearing board and/or city council need not be
bound by the common law or statutory rules of evidence and procedure, but may make inquiries in the matter through all means and in a manner best
calculated to make a just, factual determination. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 79/636
2-123: DEBARMENT HEARING BOARD'S AUTHORITY TO DEBAR; BOARD'S DECISION FINAL:
A. Authority Of Board: After notice and hearing held in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article and as may be further developed in
accordance with any additional policies adopted by the city council, the debarment hearing board shall determine whether a person is to be debarred
and for what length of time. To debar a person, the debarment hearing board must find by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more grounds
for debarment stated in section 2-121 of this article exist.
B. Board's Decision Final; Exception: Except as provided in subsection C of this section, a debarment hearing board's decision shall be final.
C. Appeal To Council: A decision by a debarment hearing board to permanently debar a person may be appealed to the city council in accordance with
section 2-125 of this article. The filing of a request for appeal of the debarment decision shall not stay the debarment hearing board's decision pending
a final decision of the city council.
D. Notice Of Board's Decision: The debarment hearing board shall deliver notice of the decision to the person subject to the debarment hearing and to the
city manager. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-124: MODIFICATION OF DECISION:
A. Reasons For Modification: The debarment hearing board may, but is not required to, modify a debarment decision for any reason which obviates the
need for the debarment or which indicates that a shorter debarment period will adequately protect the public interest. Such reasons include, but are not
limited to, the following: 1) newly discovered evidence; 2) reversal of the conviction or civil judgment upon which the debarment was based; 3) bona
fide change in ownership or management; or 4) elimination or other grounds for which the debarment was imposed.
B. Initiation Of Modification Of Decision: Such modification of the debarment decision may be initiated by the debarred person upon request by the
debarred person submitted to the debarment hearing board. Such request by the debarred person shall be in writing and accompanied by supporting
documentation.
C. Action By Board Within Reasonable Time: The debarment hearing board shall act upon any such written request submitted by a debarred person within
a reasonable time after receipt of the request and shall promptly notify the debarred person of the decision made on such request.
D. Appeal To Council: The debarred person may appeal the debarment hearing board's decision to the city council, following the procedures specified in
section 2-125 of this article. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-125: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL FROM CERTAIN DECISIONS OF DEBARMENT HEARING BOARD:
A. Right To Appeal: If a debarment hearing board has made a determination to debar a person permanently, that person may appeal that decision to the
city council in accordance with procedures set forth in this article and procedures adopted by the city council.
B. Time Limit For Requesting Appeal: A person who has been debarred may request an appeal to the city council no later than five (5) working days from
the date of the notice of the debarment hearing board's debarment decision. The debarred person's request for appeal shall set forth in detail the
reasons why the person disagrees with the decision. The person shall file the notice of appeal with the city clerk, who shall calendar the appeal hearing
in front of the city council after consultation with the city manager and mayor.
C. Appeal Request Does Not Stay Decision: The filing of a request for an appeal shall not stay the debarment decision. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-126: SUBMISSION OF ARGUMENT ON APPEAL:
A. New Evidence Prohibited; Argument Supporting Appeal Allowed: At the city council hearing on the appeal, no new evidence may be presented by the
city or any person. However, if the person who filed the appeal under section 2-125 of this article wishes to submit argument supporting the appeal, that
person shall submit argument in writing with the city clerk no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M., ten (10) calendar days prior to the date on which the
hearing is scheduled to be held. Filing shall also be made on all persons subject to the debarment and on the debarment hearing board.
B. Filing By City Of Rebuttal Arguments: Where argument is submitted in accordance with subsection A of this section, the city may submit rebuttal
arguments, which shall be filed with the city clerk no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M., five (5) calendar days prior to the date on which the hearing is
scheduled to be heard. Filing shall also be made on all persons subject to the debarment. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-127: STANDARD OF PROOF:
The standard of proof for the debarment hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-128: IMPUTATION OF KNOWLEDGE AND CONDUCT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 80/636
A. The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of any officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee, or other individuals associated with
a person may be imputed to the person when the conduct occurred in connection with the individual's performance of duties for, or on behalf of, the
person, or with the person's knowledge, approval, or acquiescence. The person's acceptance of the benefits derived from the conduct shall be
evidence of such knowledge, approval, or acquiescence.
B. The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of a person may be imputed to any officer, director, shareholder, partner, employee, or
other individual associated with the person who participated in, knew of, or had reason to know of the person's conduct.
C. The fraudulent, criminal, or other seriously improper conduct of one person participating in a joint venture or similar arrangement may be imputed to
other participating persons if the conduct occurred for, on approval of, or acquiescence of these persons. Acceptance of the benefits derived from the
conduct shall be evidence of such knowledge, approval, or acquiescence. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-129: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Once a debarment hearing board or the city council has issued a final decision as provided in this article, the time in which judicial review of the order must
be sought shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-130: CREATION OF LIST OF DEBARRED AND SUSPENDED PERSONS:
A. Creation And Maintenance Of List: The city manager shall create and maintain a list of persons who have been debarred or suspended in accordance
with policies and procedures of this article.
1. This list shall include the names and addresses of all persons who have been debarred or suspended.
2. For each debarred or suspended person, the list shall state the date of commencement and expiration of the debarment or suspension.
B. Use Of List: The city manager shall establish procedures to provide for the effective use of the list to ensure that the city does not do business with
persons who have been debarred or suspended. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-131: EFFECT OF DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION:
A. Persons who have been debarred or suspended are excluded from conducting business with the city on behalf of themselves or as agents or
representatives of other persons for the duration of the debarment or suspension.
B. Persons who have been debarred or suspended are excluded from submitting bids, directly or indirectly (e.g., through an affiliate), submitting responses
to requests for proposal or qualifications, receiving contract awards, executing contracts, participating as a subcontractor, employee, agent or
representative of another person contracting with the city, or receiving contracts for the period of debarment or suspension.
C. Persons who have been debarred or suspended are excluded from acting in a capacity where the person reasonably may be expected to submit offers
for or be awarded, a contract, or a subcontract under a contract.
D. Persons who have been debarred or suspended are excluded from conducting business, or from acting in a capacity where the person reasonably may
be expected to conduct business, with the city as an agent or representative of another person.
E. The management of a corporate or other legal entity that has been debarred or suspended shall not conduct business or act in a capacity where they
reasonably may be expected to conduct business with the city under a different corporate name.
F. The city shall not accept, receive, open a bid, evaluate for award, or include any proposals, quotations, bids, or offers from any debarred or suspended
person for the duration of the debarment or suspension.
G. The city shall not award or approve the award of a contract or execute a contract under which a debarred or suspended person is intended to
participate as a subcontractor or material supplier.
H. A prime contractor who is awarded a contract shall not employ, subcontract with, nor purchase materials or services from a debarred or suspended
person.
I. When a debarred person sells or otherwise transfers to a relative or to any other person over whose actions the debarred person exercises substantial
influence or control, then that relative or other person is automatically suspended or debarred or proposed for debarment to the same extent as the
seller or transferor is debarred, suspended, or proposed for debarment. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-132: EFFECT OF DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION ON AN AFFILIATE:
A. If the city determines that a person is an affiliate of a person that is debarred, suspended or proposed for debarment, the affiliate is debarred or
suspended to the same extent as the person that is debarred, suspended or proposed for debarment.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 81/636
B. The affiliate debarred under subsection A of this section may request an appeal of the decision to the debarment hearing board by submitting a written
request to the city clerk. An appeal under subsection A of this section shall be governed by the same rules and regulations in accordance with this
article as are applicable to a debarment hearing board's procedure to debar a person.
C. The filing of a request for review under subsection B of this section shall not stay the decision to debar the affiliate. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-133: EFFECT OF DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION BY ANOTHER GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY:
If a person has been debarred by another governmental agency, that person may be automatically debarred by the city manager permanently, or for three
(3) years, or until the other governmental agency's term of debarment expires, in the sole discretion of the city manager. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-134: LIABILITY FOR INCREASED COSTS:
Any person who enters a contract with the city, either directly as a prime contractor or indirectly as a subcontractor, during a period of suspension or
debarment imposed upon that person by the city under its rules and regulations, shall be liable to the city for increased costs incurred as a result of
replacing the debarred or suspended person. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-135: EFFECT OF DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION ON EXISTING CONTRACTS:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section and notwithstanding the debarment, suspension, or proposed debarment, of a person, the city may
continue contracts or subcontracts it has with that person that are in existence at the time the person was debarred, suspended, or proposed for
debarment.
B. If the basis of a person's debarment or suspension is so serious that the city manager believes that termination of contracts or subcontracts the city has
with that person that are in existence at the time the person is debarred or suspended is in the best interests of the city, the city manager may take
actions necessary to terminate those contracts or subcontracts only after consultation with the city attorney to ensure the propriety and legality of the
proposed action.
C. The city may continue to place orders against existing contracts, including delivery contracts, held by a debarred or suspended person, unless the
contract has been terminated.
D. The city shall not renew or otherwise extend the duration of current contracts, or consent to subcontracts, with debarred or suspended persons, unless
the city manager states in writing the compelling reasons for renewal or extension. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-136: AGREEMENT NOT TO BID IN LIEU OF ONE YEAR DEBARMENT:
The city may, but is not required to, offer a person the opportunity to execute a written agreement not to bid for one year, in lieu of the city's pursuing a one
year debarment under this article. By executing this agreement, the person shall consent to waive a debarment hearing as described in section 2-118 of
this article, and this agreement will not constitute a debarment. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-137: AMENDMENTS AND COMPROMISES ALLOWED:
Nothing in this article is intended to prevent the city, in its sole discretion, from amending, modifying or waiving the provisions of any city contract, or from
entering into compromise agreements with persons about the future performance of contracts by a city contractor. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
2-138: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this article or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of the
article or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in
this article or any part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1705 § 1, 10-3-2006)
Chapter Article XIV
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
2-141: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
A. Alternative Method Of Enforcement: The city council hereby finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for minor violations of
this code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code. The city council further finds that an appropriate
method of enforcement for minor violations is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code section 53069.4.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 82/636
B. Procedures Additional To Other Remedies: The procedures established in this article shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy
established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of this code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable
chapters of this code.
C. City Goals: The city council hereby finds and determines that enforcement of this code, other ordinances adopted by the city, conditions on entitlements
and terms and conditions of city agreements are matters of local concern and serve important public purposes. Consistent with its powers as a charter
city, the city of Porterville adopts this administrative citation program provision in order to achieve the following goals, and:
1. To protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city;
2. To gain compliance with this code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code in a timely and efficient
manner;
3. To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of this code and state codes specifically
adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code;
4. To minimize the expense and delay where the sole remedy is to pursue responsible parties in the civil or criminal justice system;
5. To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines.
D. Purpose: The purpose of this article is to enable the city, acting as a charter city pursuant to article XI, sections 5 and 7 of the state constitution, to
impose and collect civil administrative fines in conjunction with the enforcement of provisions of this code or state codes specifically adopted by
reference in the applicable chapters of this code. Notwithstanding the provisions herein, the city has, and shall continue to employ, the philosophy of
voluntary compliance when seeking compliance with this code and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this
code.
E. Voluntary Compliance: Prior to the implementation of the enforcement policies and penalties stated herein, voluntary compliance approaches, when
practical, should first be used in order to educate city property owners and businesses concerning the requirements of this code, or state codes
specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, and the corrective action necessary to correct a violation of this code and state
codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code.
F. Use Of Provisions Discretionary: Use of this article shall be at the sole discretion of the city. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-142: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall mean:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any officer or employee with the authority to enforce this code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the
applicable chapters of this code.
HEARING OFFICER: Any person appointed by the city manager to preside over the administrative hearings provided for in this article.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any individual or entity who is the registered owner or occupant of real property, owner or authorized agent of any business,
company, or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, who causes or maintains a violation of this code
or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-143: AUTHORITY:
A. Issuance Of Citation: Any person violating any provision of this code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this
code, may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited
to: all violations of this code, and applicable state codes, ordinances or regulations adopted by the city council; or the failure to comply with any
condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, agreement or environmental document issued or approved under the provisions of this code.
B. Each Day A Separate Offense: Each and every day a violation exists may constitute a separate and distinct offense.
C. Civil Fine: A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the city
of Porterville. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-144: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT:
The city council of the city of Porterville intends to secure compliance with the provisions of this code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in
the applicable chapters of this code. To the extent that such compliance may be achieved by less drastic methods of enforcement, the following alternate,
separate and distinct methods may be utilized. Each method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and does not prevent concurrent or
consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance against continuing violations. Each and every day any such violations exist constitutes a separate
offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, each
violation of the provisions of this code may be enforced alternatively as follows:
A. Misdemeanor: Unless otherwise specified in this code, any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of this code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, may be prosecuted for a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 83/636
misdemeanor. Written citations for misdemeanors may be issued by police officers or by nonsafety employees designated by this code. Any person
convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this
code, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
B. Infraction: In the alternative, with the concurrence of the city attorney, any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the
mandatory requirements of this code, and state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, may be prosecuted for
an infraction. Written citations for infractions may be issued by police officers or nonsafety employees designated by this code. Unless otherwise set
forth in this code, fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified as follows:
1. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;
2. A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within twelve (12) months, or five hundred dollars
($500.00) for building and safety code violations;
3. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within twelve (12) months, or one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for building and safety code violations.
C. Civil Action: The city attorney, or an attorney hired for such purposes by and at the request of the city council, may institute an action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this code, or state codes specifically
adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, as provided by law, and the city shall be entitled to its attorney fees and costs.
D. Administrative Citation: Upon a finding by the city official vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of this code, or state codes
specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, that a violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation under the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-145: SERVICE PROCEDURES:
An administrative citation on a form approved by the city manager shall be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of this
code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable chapters of this code, in the following manner:
A. Personal Service: In any case where an administrative citation is issued:
1. The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on
the administrative citation.
2. If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the
administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.
B. Service Of Citation By Mail: If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the
responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid, with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the
citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by
first class mail is not returned.
C. Service By Citation By Posting Notice: If the enforcement officer does not succeed in serving the responsible person personally, or by certified mail or
regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the city where the city has knowledge that the
responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-146: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:
A. Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;
B. The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s);
C. An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within the time specified, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the
violation(s);
D. The amount of the fine for the violation(s);
E. An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid;
F. Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to
contest the administrative citation; and
G. The name and signature of the enforcement officer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 84/636
H. If possible, the signature of the responsible person. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-147: SATISFACTION OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person shall:
A. Pay the fine to the city within fifteen (15) working days from the issuance date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the
city of Porterville. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the
city; and
B. Remedy the violation(s). If the responsible person fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same
violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this article or by ordinance. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-
2007)
2-148: APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the
applicable chapters of this code, or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within
fifteen (15) working days from the issuance date of the administration citation, together with an advanced deposit (full amount) of the fine. Any
administrative citation fine, which has been deposited, shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative
citation was not the responsible person for the violation(s) or that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-
2007)
2-149: HEARING OFFICER:
The city manager shall designate the hearing officer for the administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer shall not be a current Porterville city
employee. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned
upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-150: HEARING PROCEDURE:
A. Request For Hearing: No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form
has been completed and submitted, and the fine has been deposited in advance.
B. Setting Date For Hearing: A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen (15) working days and not more than
sixty (60) working days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this article. The person requesting the
hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) working days prior to the date of the hearing.
C. Considering Evidence: The enforcement hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether
the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s) of this code, or state codes specifically adopted by reference in the applicable
chapters of this code, on the date(s) specified in the administrative citation.
D. Testimony And Witnesses Allowed: The responsible person contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and present
witnesses and evidence concerning the administrative citation.
E. Failure To Appear: The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of
the fine and a failure to exhaust their administrative remedies.
F. Evidence Of Facts: The administrative citation and any additional documents submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facia evidence
of the respective facts contained in those documents.
G. Submission Of Additional Written Report To Hearing Officer: If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative
citation to the hearing officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of this report also shall be served by mail on the person requesting the
hearing at least five (5) working days prior to the date of the hearing. At least ten (10) working days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an
administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer.
No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.
H. Continuation Of Hearing: The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient
of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-151: HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 85/636
A. Issuance Of Written Decision: After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written
decision within ten (10) working days of the close of the hearing to uphold or deny the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons
for that decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, subject to judicial review.
B. Citation Upheld: If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be
retained by the city.
C. Citation Dismissal: If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be dismissed, the city shall refund the amount of the deposit
within ten (10) working days of the date of its receipt of the decision.
D. Notice Of Decision To Recipient: The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the hearing officer's written decision in the
manner prescribed above. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-152: FAILURE TO PAY FINES:
The failure of any person to pay the civil fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the matter being
referred to the city of Porterville - finance, to file a claim with the small claims court. Alternatively, the city may pursue any other legal remedy to collect the
civil fines. The city may also recover all of its collection costs, including its attorney fees. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-153: RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any person aggrieved by a decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for
review with the Tulare County superior court in accordance with the time lines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code section 53069.4.
(Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-154: NOTICES:
A. The administration citation and all notices to be given by this article shall be served on the responsible person in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Failure to receive any notice specified in this article does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
2-155: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this article. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this article and each
section, subsection, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be
declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 1720 § 3, 5-1-2007)
Chapter 3
ADVERTISING AND SIGNS
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
3-1: SCOPE OF ARTICLE:
It is not the intention of this article to prohibit the labeling of such poles or posts with numbers, danger signs permanently fastened or painted thereon, or to
prohibit posting notices of public improvement; provided, that when such notices of public improvement shall have served their purpose, they shall be
removed and gathered up. (Ord. Code § 3121; Ord. 727 § 1)
3-2: POSTING NOTICES AND BILLS ON UTILITY POLES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post on or fasten to or fasten or attach, in any manner, to any power, light, telegraph or telephone pole or other poles
or posts, on or along any public street or alley in the city any notice, poster, bill or advertising matter of any description. (Ord. Code § 3121; Ord. 727 § 1)
3-3: PERMITS FOR BANNERS ACROSS STREETS REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or install across any public street or alley in the city any banner, notice or advertisement matter of any
description, without first having secured from the city council a permit therefor in writing. Any such permit request therefor, shall observe the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 86/636
A. Messages and announcements shall pertain to events or activities that are of interest or benefit to the general public from local organizations.
B. The comment and wording of messages and announcements shall be approved by the city council or its designee.
C. Announcements shall be nondiscriminatory in nature. (Ord. Code § 3121; Ord. 727 § 1; Ord. 1367 § A(1), 11-18-1986)
Chapter Article II
HANDBILLS, ADVERTISING CIRCULARS, ETC.
3-7: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DISTRIBUTION:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to carry on, conduct or engage in the business of distributing advertising matter, samples, dodgers,
handbills, or other notices of commercial advertising in the city, without first having obtained from the city clerk a license to carry on and conduct such
business. (Ord. Code § 7414)
3-8: NEWSPAPERS EXCEPTED FROM APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE:
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to any newspaper, or any publication printing news of a general nature and keeping advertising
space therein open to the public, and the publishing of general advertising matter therein. (Ord. Code § 7413)
3-9: DISTRIBUTION ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR AUTOMOBILES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or throw upon any sidewalk, alley, street, park, or other public place, in the city, or in any automobile, truck,
trailer or automotive vehicle, being upon any public street, alley, driveway or park, not in the possession or control of the person so distributing the same,
any advertising sample, handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, or other notice of commercial advertising. (Ord. Code § 7411)
3-10: DISTRIBUTION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED WHERE NOTICE POSTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or throw upon any private yard, lawn, driveway, vacant lot, porch or steps of any residence, or in, or upon,
or in any part of any structure located thereon, in the city, not in the possession or control of the person so distributing the same, any advertising sample,
handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, or other notice of commercial advertising, where the owner, tenant, or person in possession thereof, has posted upon
such property, a notice forbidding the throwing and distribution of the same, or any part thereof, upon such property. (Ord. Code § 7412)
Chapter Article III
SOUND TRUCKS AND SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT
3-11: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound amplifying
equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or
warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle, or horsedrawn vehicle, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment. (Ord. Code
§ 7431.1)
3-12: NONCOMMERCIAL USE; REGISTRATION STATEMENT REQUIRED; CONTENTS:
A. No person shall use, or cause to be used, any vendor vehicle with its sound amplifying equipment in operation for any purpose in the city before filing a
registration statement with the city police department in writing. Political sound trucks and special events approved by the city council as community
events shall be exempt from this requirement but shall otherwise comply with the California Vehicle Code.
B. This registration statement shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following:
1. Name and home address of the applicant.
2. Address of place of business of applicant.
3. License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by applicant.
4. Name and address of person who owns the vehicle or sound truck.
5. Name and address of person having direct charge of vehicle or sound truck.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 87/636
6. Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the vehicle or sound truck.
7. The purpose for which the vehicle or sound truck will be used.
8. A general statement as to the section or sections of the city in which the vehicle or sound truck will be used.
9. The proposed hours of operation of the sound amplifying equipment or sound truck.
10. The number of days of proposed operation of the sound amplifying equipment or sound truck.
11. A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used.
12. The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck. State the following:
a. The wattage to be used.
b. The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced.
c. The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck. (Ord. Code § 7431.2; Ord. 1531 § B1, 6-18-1996)
3-13: NONCOMMERCIAL USE; AMENDMENT OF REGISTRATION STATEMENT:
All persons using or causing to be used, sound trucks or sound amplifying equipment for any purpose shall amend any registration statement filed
pursuant to section 3-12 of this article within forty eight (48) hours after any change in the information therein furnished. (Ord. Code § 7431.2; Ord. 1531
§ B2, 6-18-1996)
3-14: NONCOMMERCIAL USE; DISPOSITION OF REGISTRATION STATEMENT; POSSESSION AND DISPLAY BY APPLICANT:
A. The city police department shall return to each applicant under section 3-12 of this article, one copy of the registration statement duly certified by the
city police department as a correct copy of the application.
B. Such certified copy of the sound registration statement shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound amplifying equipment or sound
truck at all times while the sound amplifying equipment is in operation and such copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any law enforcement
officer of the city upon request. (Ord. Code § 7431.2; Ord. 1531 § B3, 6-18-1996)
3-15: NONCOMMERCIAL USE; REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
Use of sound trucks or any other vehicle in the city with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations:
A. The only sounds permitted are music.
B. Operation of sound equipment shall be permitted during the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
C. Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the vehicle or sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of
at least ten (10) miles per hour except when such vehicle is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where the vehicle is stopped, the sound amplifying
equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop.
D. Sound shall not be issued within one hundred (100) yards of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses.
E. The music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous.
F. The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of fifty feet (50') from the vehicle or sound truck and so that
such volume is not unreasonable, loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
3-16: COMMERCIAL USE; LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
No person shall operate or cause to be operated, any sound truck in the city for commercial advertising purposes with sound amplifying equipment in
operation unless a license has been obtained from the city police department. The fee for such license shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
Code § 7431.4; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973; Ord. 1531 § B5, 6-18-1996)
3-17: COMMERCIAL USE; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Persons applying for the license required under section 3-16 of this article shall file with the city police department an application in writing giving in such
application the information required in the registration statement under section 3-12 of this article. (Ord. Code § 7431.4; Ord. 1531 § B6, 6-18-1996)
3-18: COMMERCIAL USE; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 88/636
The city police department shall issue a license under section 3-16 of this article upon payment of the required license fee unless the application required
in section 3-17 of this article reveals that the applicant would violate the regulations prescribed in section 3-19 of this article or some other provision of this
code or other ordinance of the city. (Ord. Code § 7431.4; Ord. 1531 § B7, 6-18-1996)
3-19: COMMERCIAL USE; POSSESSION AND DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
A licensee shall keep the license required by section 3-16 of this article and such business license as issued to street vendors/peddlers under chapter 15
of this code in his possession in the vehicle or sound truck during the time the vehicle or sound truck's sound amplifying equipment is in operation. The
license(s) shall be promptly displayed and shown to any law enforcement officer of the city upon request. (Ord. Code § 7431.4; Ord. 1531 § B8, 6-18-
1996)
3-20: COMMERCIAL USE; REGULATIONS FOR USE:
A. No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any vehicle with sound amplifying equipment or sound truck for commercial sound advertising
purposes in violation of the regulations set forth in section 3-19 of this article.
B. Any person violating this article or any provisions thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that any provision of this article is violated is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as separate and distinct offense. Notwithstanding
the classification of a violation of this article as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this article, the trial
court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted
of an infraction under this article shall be punished by:
1. A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;
2. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this article within one year; and
3. A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this article within one year. (Ord. Code § 7431.5; Ord. 1531
§ B9, 6-18-1996)
Chapter Article IV
SIGNS1
3-21: TITLE, SCOPE AND ENFORCEMENT:
A. Title: This article shall be known as the UNIFORM SIGN CODE, may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this sign code".
B. Purpose And Scope: The purpose of this sign code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating
and controlling the design, quality of materials, construction, location, electrification, and maintenance of all signs and sign structures visible from
outside the building or intended for view by people outside the building. The regulations of this sign code are not intended to permit any violation of the
provisions of any other lawful ordinance.
C. Enforcement: The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of this sign code.
D. Right Of Entry: Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or his duly authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times any
building, structure, or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed upon him by this sign code.
E. Board Of Appeals: The board of appeals as provided in the currently adopted building code and which has been established thereunder is the appellate
board to provide for reasonable interpretation of this article. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-22: DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS:
For the purpose of this sign code, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as defined in chapter 21, section
700.02 of this code. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine
and the feminine the masculine. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-23: PERMITS, FEES AND INSPECTION:
A. Permits Required: No sign shall hereafter be erected, reerected, constructed, altered, or maintained, except as provided by this sign code and a permit
for the same has been issued by the building official. A separate permit shall be required for each sign. In addition, electrical permits shall be obtained
for electric signs.
B. Application: Application for a sign permit shall be made in writing upon forms furnished by the building official. Such application shall contain the location
by street and number of the proposed sign structure, as well as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or erector. The building
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 89/636
official may require the filing of plans and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the state to practice such.
C. Exceptions: Signs identified as exempt signs in chapter 21, article 305, "Signs", of this code shall not require a sign permit.
D. Sign Permit Fee: A fee for each sign permit shall be paid to the building official as set forth in the schedule below.
1. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this sign code shall be made by the building official.
2. Where work for which a permit is required by this sign code is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining said permit, the fees specified shall be
doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this sign code in the
execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed herein.
3. Fees will be collected based on:
a. A resolution adopted by the city council.
b. Electrical permit fee to be taken from ordinance 742 (codified as section 7-11 of this code).
E. Plan Checking Fees: Where plans and other pertinent information are required in accordance with subsection B of this section, a plan check fee as per
a resolution adopted by the city council shall be paid to the building official.
F. Maintenance: All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in repair and in proper state of preservation. The
display surfaces of all signs shall be kept neatly painted or posted at all times.
G. Inspections: All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official.
1. Footing inspections will be required for all ground signs.
2. Electric signs shall be inspected before erection.
3. The building official may order the removal of any sign that is not maintained in accordance with provisions of subsection F of this section.
4. All signs may be reinspected at the discretion of the building official. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007; Ord. 1833, 6-21-2016)
3-24: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION:
A. Design:
1. General:
a. Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall
be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted
through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof.
b. The overturning moment produced from lateral force shall be transmitted through the ground in such manner as not to overstress any of the
elements thereof. The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the dead load resisting moment.
Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of
earth superimposed over footings may be used in determining the dead load resisting moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly
compacted.
2. Wind Loads:
a. For the purpose of design, and except for combination signs, wind pressure shall be taken upon the gross area of the vertical projection of all
signs and sign structures at not less than fifteen (15) pounds per square foot for those portions less than sixty feet (60') above the ground, and at
not less than twenty (20) pounds per square foot for those portions more than sixty feet (60') above the ground.
b. Wind pressure upon combination signs and their support shall be taken at not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of the gross area of the
plane surface, acting in any direction. In calculating wind pressure on curved surfaces such as cylindrical or spherical signs or sign structures, this
pressure shall be assumed to act on six-tenths (6/10) of the projected area. In all open frame signs or sign structures, the area used in computing
wind pressure shall be one and one-half (11/2) times the net area of the framing members exposed to the wind.
3. Seismic Loads: Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in the currently adopted building
code.
4. Combined Load: Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures; only that loading producing the larger
stresses need be used. Vertical design loads shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads.
5. Allowable Stresses: The design of wood, concrete, or steel members shall conform to the requirements of the currently adopted building code.
Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in the currently adopted building code.
The working stresses for wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in the currently adopted building code.
B. Construction:
1. General: The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected
in conformance with the requirements of this sign code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 90/636
2. Material: Materials of construction for signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the currently adopted
building code. Anchors and supports when of wood are embedded in the soil, or within six inches (6") of the soil, shall be of all heartwood of a
durable species or shall be pressure treated with an approved preservative. Such members shall be marked or branded by an approved agency.
3. Restrictions On Combustible Materials: Ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this sign code, except as
provided above. Combination signs, wall signs, projecting signs, and signs on marquees shall be constructed of incombustible materials, except as
provided in subsection B4 of this section. No combustible materials other than approved plastic materials shall be used in the construction of electric
signs.
4. Nonstructural Trim: Nonstructural trim may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof.
5. Anchorage:
a. Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical,
shall not exceed the safe values. Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction.
Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to overturning. Anchors and supports
shall penetrate to a depth below ground greater than that of the frost line.
b. Portable ground signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to the base shall be so proportioned that the weight and size of the base will
be adequate to resist the wind pressure specified in subsection A2 of this section.
c. Signs attached to masonry, concrete, or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereto by means of metal anchors, bolts, or approved
expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied.
d. No wooden block or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case
of signs attached to wood framing.
e. No anchor or support of any sign shall be connected to, or supported by, a parapet wall, unless such wall is designed in accordance with the
requirements specified in the currently adopted building code for parapet walls.
6. Display Surfaces: Display surfaces in all types of signs may be made of metal, glass or approved plastics, in accordance with the area limitations set
forth in tables 4-A and 4-B of this article (section 3-25 of this article).
7. Restrictions As To Zoning Regulations: All signs shall comply with zoning regulation ordinances of the city of Porterville.
8. Clearance From Electric Power Lines: No permit for any sign shall be issued and no sign shall be constructed, installed, or erected which has less
horizontal or vertical clearance from energized electrical power lines than prescribed by the California Penal Code section 385, the regulations of the
California public utility commission, and the orders of division of industrial safety, state of California. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-25: GROUND SIGNS:
A. General: Ground signs may be constructed of any material meeting the requirements of this sign code, except as provided in subsection 3-24B3 of this
article.
B. Design: Ground signs shall be designed in accordance with the requirements specified in section 3-24 of this article.
C. Projection: Ground signs shall not project over public property or beyond a building line. For projection of combination signs, see section 3-28 of this
article.
TABLE 4-A
LIMITATIONS OF APPROVED PLASTICS IN SIGNS
Area Of Facing Or Display Surface Area Occupied Or Covered By Approved Plastic Materials
100 square feet or less 100 percent of display surface area
Over 100 square feet, but less than 2,000
square feet
100 square feet plus 25 percent of the difference between 100 square feet and the area of the
display surface
Over 2,000 square feet Not over 575 square feet
TABLE 4-B
SIZE, THICKNESS AND TYPE OF GLASS PANELS IN SIGNS
Maximum Size Of
Exposed Glass Panel
Any Dimension
In Inches
Area In
Square Inches
Minimum
Thickness Of
Glass In Inches Type Of Glass
30 500 1/8 Plain, plate or wired
45 700 3/16 Plain, plate or wired
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 91/636
144 3,600 1/4 Plain, plate or wired
Over 144 Over 3,600 1/4 Wired
(Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-26: WALL SIGNS:
A. General: Wall signs shall be constructed of materials compliant with title 24 of the California building code, except as provided in subsection 3-24B4 of
this article.
B. Design: Wall signs shall be designed in accordance with the requirements specified in section 3-24 of this article.
C. Projections: Signs or advertising structures projecting not more than six inches (6") from the face of a building or any other supporting structure, over a
public sidewalk or any other public property, shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet (8') above the pavement or finished grade. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-
2007)
3-27: PROJECTING SIGNS:
A. General: Projecting signs shall be constructed of materials compliant with title 24 of the California building code, except as specified in subsection 3-
24B4 of this article.
B. Design: Projecting signs shall be designed in accordance with the requirements specified in section 3-24 of this article.
C. Residential Districts: In any residentially zoned district, with the exception of newspaper and mail receptacles, no sign or advertising structure shall
extend or project over any public sidewalk, street, alley, or other public property unless exempted under the zoning ordinance.
D. Projections Over Travelways Or Walkways: Signs or advertising structures projecting more than six inches (6") from the face of a building, or any other
supporting structure, over travelways or walkways on private property used or intended to be used by the general public, shall have a minimum
clearance of eight feet (8') above the pavement or finished grade. Such signs may not project greater than forty eight inches (48").
E. Wall Signs; Other Signs Projecting Into Alley: No wall sign shall have a projection over public property or beyond a building line greater than the
distances set forth in this sign code, nor extend above any adjacent parapet or roof of the supporting building. No sign or sign structure shall project
into any public alley whatsoever, below a height of eight feet (8') above grade, nor more than eight inches (8") when over eight feet (8').
F. Clearance Above Pavement Or Finished Grade: Signs or advertising structures projecting more than six inches (6") from the face of a building or any
other supporting structure, over a public sidewalk or any other public property, shall have a minimum clearance of ten feet (10') above the pavement or
finished grade.
G. Horizontal Dimensions: No sign or advertising structure shall exceed a horizontal dimension of more than thirty inches (30") when projecting from the
face of any building or any other supporting structure, whether privately or publicly owned. When the sign projects over a public sidewalk or any other
public property, and is suspended from or supported by a rod, anchor, or other hardware, the overall horizontal dimension may not exceed thirty six
inches (36"). When the sign projects over a public sidewalk or any other public property, and when said sign is placed on or suspended from an
awning, canopy, or marquee, the overall horizontal dimension must not exceed forty eight inches (48").
H. Restrictions In Certain Districts: Signs or advertising structures in any residential, PO, and CN zoned districts may not be attached to the roof of a
building, nor shall it exceed the height of the lowest roof line of the building to which it is attached.
I. Clearance:
1. No sign or sign structure shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any
fire escape, exit or standpipe. No sign shall obstruct any window to such an extent that any light or ventilation is reduced to a point below that
required by any law or ordinance.
2. Signs shall be so located as to maintain all required clearances from overhead power and service lines. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007; Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
3-28: COMBINATION SIGNS:
A. General: Combination signs shall be constructed of incombustible materials, except as provided in subsection 3-24B4 of this article.
B. Design: All supports of combination signs shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected to conform
with the requirements specified in section 3-24 of this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 92/636
C. Projection:
1. Signs may project over public property or beyond a building line as set forth in chapter 21, section 305.10 of this code.
2. The individual requirements of projecting and ground signs shall be applied for combination signs incorporating any or all of the aforesaid features.
(Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-29: MARQUEES:
Signs may be placed on, attached to, or constructed in a marquee. Such signs shall, for the purpose of determining projection clearance, height and
material, be considered a part of and shall meet the requirement for a marquee as specified in the currently adopted building code. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-30: ELECTRIC SIGNS:
A. General: Electric signs shall be constructed of incombustible materials, except as provided in subsection 3-24B3 of this article. The enclosed shell of
electric signs shall be watertight, excepting that service holes fitted with covers shall be provided into each compartment of such signs.
B. Installation: Electric equipment used in connection with display sign shall be installed in accordance with local ordinances regulating electrical
installations.
C. Erector's Name: Every electric sign projecting over any street or alley or public place shall have painted on the surface of the sign the name of the sign
erector and date of erection. Such name and date shall be of sufficient size and contrast to be readable from a reasonable distance. Failure to provide
such name and date shall be grounds for rejection of the sign by the building official. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-31: TEMPORARY SIGNS AND BANNERS:
Refer to ordinance 727 (codified as article I of this chapter), and chapter 21, article 305 of this code, which shall apply. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
3-32: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or
maintain any sign or structure in the city or cause or permit the same to be done contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this sign code.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this sign code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this sign code is
committed, continued, or permitted, and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1711, 2-20-2007)
Chapter 4
AIRPORT
Chapter Article I
GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
4-1.00: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Short Title: This chapter may be referred to as the PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT RULES AND REGULATIONS. It may be amended by a
majority vote of the city council of the city of Porterville, California.
B. Necessity: This chapter is enacted to protect the health, safety and peace, and to promote the welfare and convenience of the general public using the
Porterville municipal airport, or affected by activities related to the airport by providing for the orderly conduct of activities on, or related to, the airport.
C. Authority: The provisions of these rules and regulations are intended to augment the existing laws of the state of California by the authority of title IX of
the aeronautics act, Public Utilities Code sections 2100 et seq., the federal aviation regulations and this chapter. The city of Porterville, as owner of the
airport, is directed by federal and state law to provide for the safe and efficient operation of the facility as a public airport, and to provide for the health,
safety, and welfare of the flying public.
D. Applicability: The provisions in these rules and regulations shall be applicable to any and all persons upon the airport, who lease or rent property
directly from the city of Porterville, who have been granted any license or permit by the city of Porterville, and to any person(s) engaged in activities
thereon. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-1.05: DEFINITIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 93/636
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions and meanings shall apply unless otherwise specified:
AEROBATICS: Maneuvers intentionally performed by an aircraft involving an abrupt change in its attitude, an abnormal attitude, or an abnormal
acceleration, or deceleration.
AIR CARRIER: Any person who undertakes directly, by lease, or other arrangement, to engage in air transportation of persons or things. They operate, in
various categories, under authority or certification by the California public utilities commission. Categories include certificated route air carriers, trunk
carriers, flag carriers, local service carriers, all-cargo carriers, helicopter carriers, commercial air operators, air taxi operators, and charter air carriers.
AIR OPERATIONS AREA: Any area used for landing, taking off, taxiing or surface maneuvering aircraft.
AIR TRAFFIC: Aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface, exclusive of loading ramps or parking areas.
AIR TRAFFIC CLEARANCE: An authorization issued by air traffic control personnel for an aircraft to proceed under specified traffic conditions within
controlled airspace.
AIRCRAFT: A device that is used, or intended to be used, for flight in the air. This includes airplanes, helicopters and gliders, and lighter than air devices
such as blimps or balloons, but does not include hang gliders. (See Ultralights FARs part 103.)
AIRPORT: The Porterville municipal airport, its buildings and facilities, all lands owned by the city adjacent to the airport, including airspace above such
land and the designated approaches thereto.
AIRPORT OPERATIONS MANAGER: That person or his designee (airport operations supervisor), designated by the city of Porterville, as the competent
authority charged with the safe and efficient operation of the airport and the enforcement of the regulations herein.
AUTO ROTATION: A rotor craft flight condition in which the lifting rotor is driven entirely by the action of air when the rotor craft (helicopter) is in motion.
BALLOON: A lighter than air aircraft that is not engine driven.
BASED AIRCRAFT: Any aircraft which utilizes the airport as a base of operations and is assigned a permanent parking space, tie down, or hangar space
on the airport or adjoining property, for the period of at least one month, by virtue of a lease agreement.
CEILING: The height above the earth's surface of the lowest layer of clouds or obscuring phenomena, that is reported as "broken", "overcast", or
"obscuration", and is not classified "thin" or "partial".
CITY: The city of Porterville.
COMMERCIAL OPERATOR: Any person who, for compensation or hire, engages in the carriage of persons, property or mail in air commerce, or engages
in other aerial activity such as flight instruction, aerial photography, firefighting, agricultural aviation activities, and/or traffic surveillance.
COMMERCIAL USE: Use of the Porterville municipal airport for revenue producing commercial activities.
COMMON USE AREA: All runways for landing and takeoff, all runway markers, guidance, signal, and beacon lights used to guide aircraft operations; all
apparatus or equipment for disseminating weather and wind information, for signaling, for radio directional finding, or for radio or other electrical
communication and any other structure, equipment or mechanism having similar purpose for guiding or controlling flight in the air or the landing and takeoff
of aircraft, and together with such aprons, ramps, tie down area, taxiway and improvements.
COUNCIL: The city council of the city of Porterville, who, as governing body of the municipality which owns the airport, is final authority in all matters of
policy and procedure in the operation of the airport.
FIXED BASE OPERATOR (FBO): Any person who rents, leases or owns facilities located in an area designated for FBOs at the Porterville municipal
airport, who, by virtue of his specific type of aviation (or aviation related) activity, requires the occupancy of a site with contiguous aircraft apron and direct
access to the aircraft operation area, and who engages in a business activity providing aviation sales or services, including, but not limited to, any of the
following:
A. Selling and/or servicing new and used aircraft and component parts.
B. Aircraft maintenance and repairs.
C. Sales and/or repair of avionics.
D. Aviation training (including ground or flight instruction).
E. Aerial photography.
F. Air ambulance service.
G. Aircraft agricultural operations (crop dusting, spraying, or the application of seed, fertilizers, pesticides, defoliants, etc.).
H. Aircraft rental, charter, and leasing.
I. Hangar rentals in support of FBOs.
FLIGHT VISIBILITY: The average forward horizontal distance from the cockpit of an aircraft in flight, at which prominent unlighted objects may be seen
and identified by night.
GROUND VISIBILITY: Prevailing horizontal visibility near the earth's surface.
HELICOPTER: A rotor driven aircraft (rotorcraft) that, for its horizontal motion, depends primarily on its engine driven rotors.
IFR: Instrument flight rules covering meteorological conditions below the minimums for flight under visual (VFR) conditions.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 94/636
MAINTENANCE: Inspection, overhaul, repair, preservation and the replacement of parts, but excludes preventive maintenance.
MAXIMUM GROSS LANDING WEIGHT: The maximum landing weight stipulated for a particular aircraft by the federal aviation administration (FAA).
MOTOR VEHICLE: As defined in section 415 of the California Vehicle Code.
NIGHT: The time between the end of evening civil twilight and the beginning of morning civil twilight as published in the American air almanac, converted
to local time.
PERSON: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity, and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them.
RAMP: The area used for the parking and maneuvering, loading, and servicing of aircraft while they are on the ground.
TRAFFIC PATTERN: The traffic flow that is prescribed for aircraft landing at, or taking off from, the Porterville municipal airport.
TRANSIENT AIRCRAFT: All aircraft not permanently based at the airport (as opposed to based aircraft).
ULTRALIGHT: A vehicle to be used as an in-air manned operation for recreation or sport. If powered, weighs less than two hundred fifty four (254) pounds
empty, having a maximum fuel capacity of five (5) U.S. gallons, not capable of more than fifty five (55) knots at full power at level flight and having a power
off stall speed of twenty four (24) knots or less.
VFR: Visual flight rules covering meteorological conditions, above those requiring flight under IFR conditions.
WORD CONSTRUCTION: The following construction applies throughout this chapter:
A. Words importing the singular include the plural.
B. Words importing the plural include the singular.
C. Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article II
AIRPORT OPERATION AREA REQUIREMENTS, GENERAL
4-2.05: RESPONSIBILITIES:
A. Management: It shall be the responsibility of the airport manager/airport operations supervisor of Porterville municipal airport to fairly and impartially
administer the Porterville municipal airport rules and regulations. The airport manager/airport operations supervisor is responsible for the safe and
efficient operation of the airport.
B. Users: It shall be the responsibility of every user of the Porterville municipal airport, pilot or other, to become familiar with the Porterville municipal
airport rules and regulations and to obey those rules and regulations. The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall constitute an
acceptance by the user of these rules and regulations and shall create an obligation on the part of the user to abide by and obey said rules and
regulations. A copy will be maintained current to reflect any amendments and will be posted in the administration building. Additional copies will be
provided by the Porterville municipal airport manager/airport operations supervisor to any user of the airport who requests a copy. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-
2004)
4-2.10: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The Porterville municipal airport shall be open for public use (24 hours), subject to any restrictions imposed by the airport manager/airport operations
supervisor, the condition of the landing area, the presentation of special events, construction or repair activities, or similar causes. The airport is attended
from eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. daily in the winter and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M. daily in the summer.
Services may be obtained at other times by contacting the numbers posted on the door of the airport lobby. A call out fee will by charged per the airport fee
schedule set by city council resolution. The fee schedule will be reviewed by city council on an annual basis. (Winter hours are October 1 through May 15;
summer hours are May 16 through September 30, unless situations occur that require the airport manager to modify the hours.) (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-
2004)
4-2.15: COMMON USE AREAS:
All runways, taxiway, and associated turnoffs, and aprons, together with associated lighting, marking and navigational fixtures shall be considered common
use areas and shall be maintained as being available for use by all persons flying or operating aircraft on the airport. Certain areas of the main ramp,
including parking areas and helipads shall also be designated as common use areas. No FBO or other person shall use any common use area for the
parking or storing of aircraft, repair, servicing, or for any other purpose other than the flying and operation of aircraft, without the prior consent or
authorization of the airport manager/airport operations supervisor. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.20: MAINTENANCE:
Unless otherwise authorized by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor, no aircraft or vehicle maintenance (other than that required to remove
damaged aircraft from the runway or taxiway, or replacing a flat tire) shall be performed on the Porterville municipal airport except in areas specifically
designated by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor for that purpose. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 95/636
4-2.25: ANIMALS:
A. No person shall wilfully and knowingly permit any animal owned, possessed or harbored by him to enter the airport unless the animal is leashed or
restricted so as to be under control, or in a shipping container, or otherwise under physical restraint. Nor shall he permit such animal, except a "seeing
eye" dog, to enter any airport building.
B. Owner shall be responsible for cleanup of animal defecation. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.30: BASED AIRCRAFT:
Any person desiring to store or base his/her aircraft at the Porterville municipal airport shall register his aircraft at the airport office prior to beginning such
storage or operations, and at any time that a change in ownership occurs. The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an
obligation on the part of the user to obey all of the rules and regulations. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.35: COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY:
No person shall utilize the Porterville municipal airport for any revenue producing commercial activities without first obtaining a business license from the
city for such activities and paying the fees and charges established for such use. The airport manager/airport operations supervisor shall maintain
available for examination upon request, a schedule of fees and charges for the use of the airport and its facilities. Any aircraft owner who fails to pay any
fee duly charged for aircraft owned or controlled by him shall have such aircraft subject to impounding until the fees are paid, along with any impound fees,
or until the aircraft is sold for charges. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.40: AIRCRAFT STORAGE AND PARKING:
Aircraft shall only be stored or parked at places designated by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor and such storage or parking shall be at
the sole risk of the owner or operator of the aircraft, and without any responsibility of the Porterville municipal airport, the city, or any of its officers, agents
or employees, for any loss of, or damage to the aircraft while so stored or parked. The owner or operator of the aircraft shall be responsible for the tying
down and securing of his aircraft. He shall likewise be responsible for any liability arising from or caused by his aircraft or his activities. Transient aircraft
shall only be parked in the area designated by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.45: UNATTENDED AIRCRAFT:
No aircraft shall be left unattended on the airport unless properly secured or within a hangar. Owners of the aircraft left unattended shall be liable for
damage to other aircraft or property resulting from the failure to adequately secure or tie down their aircraft. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.50: RESTRICTED AREAS:
No person shall enter any restricted area which is posted or closed to the public except: a) persons duly authorized by the airport manager/airport
operations supervisor; or b) law enforcement or firefighting personnel. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.55: DUMPING REFUSE:
No person shall place, deposit, or dump any garbage, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, sewage, carcass of any dead animal, or any trash, rubbish, debris, or
any other refuse in any location on the airport except in containers plainly marked for such purposes. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-2.60: PLACE OF ABODE:
No person shall erect lodge shelters, structures, or house(s) on the airport nor shall any person reside at the airport without consent of the city council.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article III
AIRCRAFT FLIGHT RULES, GENERAL
4-3.05: STARTING ENGINES:
No person shall start any aircraft engine on the Porterville Municipal Airport:
A. Unless a competent operator is at the controls;
B. Unless the aircraft is equipped with adequate brakes fully applied or the wheels are securely blocked with blocks or chocks that can be removed safely;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 96/636
C. When the aircraft is in such a position that the propeller slipstream or jet blast can cause damage to, or interfere with the operation of other aircraft,
vehicles, mobile equipment, hangar shops or other buildings, or can cause injury to passengers, spectators or other personnel. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-
2004)
4-3.10: TAXIING:
A. No person shall taxi any aircraft into, out of, or within any hangar or other building on or adjacent to the airport.
B. Nor shall any person move any aircraft under its own power on the airport unless he is in full control of such aircraft, and has assured himself that there
is no danger of collision with other aircraft, vehicles, equipment, buildings, or other obstacles.
C. Aircraft shall be taxied at a safe speed.
D. No aircraft shall use the runway for taxi back purpose, unless communicating intentions over Unicom.
E. No aircraft shall be taxied without an adequate braking system, unless aircraft is accompanied by an attendant to help in stopping or slowing movement.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-3.15: TAKEOFFS AND LANDINGS:
No aeronautical activity shall be conducted at the Porterville Municipal Airport except in conformance with current federal air regulations, state of California
law and regulations, and this chapter. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-3.20: TRAFFIC PATTERN:
It is recommended that every aircraft, before landing and after takeoff, shall be flown in accordance with the traffic pattern illustrated on the diagrams
included in chapter 21, article 500 of this code. Aircraft traveling faster than one hundred twenty five (125) knots per hour, shall be flown using the outside
pattern shown on said chapter 21. If a conflict is observed, the right of way rules of FAR 91.113 shall prevail. In all cases, the offending aircraft shall yield
the right of way as appropriate and overfly the pattern to reenter the downwind leg of the pattern. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-3.25: NOISE:
A. No person shall operate any aircraft in flight or on the ground so as to cause unnecessary noise as determined by the applicable federal or state or local
laws and regulations.
B. No person shall unnecessarily create noise through loudspeaker systems, radios or other means, or to create disturbances of a nature which will disturb
other airport tenants or users of the airport facility. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article IV
VEHICLE OPERATIONS
4-4.05: GENERAL:
All persons who operate motor vehicles on airport premises shall do so in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and city rules and regulations. The
airport operations area was designed for aircraft use and for safety. Vehicular traffic must be kept to a minimum. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.10: RIGHT OF WAY:
Motor vehicle traffic shall yield the right of way to aircraft. Right of way shall also be given to emergency response equipment and aircraft fueling vehicles.
When emergency conditions exist on the field area, motor vehicles not involved in the emergency shall remain a safe distance away from the emergency
area and abide by all existing airport regulations. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.15: MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED LIMITS:
No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport in excess of ten (10) miles per hour, except emergency vehicles responding to an emergency
situation. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.20: PARKING:
Vehicles shall not be parked on the airport other than in the manner and locations indicated by posted traffic signs. Vehicles parked other than as specified
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 97/636
in this section may be removed by airport personnel, and in such event a towing charge will be levied prior to releasing the vehicle from impound. No
liability for damages sustained by such vehicles during said movement will be assumed by the city of Porterville or any of its officers or employees. (Ord.
1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.25: SHORT TERM PARKING:
The parking lot located adjacent to the administration building is available for public parking for less than seventy two (72) hours. Parking inside the airport
security fences, in a designated parking area, is permitted for a fee per the airport fee schedule set by city council resolution. This fee schedule will be
reviewed by city council on an annual basis. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.30: LONG TERM STORAGE:
The city does not authorize long term storage of vehicles, operable or not, except as provided below:
Persons desiring to store and not move a vehicle off the airport's common area for more than seventy two (72) consecutive hours must ask the permission
of the airport manager/airport operations supervisor. A long term parking permit may be purchased. The permit fee shall be set by city council resolution.
This fee schedule will be reviewed by city council on an annual basis. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.35: ACCIDENT REPORTS:
All persons involved in a vehicle accident, occurring on the airport, shall make a full report to the city police department as soon after the accident as
possible. This report shall include names and addresses of all persons involved. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-4.40: MOTORBIKES, BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS:
Skateboards are prohibited on the airport. Further, no person shall ride or park motorbikes, bicycles, or other equipment in the aircraft movement area in
such a manner as to cause distraction or create an obstruction to aircraft, pedestrian traffic or authorized vehicles or in front of "No Vehicle Parking" signs.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article V
FIRE HAZARDS
4-5.00: COMPLIANCE WITH FIRE CODE:
All activities at the Porterville municipal airport shall be in compliance with the latest edition of the uniform fire code (UFC) with state amendments as
adopted by the city of Porterville. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.05: SOURCES OF IGNITION:
Open flames, flame producing devices and other sources of ignition shall not be permitted except where allowed by the fire code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-
2004)
4-5.10: SMOKING:
Smoking shall be prohibited in aircraft refueling vehicles, commercial aircraft hangars, and aircraft operation areas. No smoking signs shall be provided in
accordance with the fire code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.15: HOUSEKEEPING:
The aircraft operation area (AOA) and related areas shall be kept free of combustible debris at all times. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.20: FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS:
Fire lanes and access roads shall be provided and maintained and shall not be blocked. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.25: DISPENSING FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS:
Dispensing, transferring and storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with UFC. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.30: COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE INSIDE OF HANGARS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 98/636
Combustible materials stored in aircraft hangars shall be stored in approved locations and containers as allowed by the fire code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-
2004)
4-5.35: HAZARDOUS MATERIAL DISPOSAL:
No person shall dispose of any hazardous materials in any manner other than as designated by the United States environmental protection agency, the
department of environmental conservation, the laws and regulations of the state of California, the city of Porterville and/or otherwise designated by the
airport manager/airport operations supervisor. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.40: AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE:
Aircraft maintenance shall only be done in accordance with the UFC. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.45: CLEANING PARTS:
Class 1-A liquids shall not be used to clean aircraft, aircraft parts or aircraft engines. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.50: SPILLS:
Spills shall be cleaned immediately. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.55: NOTIFICATION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT IN EVENT OF SPILL:
The fire department shall be notified of any fuel spill that is considered a hazard to people or property or that meets one or more of the following criteria,
any dimension of the spill is greater than ten feet (10'), or the spill area is greater than fifty (50) square feet. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.60: ENGINE RUN:
Aircraft engines shall not be run in aircraft hangars except in approved engine test areas. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.65: PORTABLE FIRE EXTINGUISHERS:
Portable fire extinguishers shall be provided as per the fire code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.70: REPORTING OF USE:
Use of any fire extinguisher equipment under any circumstances shall be reported to the airport manager/airport operations supervisor of the airport and
the fire chief immediately after use. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.75: OPERATION, MAINTENANCE AND USE OF AIRCRAFT FUELING VEHICLES:
Operation, maintenance and use of aircraft fueling vehicles shall be in compliance with the fire code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-5.80: OPEN FLAMES ON AIRCRAFT FUEL SERVICING RAMPS:
Open flames and open flame devices are prohibited within fifty feet (50') of any aircraft fuel servicing operation or fueling equipment. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-
2004)
4-5.85: AIRCRAFT FUEL SERVICING LOCATIONS:
Aircraft fuel transfer operations shall be prohibited indoors and comply with the fire code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article VI
AIRCRAFT HANGARS/TIE DOWN PERMITS
4-6.05: GENERAL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 99/636
This article refers to the general occupancy of private aircraft storage hangars on the airport. Distinction is made between such small hangars and larger
FBOs or aircraft maintenance facilities. This article applies exclusively to smaller, private aircraft storage hangars. The occupancy of larger maintenance or
FBO hangars is addressed in article VII of this chapter. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.10: AIRCRAFT STORAGE:
No person shall park or store any aircraft or associated equipment in any hangar on the airport except by authority of and in compliance with the provisions
of this article. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.15: TENANTS/LESSEE:
All tenants of hangars and/or holders of tie down permits shall be subject to the following terms and conditions:
A. Aircraft shall be stored only in hangars or tie down spaces assigned by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor. Occasionally it may be
necessary for the airport manager/airport operations supervisor to relocate airplanes.
B. When more than one aircraft (owned by the same person) can be stored safely in a hangar the airport manager/airport operations supervisor will be
notified in writing. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.20: HANGAR/TIE DOWN AGREEMENTS:
All hangar agreements and tie down permits (except hangars and tie downs under control of concession lessees) shall be assigned by the airport
manager/airport operations supervisor based upon present rent or fees. An agreement for permanent hangar storage or tie down permit must be in the
name of an individual, flying club, corporation or entity. Tenants/permittee(s)/lessee(s) must be at least eighteen (18) years old to sign a permit agreement.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.22: CITY OWNED HANGARS:
All city owned hangar tenants shall be responsible for hangar damage caused by their occupancy other than proven vandalism or acts of God. Such
damage refers particularly to rough use or misuse of hangar doors by tenants or visitors. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.25: PROOF OF OWNERSHIP:
The airport manager/airport operations supervisor shall require tenants/permittees to establish proof of ownership or vested interest for the aircraft. (Ord.
1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.30: ADDITIONAL USE:
Individual aircraft hangars are allowed on the airport for the primary purpose of aircraft storage and the normal maintenance, repair and service activities
associated with said aircraft. Any additional uses within said hangars shall comply with all applicable city regulations. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.35: AGREEMENT/PERMIT TRANSFERENCE:
Lessee shall not sublet the premises, or any part thereof or assign, transfer, mortgage, or otherwise convey this agreement without the prior written
consent of the city. Any consent by the city to any sublease, assignment, transfer, mortgage, or conveyance shall not be deemed or construed as a
consent to any other different or subsequent sublease, assignment, transfer, mortgage, or conveyance. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.40: INCIDENTAL STORAGE:
Storage of personal items, in addition to aircraft storage, within the hangar shall conform to all local fire and safety codes and the provisions of these
regulations. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.41: VEHICLE STORAGE:
Vehicles belonging to the hangar or aircraft owner and guests may be stored in the hangar while the aircraft is away, or for other short durations of time.
The storage of any motor vehicle within a hangar shall conform to applicable fire and safety codes. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.45: OUTSIDE PARKING:
No vehicle shall be parked or left unattended in any aircraft operating area or in a manner which limits aircraft operation. Vehicles may be stopped in such
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 100/636
areas for short periods of time so long as the owner is readily available to move the vehicles should the needs of aircraft traffic so dictate. (Ord. 1652 § B,
4-20-2004)
4-6.50: MAINTENANCE:
Maintenance in private hangars shall be limited to routine service and inspection of owner's personal aircraft. Said maintenance may include minor repair,
required lubrication and engine oil change, and component replacement by aircraft owner or authorized mechanic. All other maintenance activities shall be
done in accordance with applicable fire and safety codes. Other FAA maintenance tasks are approved only if the hangar meets current building, fire, and
zoning regulations. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.51: DISASSEMBLED AIRCRAFT:
Aircraft in any state of disrepair or assembly may be stored in the hangar while awaiting repairs. Long term storage of such aircraft shall be subject to the
fire and safety provisions of this code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.55: ENGINE RUN:
No aircraft engine shall be run while inside any hangar. Aircraft shall be moved from the hangar to a safe position as provided in section 4-3.05 of this
chapter for run up, or at least outside of the hangar for low power engine runs. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.60: BUSINESS ACTIVITIES:
No person shall conduct any type of business activity or service from individual hangars, unless specifically authorized by city. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.65: ADDITIONAL OCCUPANCY:
No residential occupancy or use shall be allowed in an aircraft storage hangar or elsewhere on the airport unless specifically authorized by city. (Ord. 1652
§ B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.70: HANGAR INSPECTION:
City may inspect each hangar annually, and more often if deemed necessary to determine compliance. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.75: FIRE AND SAFETY:
All occupants of aircraft hangars shall comply with this article, as well as all principles of fire safety. All persons shall exercise the utmost care to guard
against any threat of fire or injury to persons and property on the airport. All occupancies shall comply with applicable provisions of city regulations. (Ord.
1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.76: BEQUEST OF HANGAR/TIE DOWN/LEASE:
Upon the death of a hangar tenant/tie down permittee/lessee, a hangar/tie down permit/lease may be transferred to an heir by inheritance of the aircraft.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.77: USE OF HANGAR/TIE DOWN:
No tenant/permittee/lessee may sublease, subrent, his hangar/tie down permit/lease to another person for storage, charter, rental or otherwise without
notifying the airport manager/airport operations supervisor and according to standard procedure set forth. The use of hangar/tie down by an aircraft other
than the tenant/permittee/lessee must be approved by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor.
A tenant/lessee may sublet a portion of his hangar to a second owner whose aircraft will safely fit in the available space. In such an instance, the second
occupant of the space is subject to the same rules and regulations as if they were a primary tenant/lessee. The subtenant/lessee is not the primary
tenant/lessee under any circumstance and must comply with all applicable provisions of city regulations. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.80: PAYMENT TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Payment Schedule:
1. All city owned hangar agreements/tie down permits will be on a monthly basis with an option to renew.
2. All private hangar land leases will be billed as per the lease agreement.
3. Rental agreements/permits will be prorated to the nearest week upon initial occupancy, but not prorated upon termination of occupancy.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 101/636
B. Delinquent Accounts: Rules and regulations prescribing penalties and procedures relating to delinquent accounts of the airport are as follows:
For the purpose of these rules and regulations every airport tenant, permit account, lease shall become due and payable on the first day of the
calendar month during which the agreement, permit or instrument of tenancy became effective. It shall remain due and owing to the city together with
all penalties thereon as herein prescribed, until paid in full, unless otherwise expressly provided by terms of such agreement, permit, or lease.
1. For the purpose of these rules and regulations, all such accounts shall be classified as delinquent when not paid in full by the tenth of the calendar
month in which said accounts shall become due, unless otherwise expressly provided by the agreement.
2. Tenant, permit accounts, leases delinquent for thirty (30) days, or on the tenth day of the month succeeding the date the account initially became
due, will be subject to the following procedure:
a. A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the sum will be added to the original amount due.
b. A due bill will be prepared clearly setting forth the sum and the basic amount. The bill will designate the amount of the penalty, and will be sent to
the delinquent party by registered mail accompanied by a letter of termination of tenancy/lease; said termination to be effective on the forty fifth
day of delinquency, which will be fifty five (55) days succeeding the date the account first became due.
3. Upon termination of any agreement, by the foregoing procedure, the former tenant/permittee/lessee shall at once relinquish and vacate any and all
premises of the airport and shall return any and all lands, building or properties if owned by the city to the control of the city, and the
tenant/permittee/lessee shall have no further right, title, estate or interest in said airport.
4. The provisions of these rules and regulations, when carried to termination, shall in no way mitigate, modify or cancel any tenant/permittee/lessee
indebtedness to the city and any delinquent account shall be subject to any and all methods of collection determined appropriate by the city.
5. Reinstatement of an agreement/permit/lease terminated by the forgoing procedure may be accomplished only by complete payment of any and all
indebtedness, including penalties, and by instituting a successful request for such consideration by the airport manager. Reinstatement action
described herein shall be subject to an administrative charge payable by said applicant in advance.
6. The provisions of these rules shall be deemed a part of each and every agreement or permit now in effect and heretofore issued to any tenant or
permittee of any portion of the airport, or which may be hereafter issued to any party. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-6.85: NOTICE OF INFRACTION:
The tenant will be given a notice of infraction if he violates the provisions of these rules or other applicable rules, ordinances, resolutions or regulations.
Within thirty (30) days the tenant may exercise the appeal process in article XIII of this chapter unless superseded by a current and valid lease agreement.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article VII
FIXED BASE OPERATORS
4-7.05: GENERAL:
This article applies to any person or entity who provides aviation support services to the flying public. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.10: CLASSIFICATION:
Fixed base operator (FBO) means any person who rents, leases or owns facilities located in an area designated for FBOs at the Porterville municipal
airport, who, by virtue of his specific type of aviation (or aviation related) activity, requires the occupancy of a site with contiguous aircraft apron and direct
access to the aircraft operation area, and who engages in a business activity providing aviation sales or services, including, but not limited to, any of the
following:
A. Selling and/or servicing new and used aircraft and component parts.
B. Aircraft maintenance and repairs.
C. Sales and/or repair of avionics.
D. Aviation training (including ground or flight instruction).
E. Aerial photography.
F. Air ambulance service.
G. Aircraft agricultural operations (crop dusting, spraying, or the application of seed, fertilizers, pesticides, defoliants, etc.).
H. Aircraft rental, charter, and leasing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 102/636
I. Hangar rentals in support of FBOs. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.20: CITY REPRESENTATION:
No employee or representative of any FBO or lessee shall be authorized or assumed to be authorized to act as an agent for or on behalf of the city in
matters of airport operation or policy. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.25: LEASE TRANSFERENCE:
Lessee shall not sublet the premises, or any part thereof or assign, transfer, mortgage, or otherwise convey this agreement without the prior written
consent of the city. Any consent by the city to any sublease, assignment, transfer, mortgage, or conveyance shall not be deemed or constructed as a
consent to any other different or subsequent sublease, assignment, transfer, mortgage, or conveyance. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.30: INCIDENTAL STORAGE:
Storage of items, in addition to aircraft storage, within the hangar shall conform to all local fire and safety codes and the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.35: VEHICLE STORAGE:
Vehicles belonging to the hangar or aircraft owner and guests may be stored in the hangar for short durations of time. The storage of any motor vehicle
within a hangar shall conform to applicable fire and safety codes. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.40: OUTSIDE PARKING:
No vehicle shall be parked or left unattended in any aircraft operating area or in a manner which limits aircraft operation. Vehicles may be stopped in such
areas for short periods of time so long as the owner is readily available to move the vehicles should the needs of aircraft traffic so dictate. (Ord. 1652 § B,
4-20-2004)
4-7.45: ENGINE RUN:
No aircraft engine shall be run while inside any hangar. Aircraft shall be moved from the hangar to a safe position as provided in section 4-3.05 of this
chapter for run up, or at least outside of the hangar for low power engine runs. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.50: ADDITIONAL OCCUPANCY:
No residential occupancy or use shall be allowed in an aircraft storage hangar or elsewhere on the airport unless specifically authorized by city. (Ord. 1652
§ B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.55: HANGAR INSPECTION:
City may inspect each hangar annually, and more often if deemed necessary to determine compliance. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.60: FIRE AND SAFETY:
All occupants of aircraft hangars shall comply with this article, as well as all principles of fire safety. All persons shall exercise the utmost care to guard
against any threat of fire or injury to persons and property on the airport. All occupancies shall comply with applicable provisions of city regulations. (Ord.
1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.65: BEQUEST OF LEASE:
With the death of a lessee, a lease may be transferred to an heir by inheritance of the aircraft. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.70: PAYMENT TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
A. Delinquent Accounts: Rules and regulations prescribing penalties and procedures relating to delinquent accounts of the airport are as follows:
For the purpose of these rules and regulations every airport lease shall become due and payable on the first day of the calendar month during which
the agreement became effective. It shall remain due and owing to the city together with all penalties thereon as herein prescribed, until paid in full,
unless otherwise expressly provided by terms of such lease.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 103/636
1. For the purpose of these rules and regulations, all such accounts shall be classified as delinquent when not paid in full by the tenth of the calendar
month in which said accounts shall become due, unless otherwise expressly provided by the agreement.
2. Leases delinquent for thirty (30) days, or on the tenth day of the month succeeding the date of the account initially became due, will be subject to the
following procedure:
a. A penalty of ten percent (10%) of the sum will be added to the original amount due.
b. A due bill will be prepared clearly setting forth the sum and the basic amount. The bill will designate the amount of the penalty, and will be sent to
the delinquent party by registered mail accompanied by a letter of termination of lease; said termination to be effective on the forty fifth day of
delinquency, which will be fifty five (55) days succeeding the date the account first became due.
3. Upon termination of any agreement, by the foregoing procedure, the former lessee shall at once relinquish and vacate any and all premises of the
airport and shall return any and all lands, building or properties if owned by the city to the control of the city, and the lessee shall have no further
right, title, estate or interest in said airport. Personal property shall be removed upon termination of the lease. Hangar(s) will be removed within ninety
(90) days during which the hangar owner will be responsible for the lease payment.
4. The provisions of these rules and regulations, when carried to termination, shall in no way mitigate, modify or cancel any lessee indebtedness to the
city and any delinquent account shall be subject to any and all methods of collection determined appropriate by the city.
5. Reinstatement of a lease terminated by the foregoing procedure may be accomplished only by complete payment of any and all indebtedness,
including penalties, and by instituting a successful request for such consideration by the airport manager. Reinstatement action described herein
shall be subject to an administrative charge payable by said applicant in advance.
6. The provisions of these rules shall be deemed a part of each and every agreement or permit now in effect and heretofore issued to any lessee of any
portion of the airport, or which may be hereafter issued to any party. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-7.75: NOTICE OF INFRACTION:
The lessee will be given a notice of infraction if he violates the provisions of these rules or other applicable rules, ordinances, resolutions or regulations.
Within thirty (30) days the lessee may exercise the appeal process in article XIII of this chapter. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article VIII
EMERGENCY
4-8.05: GENERAL:
This article provides for the authority and designated responsibilities of individuals and agencies in the event of an airport emergency. Such emergencies
would include fires of any type, aircraft emergencies or accident, or incident of personal injury. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.10: NOTIFICATION:
It shall be the responsibility of any person or airport tenant who observes or has knowledge of any type of airport emergency which has not, to their
knowledge, been reported, to initiate a report as specified. Said report shall be accomplished by dialing 9-1-1 from any airport telephone or otherwise
contacting the city police/fire department. The person shall then give the dispatcher all information which he has available. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.15: RESPONSE ACTIVATION:
Upon receipt of notification of an airport emergency, the police/fire dispatcher shall activate the fire department and/or police department. (Ord. 1652 § B,
4-20-2004)
4-8.25: RIGHT OF WAY:
All persons not responding to an airport emergency shall yield the right of way to emergency service personnel. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.30: EMERGENCY VEHICLE RIGHT OF WAY:
Emergency service vehicles displaying proper red lights and other required markings shall have the right of way on all taxiways. When responding to an
aircraft incident, all aircraft and other vehicles shall yield to said equipment. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.35: SPEED WAIVER:
The airport speed limit requirements are waived for all emergency vehicles and authorized personnel responding to an airport emergency. (Ord. 1652 § B,
4-20-2004)
4-8.40: AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 104/636
Upon the arrival of the fire department and/or police department to an airport emergency, all other persons, including aircraft owners, operators, and
interested parties shall remain clear of the area until the designated incident commander has determined that the accident scene is stabilized and safe for
entry by airport personnel. The airport manager/airport operations supervisor shall then designate only those essential persons authorized to enter the
accident scene. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.45: INCIDENT COMMAND:
Immediately upon arrival at any airport emergency, the affected area shall come under the full control of the fire department and the designated incident
commander. The incident commander shall control all access to and from the site, as well as all rescue, stabilization, and suppression efforts. (Ord. 1652
§ B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.50: AIRPORT PERSONNEL:
It shall be the duty of the airport manager/airport operations supervisor to coordinate or even curtail any and all airport operations which may be in conflict
with or endangered by an emergency situation. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.55: AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT:
Aircraft accident scenes, as defined by FAR, fall within the jurisdiction of the FAA and its associated investigating bodies. All persons on or near a crash
scene shall preserve any and all aircraft pieces, parts, papers, and other pertinent data and document their positions and content as additional aid to the
appropriate investigating authority. Only those persons authorized by the incident commander or the airport manager/airport operations supervisor shall be
on the accident scene or within two thousand feet (2,000') thereof. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.60: AUTOMATIC CLOSURE:
Any runway, taxiway, or other operating area of the airport which becomes the scene of an aircraft accident shall immediately be considered closed and
unusable until determined otherwise by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor. The airport manager/airport operations supervisor shall provide
for proper notification of closures and the coordination of air traffic so long as the closure remains in effect. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.65: REMOVAL OF AIRCRAFT:
No aircraft or parts thereof shall be removed from an accident scene until such removal has been authorized by the appropriate FAA/NTSB representative.
Airport management may assist in securing proper removal authority; however, it shall be the ultimate responsibility of the aircraft owner to acquire the
proper authorizations for removal, as specified by federal regulation. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.70: SCENE PRESERVATION:
In the event an accident scene must be preserved for a prolonged period of time, the airport manager shall provide for adequate protection as may be
necessary for such preservation. The charges for any such protection shall be borne by the aircraft owner. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.75: OWNER RESPONSIBILITY:
Any aircraft involved in an accident or incident on the airport shall bear the responsibility of the registered owner for its prompt and proper removal from the
accident site. Said removal shall be accomplished only after proper authorization has been received as specified in section 4-8.65 of this article. The
owner may engage local services at his option. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.80: CITY RESPONSIBILITY:
In the case where an owner is unable to remove a disabled aircraft from an airport operating area, the airport manager/airport operations supervisor may
at his discretion remove, or authorize the removal of said aircraft to the appropriate storage area. The charges for such removal shall be borne by the
aircraft owner. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.85: CITY INDEMNITY:
In the event that airport management removes said aircraft or parts thereof from an accident site in order to facilitate airport operations, to the fullest extent
permitted by law, all tenants and persons shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless airport management, its agents and employees from and against all
claims, damages, losses and expenses attributed to bodily injury, sickness, disease or death, or injury to or destruction of tangible property including the
loss of use resulting therefrom, regardless of whether or not it is caused in part by a party indemnified hereunder, and including, but not limited to, attorney
fees, arising out of, resulting from, or in any manner related to any work performed or services provided in the course of such a removal. Said removal
shall be done only after the proper authorization has been obtained from the FAA, and only if it is determined to be necessary to assist airport operation, or
to protect the safety of the general public and users of the airport. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.90: AIRCRAFT STORAGE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 105/636
Any aircraft involved in an accident or incident which is rendered disabled or unairworthy shall be parked or stored in an area designated by the airport
manager/airport operations supervisor. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.95: SPECIAL HANDLING:
The registered owner of any aircraft which requires special handling, parking or storage as a result of an accident, shall be responsible for any and all
charges incurred as a result of such storage. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-8.96: AIRPORT CLOSURE:
The airport manager/airport operations supervisor is hereby directed and authorized to close the airport, or portions thereof, or suspend operations related
to the landing, takeoff, or taxiing of aircraft during any period in which he/she determines that such operations, or their continuance, would be hazardous.
Causes for such closure could include, but would not be limited to, runway maintenance or repairs, runway obstacles, fire, aircraft or other accident. Any
such closure shall be effective only during such time as there is placed at each end of each runway so closed, a letter "X", the arms of which are at least
sixty feet (60') long and twenty feet (20') wide, and so colored as to contrast with the background or other surface. The airport manager/airport operations
supervisor shall immediately notify the Rancho Murrieta flight service station and issue a notice to airmen (NOTAM), advising of the closure. Phone 1-800-
992-7433. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article IX
FUELING AND SALES
4-9.05: AIRCRAFT FUELING AND DEFUELING:
All fueling operations conducted at the Porterville airport shall be in compliance with city regulations and the uniform fire code.
A. No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the aircraft engine is running or while the aircraft is in a hangar or other enclosed space.
B. No smoking shall be permitted within fifty feet (50') of the aircraft or fuel truck while the aircraft is being fueled or defueled.
C. During fuel handling, no passenger shall be permitted in or on the aircraft.
D. All hoses, funnels and apparatus used in fueling or defueling activities shall be equipped properly with a grounding device to prevent possible static
ignition of volatile liquids. Such grounding devices shall be used during all fueling and defueling activities.
E. During fueling handling activities, no person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver, nor switch electrical appliances on or off in such aircraft, or
in the immediate vicinity (50 feet) thereof.
F. Every person engaged in aircraft fuel handling shall exercise due care to prevent the overflow or spilling of fuel.
G. Any fuel spills in excess of forty four (44) gallons shall be reported to the airport manager/airport operations supervisor. All fuel spills shall be cleaned
up immediately, following guidelines as set forth by the EPA.
H. During fuel handling, no person shall use any material or device which is likely to cause a static spark within fifty feet (50') of such aircraft or fuel truck.
I. Where there has been a fuel spill or leak, no person shall start the engine of any aircraft in close proximity until the spill or leak has been stopped and
cleaned up. In the event of such spills or leaks, the fire department shall be notified.
J. All fueling equipment including, but not limited to, pumps and hoses shall be maintained in a safe and sound, nonleaking condition.
K. Prior to fuel transfer to storage tanks, the fuel dealer and dispensary shall conduct tests as to fuel type and signs of contamination. Furthermore, in
accordance with environmental laws, the fuel dispensary or authorized agent shall conduct daily inventory reconciliation in order to assess fuel loss. A
reconciliation log shall be maintained daily. Any fuel loss due to apparent leakage or any other reason shall be reported to the airport manager/airport
operations supervisor. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-9.10: FUEL SALES:
No person shall deliver aviation fuels or lubricants to, or dispense such fuel from, at, or upon the airport without written approval from the city council. For
the right, privilege and concession of making deliveries of all types of aviation fuels and lubricants, and other fuels, to any person or location at or upon the
airport, or to a bulk storage plant of an oil company on the airport, there is levied against such individual or firm a gallonage charge, which will be
established by resolution of the city council, for each gallon so delivered. No fuel shall be stored anywhere on the airport except in tanks as may be
approved by the fire department. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 106/636
Chapter Article X
INSURANCE
4-10.05: LIABILITY:
The privileges of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof. To the fullest
extent permitted by law the city, its agents, and/or employees shall not be liable for claims, damages, losses and expenses including, but not limited to,
attorney fees arising out of, resulting from or in any manner related to loss, incident or mishap of any nature whatsoever, and/or from any cause
whatsoever to individual, aircraft or property, which occurs at the airport. Such indemnification shall include loss or expense attributable to bodily injury,
sickness, death or disease or any injury to or destruction of tangible property including the loss of use resulting therefrom regardless of whether or not it is
caused in part by a party indemnified hereunder.
No person, firm or corporation shall maintain a local based aircraft at the airport unless such proprietor has filed with the airport manager/airport operations
supervisor, and kept in current effect, a certificate of public liability insurance with the coverage set by the risk manager of the city of Porterville. This article
shall apply to all airport users.
In order to protect the city, its agents, officers, and employees against all claims and liability for death, injury, loss, and damage as a result of use and
operations on the airport, lessee shall name the city as additional insured on the aircraft insurance policy or policies. Such insurance for additional insured
shall apply as primary insurance and any other insurance maintained by airport management shall be excess.
Provided coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, reduced in coverage or otherwise materially changed except after thirty (30) days' prior
written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, has been provided to airport management. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-10.10: ROUTINE MAINTENANCE:
The city conducts routine maintenance and contracts for special events, construction and various airport improvement projects with certain equipment and
machinery and because of these ongoing occurrences cannot fully protect aircraft or person using the airport facility from damage or injury to persons
and/or property arising from dust, debris, vehicle equipment operation or the related condition of the facility. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-10.15: CITY LIABILITY:
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the tenant and other persons on premises shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its agents and
employees from and against all claims, demands, damages, debts, liabilities, obligations, costs, expenses, liens and actions or causes of actions of any
kind whatsoever resulting from the activities including, but not limited to, foreign object damage, collision, equipment or vehicles, closure of gates, access,
runway or ramp facilities or any other circumstances whatsoever. Tenant's indemnification to defend and hold harmless relative to city, its agents and
employees, shall extend as well to attorney fees arising out of or resulting from any incident which occurs on the premises. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article XI
ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES
4-11.05: RUNWAY:
No person shall land, take off, taxi, or otherwise operate any aircraft on, at, or from, the Porterville municipal airport when he/she knows such aircraft is not
operating properly, or is equipped with any part or safety device which is defective or unsafe. Deviations from this restriction shall only be permitted by the
issuance of a ferry permit by the FAA. Nor shall any aircraft be operated on or at the airport, or on any runway thereof, when the airport or runway has
been closed to traffic by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor or other legal authority, and such closure has been indicated by the placement
of an "X" at each end of the closed runway. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-11.10: SAFETY:
No person shall operate any aircraft (or vehicle) on, at, or in the vicinity of the Porterville municipal airport in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons or property, whether his own or that of others. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-11.15: STUNTS:
No person shall engage in the performance of any aerobatics, stunt, maneuver not necessary to a normal takeoff, landing, normal turn or level flight of the
aircraft over or within one mile of the exterior boundaries of the airport, except for FAA approved airshows. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-11.20: BUSINESS PERMITS:
No person shall engage in the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or services at or upon the airport without first having complied with chapter 15,
"Licenses And Business Regulations", of this code. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-11.25: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 107/636
No person shall commit any disorderly, obscene, indecent or unlawful act or commit any nuisance on the airport. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-11.30: INTOXICATING LIQUORS/ILLICIT DRUG USE:
No person shall drink any intoxicating liquors upon any portion of the airport open to the public, except in a restaurant or other place designated and
licensed for on-sale liquor dispensing, or in an area protected by the right to privacy.
No person shall become intoxicated or use habit forming and/or illicit drugs on any portion of the airport nor shall any person under the influence enter
upon or loiter on or about the airport property. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-11.35: MODEL AND RADIO CONTROLLED AIRCRAFT:
No model or radio controlled aircraft will be allowed on or above Porterville municipal airport property nor on any city property adjacent to the Porterville
municipal airport nor any property within the city of Porterville that is under or near the pattern for aircraft or air vehicles at the Porterville municipal airport.
(Ord. 1755, 6-2-2009)
Chapter Article XII
SPECIAL EVENTS
4-12.00: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person or organization shall hold or cause to be held any community civic event utilizing airport facilities, involving the assembly of more than ten (10)
aircraft and/or thirty (30) people, outside of normal prescribed airport operations, without first obtaining a community civic event permit from the city. (Ord.
1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-12.05: APPLICATION:
An applicant for a community civic event shall submit an application to the city council. Such application shall include the name and address of the
sponsoring organization, those principal persons involved, the scope and extent of the proposed event, and the number of persons and/or aircraft
anticipated to attend. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-12.10: EVALUATION:
Applications for a community civic event shall be evaluated on the basis of relative merit, compatibility with airport operations, anticipated benefit to the
airport, the public, and the city of Porterville, and the compatibility with allowed uses for city and airport property. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-12.15: LIABILITY EXPOSURE:
No application for an airport special events permit shall be approved which unduly creates additional hazard or liability exposure to the public, the airport,
or the city of Porterville. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-12.20: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
Each applicant for an airport special events permit shall provide adequate liability insurance in a form and by an underwriter approved by the state of
California, to those minimum limits as specified by the city. Said insurance shall include coverage for liability and property damage, and insurance against
liability for personal injury including accidental death, as well as liability for property damage which may arise in any way during the term of the permit.
Such insurance shall remain in effect during that period of time of the event as specified in the special events permit. Each policy covering the special
event on the airport shall name the city of Porterville as an additional primary insured without offset to the city's own liability insurance. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-
20-2004)
4-12.25: CROWD CONTROL/OPERATIONS:
A. Each applicant for an airport special events permit who proposes to involve more than thirty (30) persons outside of normal airport operations for said
event shall submit a crowd control/operations plan to the airport manager/airport operations supervisor for review and approval. Such plan shall
include, but not be limited to, provisions for the following as pertains to the proposed event:
1. Vehicle parking.
2. Transient (spectator) aircraft parking.
3. Participant aircraft parking.
4. Static display area.
5. Spectator area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 108/636
6. Crowd line.
7. Participant aircraft pattern and limitations.
8. Concession areas.
9. Public accommodations (restrooms, first aid, etc.).
10. Tactical communications.
11. Additional aircraft communications.
12. Ground handling of aircraft and vehicles.
13. Personnel training and coordination.
14. Public address and communication.
B. The airport manager/airport operations supervisor may waive, approve, or require additional information or provision for any of the elements above,
based upon the scope of the proposed event. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article XIII
APPEALS PROCESS
4-13.05: VIOLATIONS OF REGULATIONS:
Violations of the regulations contained herein and administered by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor may result in a notice of violation or
an order to cease. Any notice or order so levied may be appealed.
A. The person receiving the notice of violation or order to cease may appeal, in writing, within ten (10) working days to the airport manager/airport
operations supervisor.
B. Within ten (10) days after the receipt of the appeal by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor the time and place for a meeting will be set to
be held within thirty (30) days. Further actions by the airport manager/airport operations supervisor will be stayed (where the violation is not a hazard)
pending the meeting. The person requesting the appeal shall have the right of the presence of any supporting person he chooses at the meeting. The
decision reached shall be binding, subject to appeal.
C. If the party does not agree with the decision from the meeting, he may appeal to the city council for final determination. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article XIV
SEVERABILITY
4-14.05: SEVERABILITY:
Should any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter be held invalid or unconstitutional for any reasons, such decision shall
not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each article, section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase, regardless of the fact that any one or more articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be
declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article XV
APPENDIX A, TRAFFIC PATTERN
4-15.05: PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT. RUNWAY 30:
A. Enter pattern in level flight, abeam midpoint of runway, at pattern altitude. Light aircraft with pattern speed under one hundred twenty five (125) knots
use inner pattern at altitude of one thousand feet (1,000') AGL (above ground level = 1,444 feet indicated altitude).
B. Maintain pattern altitude until abeam approach end of landing runway, on downwind leg.
C. Complete turn to final at least one-fourth (1/4) mile from end of runway.
D. Continue straight ahead until beyond departure end of runway.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 109/636
E. If remaining in traffic pattern, commence turn to crosswind leg two thousand feet (2,000') beyond the departure end of the runway at the designated
marker, at pattern altitude.
F. If departing traffic pattern, continue straight out, or exit with a forty five degree (45°) left turn beyond the departure end of the runway, after reaching
pattern altitude.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
4-15.10: PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT, RUNWAY 12:
A. Enter pattern in level flight, abeam midpoint of runway, at pattern altitude. Light aircraft with pattern speed under one hundred twenty five (125) knots,
use inner pattern at altitude of one thousand feet (1,000') AGL (above ground level = 1,444 feet indicated altitude).
B. Maintain pattern altitude until abeam approach end of landing runway, on downwind leg.
C. Complete turn to final at least one-fourth (1/4) mile from end of runway.
D. Continue straight ahead until beyond departure end of runway.
E. If remaining in traffic pattern, commence turn to crosswind leg two thousand feet (2,000') beyond the departure end of the runway at the designated
marker, at pattern altitude.
F. If departing traffic pattern, continue straight out, or exit with a forty five degree (45°) left turn beyond the departure end of the runway, after reaching
pattern altitude.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter Article XVI
FORMS
4-16.05: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT FORMS:
City Of Porterville
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
General Information Form
Name/Company Name:
Address:
Phone Number:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 110/636
Emergency Contact:
Phone Number:
Brief Description Of Airport Business:
Insurance Co.:
Description Of Aircraft:
Hangar Lease Lot Number:
PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
AIRCRAFT PARKING AND TIE-DOWN AGREEMENT
(MONTHLY BASIS)
NAME
ADDRESS
AIRCRAFT REGISTRATION NUMBER
OWNER OF AIRCRAFT IF OTHER THAN ABOVE
AIRCRAFT DESCRIPTION: COLOR NO. OF ENGINES
MANUFACTURER MODEL
YEAR GROSS WEIGHT
INSURANCE POLICY
The Undersigned:
1. Understands this agreement extends the right to park and/or tie-down one aircraft in a designated space at the Porterville Municipal Airport and conveys
no other right or interest.
2. Agrees to pay monthly parking and tie-down fees as specified in this agreement.
3. Understands that the monthly fees are $ for single engine aircraft and $ for twin engine aircraft at the time of the signing of this agreement
and that the City Council of the City of Porterville may, at any time, adjust the fees at their discretion.
4. Understands that he/she will be billed each month in advance for parking/tie-down fees and that all fees unpaid after one month of the billing date will be
charged interest at a rate of one percent (1%) per month on any unpaid balance.
5. Agrees to comply with all codes, ordinances and rules of operation applicable to Porterville Municipal Airport.
6. Agrees to indemnify, defend and save harmless the City, its agents, officers, and employees, and each of them, from any and all losses, costs,
expenses, claims, liabilities, actions, or damages, including liability for injuries to person or persons, or damage to property of third persons, arising out of
or in any way connected with the above described aircraft.
7. Agrees, in the event the City has to resort to legal action to enforce payment under this agreement, to pay all court costs including reasonable attorney
fees, of such action.
8. Agrees that the fees due under this agreement shall be due on the day of , and the first of each calendar month thereafter.
AIRCRAFT OWNER/AGENT:
SIGNATURE
DATE
APPROVED FOR PORTERVILLE MUNICIPAL AIRPORT:
SIGNATURE TITLE
DATE NOTICE OF VIOLATION
CITY OF PORTERVILLE - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Name
Address
Phone ( )
VIOLATION
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 111/636
Your actions have been found to conflict with Article of the Rules and Regulations for the Porterville Municipal Airport. You are hereby formally
ordered to cease any and all actions conflicting with the established Rules and Regulations.
Airport users who feel they have a compelling, legitimate reason to dispute a violation notice or a notice to cease may follow the Appeals Procedure set
forth in Article XIII of the Rules and Regulations for the Porterville Municipal Airport.
Noncompliance with an official NOTICE OF VIOLATION may result in termination of lease agreement or the loss of Airport privileges.
Signed Date
Designated City Officer Date City of Porterville
REPORT OF AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT
1. DATE OF ACCIDENT TIME A.M. ? P.M. ?
(Month) (Date)
2. Location of Accident
3. Operator (Pilot)
(Name) (Telephone Number)
(Number and Street, Apartment No., etc.)
(City, State, Zip Code)
4. Owner (if different)
(Name) (Telephone Number)
(Number and Street, Apartment No., etc.)
(City, State, Zip Code)
5. Type of Aircraft
(Manufacturer)(Model) (Identification No.)
6. Total Number of Persons on Board Aircraft
7. (Name, Address, Extent of Injuries to Occupants and/or Persons on the ground. Use additional sheets if number exceeds space.)
?
Crew
Passenger
Non-Occupant
Fatal
Serious
Minor
None
8. Damage to Property (Other than that of Owner, Operator or Passenger, or in their care, custody or control). Describe fully, and give best estimate of
dollar cost. Use additional sheets if necessary.
9. Was a Report made to Any of the Following Agencies:
Federal Aviation Administration Yes ? No ?
National Transportation Safety Board Yes ? No ?
Law Enforcement Agency Yes ? No ?
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 112/636
If such a report was made, to whom and at what address:
10. Was there, at the time of the accident, an Aircraft Liability Policy?
Yes ? No ?
or Bond? Yes ? No ?
or any other form of Liability Protections covering the aircraft operation?
Yes ? No ?
or have you registered with the Department of Aeronautics as a Self-Insurer?
Yes ? No ?
11. If answer to 10 was Yes, furnish the following data on Insurer or Bonding firm which issued your Policy or Bond to cover liability for damages or injury
to others:
Complete name and address of Company
Policy Number Period of Coverage
(from) (to)
Policy issued to
(named individual or firm)
12. Report made by (print)
(Name)
(Number and Street)
(City, State, Zip Code)
(Telephone Number)
(Signature)
REMARKS or Additional Information:
Pilot Certificate Number
Ratings Total Flying Time
Weather/Visibility Conditions at time of accident:
Official Capacity, or relationship to the Operator or Owner
CITY OF PORTERVILLE
MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
After-Hours Tie-Down Fees
Name
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 113/636
Address
Phone Number ( )
Description of Aircraft
Manufacturer
Model/Year
No. of Engines
Aircraft Number
Overnight Tie-Down Fees:
$2/night (single engine)
$2.50/night (twin engine)
I agree to comply with all codes, ordinances and rules of operation applicable to Porterville Municipal Airport.
I agree not to hold the City and its employees liable for any losses, costs, expenses, claims, liabilities, actions, or damages in any way connected with the
above described aircraft.
(Ord. 1652 § B, 4-20-2004)
Chapter 4A
AMBULANCES
Chapter
AMBULANCES
4A-1: AMBULANCE OPERATION WITHIN CITY LIMITS:
A. Ambulance operation in the city applies only to those ambulance companies who routinely do business within the city, except those ambulance
companies who deliver patients to their homes or medical facilities within the city from points outside the city.
B. This chapter does not pertain to those ambulance services who may be called to assist with transportation from medical facilities in emergency
situations. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-2: CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE FOR AMBULANCE REQUIRED:
A. No person shall engage in the business of operating an ambulance or ambulances for profit on a for hire basis within the city without first obtaining a
certificate of public convenience, as hereinafter provided, from the fire chief, and this certificate shall be in addition to any business license required by
this code. This chapter shall not apply in the event of a "disaster" as defined by section 9-2 of this code.
B. A certificate of public convenience is not needed when an ambulance company licensed by the state is contracted to handle special events only. A
"special event" is defined as a sporting event, entertainment event or any other activity where an ambulance may be needed. This chapter does not
waive the necessity of any ambulance company handling special events within the city from obtaining a city business license. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-
1996)
4A-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE:
Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of public convenience shall make application therefor on forms available from the office of the fire chief. Each
application shall be accompanied by a policy of insurance in the amount provided for by this chapter. The application shall include the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 114/636
A. A copy of the ambulance license issued by the California highway patrol.
B. The number of ambulances actually owned and/or leased, and the number of ambulances actually operated by such applicant on the date of
application, if any.
C. A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, engine and serial numbers, state motor vehicle license number, and
the number of the emergency vehicle permit issued by the California highway patrol.
D. The business address and a description of the premises at and from which it is proposed to maintain such ambulances.
E. A description of the proposed color scheme, insignia, trade style and any other distinguishing characteristics of the proposed ambulance design.
F. Submittal of two (2) colored photographs of each ambulance in operation or additional ambulance henceforth, and that one colored photograph expose
the rear left of the ambulance and one expose the right front of the ambulance.
G. An application fee shall be submitted with each application. The application fee shall be in addition to any business license fee which the applicant shall
be required to pay. The amount of said application fee shall be fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-5: INVESTIGATION:
Before any application is acted upon, the fire chief shall cause an investigation to determine if the applicants, the drivers and the attendants are properly
licensed by the California highway patrol. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-6: NOTICE OF DECISION:
The fire chief shall give the applicant written notice of decision to grant or deny a certificate of public convenience and shall state the reasons for the
decision within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-8: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE:
A. A certificate of public convenience may be revoked pursuant to subsection B of this section on the following grounds:
1. The certificate holder, knowingly and after written notice from the fire chief, fails to operate his business in accordance to the provisions of this
chapter and any and all state and federal laws applicable to the ambulance business.
2. The ambulance license is suspended or revoked or disciplinary action is taken against said license holder by the California highway patrol.
3. The certificate holder shall abandon its operation of the ambulance business for a period of thirty (30) days.
Acts of God and other acts beyond the control of the certificate holder which cause abandonment or limitation of service shall not be considered an
abandonment within the meaning of this chapter.
B. No suspension or revocation shall be made effective until a hearing has been held by the fire chief, unless the fire chief finds there is a threat to the
general public by continued operation of such licensee, in which case suspension shall be immediate. The certificate holder shall have not less than ten
(10) days' notice of the hearing by registered mail or personal service.
C. No person who has had their ambulance license revoked pursuant to this chapter shall be eligible to reapply before the expiration of one year from the
date of revocation. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-9: DISPOSITION AND ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE AFTER REVOCATION:
Upon the conclusion of a hearing pursuant to subsection 4A-8B of this chapter, the fire chief may, based upon his findings, terminate such suspension and
restore the certificate, or continue such suspension for a time so specified, or in the alternative revoke such certificate. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-11: SURRENDER OF CERTIFICATE:
Whenever a certificate has been suspended or revoked, the owner of the ambulance for which such certificate was issued shall forthwith surrender such
certificate to the fire chief, and the operation of such ambulance shall cease. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-14: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
No certificate of public convenience shall be issued unless there is on file with the city an insurance policy approved by the city's insurance carrier or
insurance administrator, whereby the owner and the driver of each of the vehicles described in said certificate are insured against liability or damage to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 115/636
property and for injury to or death of any person resulting from the ownership, operation or other uses thereof. Said policy shall be in a sum of not less
than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for personal injury or death of any one person in any single accident and five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury or death of more than one person in any single accident, and the limits on each such vehicle shall be not less than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for damage to or destruction of property in any single accident. The insurance policy shall contain an
endorsement providing that the city is named as an additional insured party and that said policy of insurance will not be canceled until notice in writing
shall have been given to the city of Porterville, addressed to the city clerk, 291 North Main Street, Porterville, CA 98257, at least thirty (30) days prior to the
cancellation becoming effective. The insurance policy must be issued by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in the state. Said
policy shall further provide that there shall be a continuing liability thereon, notwithstanding any recovery on said policy. If, at any time, said insurance
policy shall be canceled by the company issuing the same, or the authority of said company to do business in the state shall be revoked, the certificate
holder shall replace said policy with another policy approved as above prior to the expiration date of cancellation of said policy. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-
1996)
4A-15: AMBULANCE RATES:
Any holder of a certificate of public convenience pursuant hereto shall, before commencing service in the city, file with the fire chief and with the city clerk a
schedule of rates for ambulance services provided. Further, any change in rates by any certificate holder shall not be effective until a period of thirty (30)
days after such notice had been filed. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-16: AMBULANCE AND RECORDS INSPECTION:
The fire chief or his authorized representative may inspect ambulances used for emergency services under this chapter, the personnel records of the
drivers and attendants, and any records pertaining to the operation of ambulances, including, but not limited to, preventative maintenance and records of
calls. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-16.1: AMBULANCE CALL ROTATION:
The fire chief or his authorized representative may assign the number of places in the normal rotation of calls for ambulance service from the city's
communication service based upon the number of staffed ambulances maintained by the ambulance company. This decision may be reviewed on a month
to month basis and, in making his decisions, the fire chief or his representative shall consider any outages of service that are beyond an amount
reasonable for maintenance of the vehicles. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-17: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
Any person who is dissatisfied with or has a complaint with any ambulance company holding a certificate should make that complaint known to the fire
chief, who shall notify the city council. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
4A-18: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1537 § B17, 8-6-1996)
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter ARTICLE I
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
5-1.0: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ALTERED ANIMAL: Any animal that has been surgically altered (spayed/neutered) or by means of written proof from a licensed veterinarian stating that
the animal does not possess the capability of reproduction.
AT LARGE: Any animal that is off the premises of its owner and not under restraint by leash or chain, or which is wandering or running freely on public
property or property belonging to a person not the owner or person in control of the animal and without supervision, accompaniment, and adequate
restraint.
ATTACK: Any unprovoked aggressive behavior toward a person or animal. Aggressive behavior in defense of property or territory of the owner shall
constitute an attack unless the dog or other animal is securely contained within an enclosure sufficient to prevent physical contact with a person or animal
outside such enclosure.
COMPETITION CAT: Any show cat (also known as a purebred cat or pedigreed cat) that is recognized by the Cat Fanciers' Association and/or the
International Cat Association and meets the following requirements:
A. The owner or custodian of the cat is a member of a purebred cat breed club, approved by the department, that encourages its members to be
owners and breeders of cats who work together to promote the preservation of pedigreed cats and the health and welfare of domestic cats.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 116/636
B. Maintains a certified pedigree registry.
C. Has participated in a cat show in the last three hundred sixty five (365) days which promotes pedigreed cats.
D. The owner or custodian of the cat is a member of a purebred cat breed club, approved by the department, which maintains and enforces a code of
ethics for cat breeding that includes restrictions from breeding cats with genetic defects and life threatening health problems that commonly threaten
the breed.
COMPETITION DOG: Any animal which is used to show, to compete, or to breed which is of a breed recognized by the American Kennel Club, United
Kennel Club, or American Dog Breeders Association and meets the following requirements:
A. The dog has competed in at least one dog show or sporting competition sanctioned by the national registry or approved by the department within the
last three hundred sixty five (365) days.
B. Maintains a certified pedigree registry.
C. The dog has earned a confirmation, obedience, agility, carting, herding, protection, rally, sporting, working, or other title from a purebred dog registry
or dog sport association.
D. The owner or custodian of the dog is a member of a purebred dog breed club, approved by the department, which maintains and enforces a code of
ethics for dog breeding that includes restrictions from breeding dogs with genetic defects and life threatening health problems that commonly
threaten the breed.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL: A dog or other animal which has attacked, bitten or injured any human being or other animal without reasonable provocation, or
which has been so declared pursuant to this chapter, or under the facts and circumstances has acted in a threatening manner toward any human being or
other animal or has displayed characteristics of being trained for fighting, or there is other evidence to show such training or fighting.
FIELD OFFICER: Any officer of the police department or other employee of the city designated to enforce this chapter.
LICENSABLE ANIMAL: A domestic dog. Other domestic pets, such as cats, birds or aquarium fish, are not required to obtain a license.
OWNER, OR HANDLER: Any person, firm or corporation owning, harboring, having an interest in, or having control, custody or possession of an animal.
In the case of an animal which is owned by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall constitute the "owner" of such animal for the purposes of this
chapter.
SERVICE ANIMAL: Any animal which shall include, but not be limited to, assistance dogs, guide dogs, signal dogs, police dogs, search and rescue
animals, or other service animals as defined by applicable state or federal law, or is being trained for such use.
UNALTERED ANIMAL: Any animal capable of reproduction. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-1.1: ANIMAL CONTROL UNIT:
Supervision of the animal control unit shall be delegated to any supervisor of the police department at the direction of the chief of police and/or his/her
designee. The police department shall carry out the duties of animal control.
A. Any city employee acting in the capacity of animal control duties shall have the following powers:
1. To enforce the provisions of this chapter and state laws relating to the care, treatment, impounding and destruction of animals. These provisions will
also encompass the adoption of animals and/or safe return of animals to their rightful owner.
2. The chief of police may formulate rules and regulations in conformity with, and for the purposes of carrying out, this chapter.
B. The chief of police or his designee shall have authority to determine whether any animal has engaged in the behaviors, or exhibits any of the
characteristics, of a dangerous animal. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-1.2: RECORDS:
The police department shall keep a record of every animal impounded pursuant to this chapter which shall include a description of the animal, the date of
receipt, the date and manner of disposal, the name of the person redeeming or purchasing, and the fees, charges and proceeds of sales received on
account of said animal, and any additional records as may be required. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-1.3: ANIMAL SHELTER:
There shall be provided by the police department a suitable building, enclosure, or other support facility to keep and safely hold all animals impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and said building, enclosure or other support facility shall be known and designated as the "shelter". (Ord. 1824,
6-16-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 117/636
5-1.4: DOG PARKS:
There may be provided by the city certain defined open spaces for the purposes of allowing dogs to run freely in a specified enclosed area, and said
enclosed open space areas shall be known and designated as "dog parks". Dog parks shall be regulated by rules to be adopted by the city manager
and/or his/her designee. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-1.5: IMPOUNDING/COLLECTION OF ANIMALS:
The police department may pick up, impound and safely keep any animal that is found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter within the
incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-1.6: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES:
Any police department employees performing animal control duties shall be authorized to enter upon any premises for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-1.7: INTERFERENCE WITH DUTIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with police department employees engaged in the performance of animal control duties. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-
2015)
Chapter ARTICLE II
ARTICLE II. LICENSABLE ANIMALS
5-2.1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every owner of a licensable animal within the city shall secure a license from a police department facility for each licensable animal within the time limits
set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to secure said license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A license need not
be secured for a licensable animal which is brought into the city by its visiting owner or for the purpose of being entered in a show or exhibition, provided
that the owner of such animal provides proof of current license and/or current rabies vaccination from the jurisdiction of origin, and the animal is removed
from the city limits no more than thirty (30) days after entry. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.2: MANDATORY SPAY/NEUTER REQUIREMENT:
It has been shown that mandatory spaying/neutering proves to be effective in reducing the population of animals in cities. By requiring mandatory
spaying/neutering, the police department is working to reduce the number of euthanizations conducted in the city of Porterville each year.
Spaying/neutering has been shown to be effective in reducing animals running at large and also reduces aggressive behavior in animals. As an additional
benefit, this requirement will cut costs to the community in managing the pet population.
A. Requirement For Unaltered Animals: No person may keep, own or harbor an unaltered dog over four (4) months of age within the city limits, unless an
unaltered license has been properly obtained. An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog must have the animal spayed or neutered or obtain an
unaltered license in accordance with the exceptions to the spay/neuter requirements as described in subsection B of this section.
B. Unaltered Animal License: An owner or custodian of an unaltered dog over the age of four (4) months must obtain an annual unaltered animal license.
The license shall be issued only if the department has determined that all of the following conditions have been met:
1. The owner or custodian has submitted the required application for the license and the applicable fees for the license have been paid in accordance
with the fee schedule as set by resolution of the city council.
2. The animal meets one or more of the following exemptions:
a. An animal unable to be spayed/neutered without a high likelihood of suffering serious bodily harm or death due to age or infirmity, which is
confirmed in writing from a licensed veterinarian.
b. A competition animal as defined in this chapter.
c. A service animal which shall include, but not be limited to, assistance dogs, guide dogs, signal dogs, police dogs, search and rescue animals, or
other service animals as defined by applicable state or federal law, or is being trained for such use.
d. An animal associated with a licensed kennel within the city for breeding purposes. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.3: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND TAG:
An application for a license required by this chapter shall be filed with the police department. Upon payment of the required fee and upon compliance with
the other requirements of this chapter, a license shall be issued. The application shall contain a description of the animal including age, sex, color, and
breed of the animal, and the name and address of the owner. The license shall contain a serial number and such other information as the police
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 118/636
department may determine. The police department shall keep a copy of the application on file. With each license issued, the police department shall also
issue a tag that shall bear the words "City of Porterville" and the serial number on the animal license. The tag shall be securely worn by the animal for
which the license was issued. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.4: TIME LIMITS:
A. An owner of a licensable animal shall secure a license for the animal within thirty (30) days after he/she acquires ownership of the animal. However, if a
licensable animal is less than four (4) months of age when the owner acquires it, the owner shall secure a license for the animal within ten (10) days
after the animal becomes four (4) months of age.
B. Any person who enters the city and resides in the city for a period of thirty (30) days or more, and who has brought a licensable animal with him/her
from outside the city, shall secure a license for the animal within thirty (30) days after the person first enters the city. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.5: VACCINATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
A. A license for an animal shall not be issued unless the owner of the animal presents a certificate signed by a veterinarian or other professional as
authorized pursuant to applicable state law showing that said animal has been vaccinated against rabies. The certificate shall indicate that the period of
time elapsing from the date of the vaccination to the date of expiration of the license does not exceed thirty six (36) months in the case of vaccination
with live virus rabies vaccine or eighteen (18) months in the case of vaccination with killed virus rabies vaccine, as those types of vaccines are defined
in section 2606 et seq., of chapter 17 of the California code of regulations. During any period when the city is designated as a rabies area pursuant to
sections 121575 - 121710 of the Health And Safety Code of the state of California, no killed virus vaccine shall be used other than a vaccine of bovine
nerve tissue origin.
B. Every duly licensed veterinarian or other authorized professional, after vaccinating any animal owned by a resident of the city of Porterville, shall sign a
certificate containing the following information pursuant to sections 121575 - 122374 of the Health And Safety Code:
1. The type of vaccination used.
2. The date of the vaccination.
3. The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated animal.
4. The serial number of the vaccination tag issued.
5. The name and address of the owner of the animal.
C. The veterinarian or other authorized professional shall immediately present the original vaccination certificate to the owner of the animal, and shall
deliver the duplicate copy to the police department. The veterinarian or other authorized professional shall keep a copy. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.6: TERM OF LICENSE:
Animal licenses shall be issued for all licensable animals older than four (4) months of age at intervals not less than one year and not more than three (3)
years. Commencing on the first day of the month after a license period lapses, the police department shall collect a delinquent penalty, in addition to the
regular license fee, before issuing any license. The delinquent penalty shall be in an amount equal to the regular license fee as set forth in the fee
schedule. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.7: LICENSE FEES:
The license fee for each licensable animal shall be established by a resolution of the city council as adopted in a fee schedule. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.8: EXEMPTION; SERVICE OR ASSISTANCE ANIMALS:
Any other provision of this chapter notwithstanding, it shall be at the discretion of the police department regarding whether or not there will be a charge for
the annual licensing of a service animal as described by this chapter. Proof of such use or training shall be provided by the applicant at the time of license
application in a form satisfactory to the police department, pursuant to sections 365.5 and 365.7 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.9: EXTENSION OF TIME; ANIMALS TOO ILL TO BE VACCINATED:
If a licensable animal is too ill to be vaccinated against rabies at the time that the time limits set forth in this chapter expire, then the date for securing the
license is extended until thirty (30) days after the date on which the animal is well enough to be vaccinated, and no delinquent penalties shall be charged
for issuance of the license during said thirty (30) day period. However, an extension of time shall not be granted pursuant to this section unless the
application for the license is accompanied by a certificate signed by a veterinarian setting forth facts which show that the licensable animal comes within
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.10: REPLACING LOST OR STOLEN TAGS:
Whenever a tag issued for the current period has been stolen or lost, the owner of the animal for which the tag was issued may, upon the payment of a fee
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 119/636
to the police department, receive a duplicate tag. The fee for a duplicate tag shall be set by resolution of the city council as adopted in a fee schedule.
(Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.11: LICENSE TRANSFERABLE:
The license and tag issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred when the ownership of the animal is transferred. The new owner or the previous
owner of the animal shall notify the police department in writing of the change in ownership of the animal and the name and address of the new owner. If
such written notice is not given, the police department shall send all required notices concerning said animal to the person whose name and address are
on file with the police department. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.12: AFFIXING LICENSE TAG:
It shall be unlawful to possess a licensable animal in the city limits without the tag issued pursuant to this chapter being securely affixed to the animal by
means of a collar, harness, or other suitable device. It shall be unlawful for any person to affix the tag required by this chapter to any animal except the
animal for which it was issued and it shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow the animal to wear a tag other than the tag issued for the current
period. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.13: IMPOUNDING BITING OR ATTACKING ANIMALS:
A. The police department shall have the power to summarily and immediately impound any animal where there is evidence it has attacked, bitten, or
injured any human being or other animal, or where there is evidence that an animal has acted in a threatening manner toward any human being, has
exhibited characteristics of being trained for fighting or attacking, or there is other evidence to show such training or fighting, pending any court
proceeding or animal license or animal permit revocation proceeding arising from the attack, bite, or injury, or pending a hearing pursuant to sections 5-
3.11 and 5-3.12 of this chapter. The police department may enter and inspect private property to enforce the provisions of this section. Failure to
surrender to the police department upon demand an animal which is being impounded pursuant to this section is a misdemeanor. The police
department shall also, as soon as reasonably possible, notify the bite victim of the rabies vaccination status of the biting animal.
An animal wearing a current license tag, impounded pursuant to the authority of this chapter, shall be returned to the owner or custodian as provided by
this chapter when it is no longer required as evidence or considered to be vicious by the police department. Once the owner is notified the animal is to
be returned, he/she has six (6) business days, not including the date of notification, to retrieve the animal.
An animal not wearing a license tag, impounded pursuant to the authority of this chapter may be destroyed in accordance with applicable state and
federal laws, if within six (6) business days after being impounded, not including the date of impoundment, the owner has failed to make application to
redeem the animal. If, within six (6) business days after being impounded, not including the date of impoundment, the owner has applied to redeem the
animal, then the animal shall be returned to the owner as provided by this chapter, or when it is no longer required as evidence or considered to be
vicious by the police department, and the owner has also satisfied all licensing requirements.
B. In lieu of impound, the police department may permit the animal to be confined at the owner's or custodian's expense in a licensed kennel or veterinary
facility approved by the police department, or at the owner's or custodian's residence, provided that the owner or custodian:
1. Shall not remove the animal from the kennel or veterinary facility without the prior written approval of the police department.
2. Shall make the animal available for observation and inspection by the police department.
C. The police department may have an animal impounded or confined as provided in subsection A or B of this section, permanently identified by means of
photo identification prior to release from impound or confinement. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.14: NOTICE TO OWNER OF LICENSED ANIMAL:
Within two (2) days after an animal which is wearing a license tag is impounded, the police department shall contact the owner by phone or in person at
the address shown on the application for the license on file, and advise the owner of the procedure whereby he/she may apply to regain custody of the
animal. If the owner cannot be contacted within the first two (2) days of impoundment, the police department shall mail a written notice of the impoundment
to the mailing address on file for the owner. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.15: REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A. The owner of any animal impounded, other than pursuant to this chapter, may redeem the animal at any time prior to its adoption, transfer to an animal
rescue, or destruction. The owner desiring to redeem an animal shall deliver to the police department an application for redemption and a statement in
a form prescribed by the police department which shall contain a description of the animal to be redeemed, the name and address of the owner, and
the statement that he or she is the owner of the animal. The police department shall issue to the owner a written statement containing the name and
address of the owner, a description of the animal redeemed, the date on which the animal was impounded, and the accrued fees to be paid by owner,
and said statement shall serve as a certificate of redemption and receipt for the fees paid.
B. The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter may redeem the animal pursuant to subsection A of this section only after seventy two
(72) hours from impoundment if he or she has not received notice that the animal has been declared a dangerous animal and of the right to a hearing
pursuant to this chapter or if, after a hearing, an order is made to return the animal to the owner. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015; Ord. 1833, 6-21-2016)
5-2.16: FEES FOR IMPOUNDING AND KEEPING LICENSABLE ANIMALS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 120/636
The owner of an animal which has been impounded shall pay to the police department an impounding fee and shall also pay a fee for keeping said animal
for each day, or portion thereof, which said animal has been impounded unless the amount required to keep the animal is higher in which case the owner
shall pay the actual cost of keeping the animal. The owner may also be charged for actual costs of veterinarian fees, medications and vaccinations
associated with the care of their animal while said animal is under the care and custody of the police department. Impoundment and associated fees will
be set by resolution of the city council as adopted in a fee schedule. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.17: ADOPTION, RESCUE, AND/OR DESTRUCTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
A. Unless an animal has been claimed within seventy two (72) hours after being impounded, or within ten (10) days for a licensed animal, not including the
date of impoundment, or unless it is being held for evidence in a hearing pursuant to sections 5-3.11 through 5-3.13 of this chapter, it may be made
available for adoption or rescue by the police department to a person other than the owner. No animal which has been declared a dangerous animal
pursuant to sections 5-3.11 through 5-3.13 of this chapter shall be made available for adoption or rescue pursuant to this section nor shall any animal
which has been impounded pursuant to section 5-2.13 of this article and subsequently found not dangerous but improperly trained, handled, or
maintained be made available for adoption or rescue.
B. An animal may be humanely destroyed in accordance with state laws by the police department if within seventy two (72) hours of impoundment, or
within ten (10) days for a licensed animal, not including the date of impoundment, the owner has failed to make an application to claim the animal.
C. All animals coming into the jurisdiction of the police department animal control unit shall be screened for a license tag, microchip, or any other means of
locating the owner. After all efforts have been made to locate the owner, the animal will be handled pursuant to subsections A and B of this section.
D. All animals voluntarily surrendered by their owner will be handled in accordance with subsections A and B of this section.
E. When an animal is adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the police department shall deliver to the person adopting said animal a contract
containing a description of the animal, the date of transfer, and the terms of the adoption and the amount of fees paid. Upon the proper adoption of an
animal, the previous owner of the animal shall thereafter be barred from all rights to recover the animal. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015; Ord. 1833, 6-21-2016)
5-2.18: LICENSING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS:
The police department shall not release any licensable animal to its owner until such time as the owner provides proof of application for license in the
jurisdiction of their residence. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.19: REMOVAL OF TAG:
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from a licensable animal the attached license tag for the current period. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.20: DISPLAY OF TAG:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show police department employees, on request, the license certificate and/or the tag for any licensable
animal kept on the premises under their control. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.21: KEEPING DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for a person to keep an animal which has been found to be a dangerous or vicious animal pursuant to this chapter, or any other
jurisdiction. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.22: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY OR ROADWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner to allow or permit any animal to habitually or repeatedly attack, chase, molest or frighten pedestrians, cyclists, vehicles or
other users of the public rights of way or roadways. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.23: PERMITTING ANIMALS TO RUN AT LARGE:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or other person in lawful possession or control of an animal to allow or permit the animal to run at large upon any
property, public or private, except with the consent of the property owner, or in a park or other area designated specifically for such activity. Every animal
found running at large in violation of the provisions of this section may be seized and impounded and/or the responsible person may be issued a citation
for said violation. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.24: LEASH REQUIREMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or handler in lawful possession or control of a dog to walk the dog on any public place or right of way without the dog
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 121/636
being secured or tethered by a fixed length leash not to exceed six feet (6'), and the number of dogs shall not exceed the number of dogs the owner or
handler can reasonably and safely control and in no circumstance shall the number of dogs exceed three (3). (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-2.25: BARKING DOGS:
It shall be unlawful for any owner or caretaker of a dog to keep said dog in the city limits which by loud or excessive barking, howling, whining, crying,
yelping, or making any other noise disturbs the comfort, quiet, or peace of any neighborhood or any person at any time, provided the owner has been
made aware of the disturbance by the police department. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
Chapter ARTICLE III
ARTICLE III. ANIMAL KEEPING
5-3.1: KEEPING OF ANIMALS:
Animal keeping is allowed as an accessory use to a primary residential use. Animals may be kept in compliance with the following standards:
A. Residential Household Pets: Household pets such as domestic dogs, cats, birds, or other small animals ordinarily permitted inside of a dwelling and
kept only for the company and pleasure provided to the occupants shall be permitted. Chickens may be allowed within certain residential zones subject
to the conditions specified herein. Household pets shall not include horses, cows, goats, sheep or other equine, bovine, ovine or ruminant animals,
pigs, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, game birds or fowl which normally constitute an agricultural use. At no time shall the combined number of
animals kept exceed seven (7) animals. At no time shall the number of cats, dogs, or chickens exceed three (3) animals. It shall be unlawful to possess
a combination of animals kept to exceed seven (7) residential household pets.
B. Keeping Of Chickens In Residential Areas: It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within single-family residential uses any chickens, except as
follows:
1. A total of not more than three (3) chicken hens may be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary environment.
2. No part of any structure (i.e., coop) shall be located less than thirty feet (30') from any residence, other than a residence owned and occupied by the
person owning or in possession of such chickens. Further, the keeping of chickens shall not create a health or nuisance problem.
3. The permissive keeping of chickens shall be subject to the following minimum standards:
a. All chickens shall be kept in an area which is fenced so as to prevent the chickens from roaming, and such fenced area shall be wholly located
within the rear yard of the site where the chickens are kept.
b. Within the fenced area, a shelter shall be provided of sufficient size to provide cover for the chickens kept on the parcel.
c. Enclosure areas shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper housing so as to prevent overcrowding.
d. Roosters are expressly prohibited.
C. Agricultural Animals: The keeping of horses, cows, goats, sheep or other equine, bovine, ovine or ruminant animals is permitted in the AC and RR zone
districts on lots one-half (0.5) acre or greater and on lots two (2) acres or larger developed as a single-family residential use, subject to zoning
administrator approval, as long as the number of animals does not exceed one per fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of lot area. The keeping of
chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, game birds or fowl is permitted with the total number not to exceed twelve (12) birds per gross acre. The raising of
pigs is permitted in conjunction with an FFA or 4-H project for any recognized fair, the limit being one animal per student residing on the property. All
animals other than household pets shall be housed or penned at a minimum distance of thirty five feet (35') from property lines and fifty feet (50') from
any residence. All areas and structures used in conjunction with the keeping of animals other than household pets shall be maintained and cleaned so
as not to present a public hazard or nuisance.
D. Unlawful To Keep Certain Animals: Except as permitted in subsections B and C of this section, it is unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit
to be maintained bees, swine, llamas, roosters, chickens, pigeons, turkeys, pea fowl, waterfowl, ostriches and other "ratitae", or livestock on any
premises within the city. In addition, predatory, wild, or endangered animals are not allowed within the city.
E. Permitted Animal Offspring: The offspring of any permitted animal may be kept until weaned, as long as they do not exceed the total number of animals
allowed herein.
F. Keeping Of Animals For Commercial Purposes: The keeping of animals for commercial purposes shall not violate the provisions of chapter 21 of this
code, which regulates kennels, pet stores, veterinary services, and animal raising. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.2: ANIMAL CARE, CONTROL, AND SUBSISTENCE:
The following section provides the minimal requirements for the care and harboring of animals within the city limits. Nothing in this section is intended to
conflict with any provision of chapter 21 of this code.
A. Sanitary Enclosure Requirements:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 122/636
1. All premises, enclosures, or structures used, or intended to be used, for the harboring of animals must be cleaned and kept reasonably free of
debris, refuse, manure, excreta, or like material as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this section.
2. The floor of any premises, enclosure, or structure used for the keeping of animals must be smooth and tight to prevent the accumulation of water,
debris, refuse, manure, excreta, or like material. A wire floor may be used if appropriate for the type of animal being harbored and if maintained to
prevent injury to the animal.
3. Evidence of unsanitary or substandard maintenance of the premises, enclosure, or structure may include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. The accumulation of debris, refuse, manure, excreta, or other like material upon any surface within any such premises, enclosure, or structure
used, or intended to be used, for the housing of such animals;
b. Any reasonably obnoxious odor or allergen arising from any condition existing within the premises, enclosure, or structure used or intended to be
used for the housing of such animals; and
c. The presence of numerous flies or fly larvae in the vicinity.
B. Enclosure, Structure, Shading Requirements:
1. All animals must have adequate enclosures, structures, or alternate forms of shading to allow an animal maintained outdoors to:
a. Protect itself from the direct rays of the sun when the sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort; and
b. Remain dry during the rain or other wet conditions.
2. The enclosure, structure, or shading must be accessible to the animal at all times.
3. The enclosure or structure must be situated to prevent exposing the animal to:
a. Unreasonably loud noise; and/or
b. Teasing, harassment, abuse, or injury by another animal or person.
4. If the animal is confined in an enclosure or structure, the enclosure or structure must be:
a. Of adequate size inside and outside the enclosure or structure to allow the animal to stand, sit, turn around freely, or lie down in a normal position,
relieve itself away from its confinement, and safely interact with any other animal;
b. Adequately lighted to provide regular lighting cycles of natural or artificial light uniformly diffused throughout the shelter, and sufficient illumination
for routine inspections and maintenance of the animal; and
c. Supplied with clean and dry bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements to maintain the shelter at a temperature that
is not harmful to the health of the animal.
C. Water Requirements:
1. All animals must have access to clean potable water at all times unless restricted for veterinary care. If the water is kept in a container, the container
must be designed to prevent tipping and spilling of the water or be secured to a solid structure, object or the ground.
2. Water containers must be clean and must be emptied and refilled with fresh water as necessary to maintain cleanliness or, alternatively, if the water
is provided by an automatic or demand device, the water supply connected to the device must be functional at all times.
D. Food And Feeding Requirements:
1. All animals must be provided food that is wholesome and be of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain a healthy body weight and meet the
normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
2. The food receptacles must be accessible to the animal and be placed in a location to minimize contamination from excreta and insects. Feeding
pans must be durable and kept clean. Disposable food receptacles may be used and must be discarded after each feeding. Self-feeders may be
used for dry food and must be sanitized regularly to prevent molding, deterioration, or the dense compaction of food.
3. Spoiled or contaminated animal food must be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
E. Veterinary Treatment Requirement: All animals must receive veterinary treatment from a veterinarian licensed by the state of California when such
treatment is necessary to alleviate the animal's apparent suffering or prevent the transmission of disease.
F. Exercise Requirements: All animals must be provided the opportunity to exercise in order to maintain normal muscle tone and mass for the age, size,
and condition of the animal.
G. Transportation Requirements: All animals must be handled, moved, or shipped in a manner to ensure the health and safety and overall comfort of the
animal.
H. Refuse Container Requirements: Any debris, refuse, manure, excreta, or other like material conducive to the breeding of flies or that creates a
reasonably obnoxious odor must be placed in a flyproofed container until the material is removed from the premises or buried under the soil surface as
fertilizer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 123/636
I. Food Storage Containers: All grain or cereal intended for use as food for animals must be kept in containers with tightly fitted covers or other containers
constructed to keep out vermin and wild animals.
J. Disposal Of Deceased Animals:
1. Upon the death of any animal, the owner or person in charge thereof shall provide for the burial, incineration or other disposition of the body of such
animal in a manner not likely to result in an unsanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to dispose of any dead animal in any trash or garbage
receptacle, whether public or private, to be hauled and carried into the general municipal solid waste stream. If the owner or person in charge of any
dead animal is unable to provide for burial or other disposition, he/she may request the police department to remove and dispose of the body of such
animal for a fee as set forth by a resolution of the city council in a fee schedule.
2. Upon learning that the body of a dead animal has not been disposed of in a safe and sanitary manner, the police department may remove and
dispose of such body immediately. The owner or person who had legal custody of such animal at the time of removal shall, immediately upon city's
demand for payment, pay the police department for costs incurred as established by a resolution of the city council in a fee schedule. (Ord. 1824, 6-
16-2015)
5-3.3: ANNEXATIONS; COMPLIANCE/TRANSITION PERIOD:
Prohibited animals brought into the city limits as the result of a property annexation may be maintained on the annexed property for a maximum
transitional period of three hundred sixty five (365) days from the date of annexation as long as the animals in question can legally be owned or possessed
by law, are not classified as or presumed to be dangerous, and are in compliance with the ordinances of the county of Tulare at the time of annexation.
Subsequent to the transitional period, the animals/property must be brought into compliance with the ordinances of the city of Porterville. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-
2015)
5-3.4: ANIMALS IN CITY BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person charged with the care of any animal or animals to cause or permit such animal to enter or remain in city owned or city
managed buildings other than a building used for the purpose of care, detention, control, or treatment of animals, or a building used for training classes,
shows, or exhibitions. This subsection shall not apply to persons using service animals.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an individual actually in the process of working a dog or other animal for ranching purposes, to transport
or carry the animal in a motor vehicle on any public highway, public roadway, or lot open to the public unless the animal is safely enclosed within the
vehicle or secured by means of a container, cage or other device which will prevent the animal from falling from, jumping from, or being thrown from the
motor vehicle. Dogs riding in the open area of a truck must be either in a secured cage or cross tied to the truck.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any dog or other animal in a vehicle or other enclosure without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as
to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which may adversely affect the health or well being of the animal. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.5: CONTROL AND SEIZURE OF DISEASED ANIMALS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge of any animal which that person knows to be infected with any disease transmittable to
humans or detrimental to other animals to permit such animal to remain within the city limits other than at an approved veterinary hospital unless the
police department or other appropriate authority approves an alternative means of confinement.
B. The police department is authorized to seize any animal reasonably believed to be infected with disease transmittable to humans or detrimental to other
animals. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.6: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity likely to cause harm or maliciously, wilfully, or recklessly kill, maim, wound, mutilate, torment,
torture or physically abuse any animal as defined in section 597 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.7: ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to abandon any animal within the city limits. "Abandonment", as used herein, refers to acts clearly indicating intent on the part of an
owner or person in control of an animal to permanently relinquish control over the animal. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.8: KILLING/BUTCHERING/PROCESSING OF ANIMALS OR FOWL:
It shall be unlawful to kill, slaughter, or sacrifice any game animal or fowl inside the city limits of Porterville within the public view except on the premises or
within the confines of establishments licensed for that purpose or within the confines of a recognized/licensed teaching institution as part of a curriculum.
This section does not apply to police department employees acting in the capacity of animal control duties. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.9: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 124/636
A. It is declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful, for any person owning or having control or custody of any animal to do any of the following:
1. Permit an animal to defecate or urinate on any privately owned or occupied property other than that of the owner or the person having control of the
animal;
2. Permit an animal to defecate on public property without immediately cleaning or removing the excrement to a proper receptacle;
3. Permit unsanitary conditions to exist on any premises where an animal is kept which would cause foul or obnoxious odors, attract flies or vermin or
otherwise threaten public health and safety; or
4. Cause or permit any animal to run or wander on any public property or privately owned or occupied property or premises without the consent of the
owner or occupant of the property.
B. If an unaltered animal is determined to be a nuisance pursuant to this subsection, upon a second offense the owner may be required to have the animal
altered.
C. The owner or person in control of an animal that has been determined to be a nuisance on a second or subsequent occasion may be required to have a
microchip inserted into the animal for identification purposes. In such instances, the microchip must be implanted by a licensed veterinarian within
twenty (20) days of being classified as a nuisance for a second or subsequent offense and shall be at the expense of the owner or person in control of
the animal. The owner or person in control of the animal shall provide the police department with a certificate of completion and provide the information
listed on the microchip, which will be included in the licensing record for that animal.
D. Any police department employee acting in the capacity of animal control may seize and impound any animal causing a public nuisance.
E. Any private person may maintain an action under Civil Code section 3493 for enforcement of this chapter declaring certain acts a public nuisance, if
such acts are especially injurious to such person. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.10: NUISANCE; INSPECTION FOR SAME:
A. The police department may enter upon any yard, lot, or parcel of land for the purpose of investigating animal related nuisances.
B. If the investigating officer has reason to believe a nuisance exists, he/she may serve written notice of correction to the person or persons owning or
having control of, or acting as agent for, leasing or occupying such premises, to abate or remove such nuisance within forty eight (48) hours or other
reasonable time as stated in the notice. Such notice shall be served personally or, where the person responsible for such nuisance cannot be located,
by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the front door or entranceway.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, wilfully, or negligently fail to abate the nuisance alleged in the notice or fail to contest the allegations in
the notice within forty eight (48) hours (or other time as specified in the notice) following receipt or knowledge of same.
D. Where the person upon whom the abatement notice is required to be served under subsection B of this section has been properly served but does not
abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice, the police department shall have the authority to do the following:
1. Where the nuisance is caused by an at large animal, a wild or exotic animal or a dangerous animal, the police department may follow the procedures
relating to seizure and impoundment.
2. Where the nuisance is in the nature of noise or odors and is caused by an animal or animals by animal waste or other conditions on the premises
that are the result of the keeping of the animals, the police department may abate the nuisance by substantially following the notice, hearing, and the
abatement procedure. Cost recovery procedures will follow the same as set forth in the impoundment recovery procedures defined in this chapter
pursuant to a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.11: HEARING TO DETERMINE IF ANIMAL IS DANGEROUS:
A. The police department may declare any animal to be dangerous whenever it has attacked, bitten or caused injury to any human being or other animal,
or where there is evidence that an animal has acted in a threatening manner toward any human being, or has exhibited characteristics of being trained
for fighting or attacking. Within two (2) days after an animal, which is wearing a license tag or can otherwise be identified, is impounded pursuant to this
section, the police department shall serve notice of the finding to the owner of record via registered mail or deliver the same in person, advising the
owner that the animal is dangerous and of the owner's right to a hearing on the issue of whether or not the animal is dangerous.
B. The owner of an animal confined or impounded pursuant to this section may, within the six (6) business day time period, not including the date of
impound, provide application for redemption of the animal, requesting a hearing to determine whether or not the animal is dangerous.
C. When a hearing is requested pursuant to subsection B of this section, a date and time for such a hearing shall be set, and notice thereof shall be served
to all involved parties including, but not limited to, the owner, witness(es), and victim(s) within five (5) business days. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-3.12: HEARING; CONDUCT:
A. A hearing requested in accordance with this chapter shall be conducted before a person appointed by the chief of police to serve as a hearing officer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 125/636
B. The hearing shall be open to the public. The animal owner may be represented by an attorney. The hearing officer shall hear all pertinent evidence
offered by any interested persons. The technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, except that the hearing officer's decision may
not be based solely on hearsay evidence. All persons giving evidence shall be sworn in before testifying. The hearing will be recorded electronically by
an uninvolved member of the police department. Copies of the hearing recording will be provided to the involved parties upon request.
C. Any animal which has attacked, bitten, or caused injury to a human being or other animal is presumed to be dangerous and the burden is on the owner
to present evidence that the animal is not dangerous.
D. In making a determination that an animal is or is not dangerous, evidence of the following shall be considered:
1. Any previous history of the animal attacking, biting, or causing injury to a human being or other animal;
2. The nature and extent of injuries inflicted and the number of victims involved;
3. The place where the bite, attack, or injury occurred;
4. The presence or absence of any provocation for the bite, attack, or injury;
5. The extent to which property has been damaged or destroyed;
6. Whether the animal exhibits any characteristics of being trained for fighting or attack or other evidence to show such training or fighting;
7. Whether the animal exhibits characteristics of aggressive or unpredictable temperament or behavior in the presence of human beings or animals;
8. Whether the animal can be effectively trained or retrained to change its temperament or behavior;
9. The manner in which the animal had been maintained by its owner or custodian;
10. Any other relevant evidence concerning the maintenance of the animal;
11. Any other relevant evidence regarding the ability of the owner or custodian to protect the public safety in the future if the animal is permitted to
remain in the city; and
12. Any other relevant evidence concerning the characteristics or behavior of the animal, or concerning the circumstances of the incident. (Ord. 1824,
6-16-2015)
5-3.13: HEARING; DECISION AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMAL:
A. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may determine:
1. That the animal is not dangerous and should be returned to its owner; or
2. That the animal is not dangerous but that the attack, bite, or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling, or maintenance; or
3. That the animal is dangerous and it should be humanely destroyed after all appeal processes have been exhausted following the receipt of the
hearing officer's decision.
B. If it is determined that the animal is not dangerous, but that the bite, attack, or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling, or
maintenance and the owner is unable or unwilling to properly train, handle, or maintain the animal and that a similar incident is likely to occur in the
future without proper training, handling, or maintenance, the animal may be destroyed.
C. If it is determined that the animal is not dangerous, but that the bite, attack, or injury was the result of improper or negligent training, handling or
maintenance, but also that the owner is able and willing to properly train, handle, or maintain the animal and that similar incident is not likely to occur in
the future with proper training, handling and maintenance, the animal may be returned to the owner with documentation of how to prevent future
incidents.
D. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be delivered personally to the owner or mailed to him/her by certified mail.
E. The owner may, within ten (10) days of receipt of the hearing officer's written decision, appeal the hearing officer's decision to the Tulare County
superior court pursuant to California Code Of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. The police department will be notified by the owner of the appeal in
writing on the same date as the appeal was filed. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
Chapter ARTICLE IV
ARTICLE IV. KENNELS
5-4.1: KENNEL DEFINED:
The term "kennel", as used in this chapter, means a premises, building or enclosure where four (4) or more animals not owned by the kennel owner or
operator are kept, boarded, trained, or maintained for commercial purposes for a period longer than twenty four (24) hours. The maintenance of more than
two (2) animals used for breeding purposes for which compensation is received, or the parturition or rearing of more than two (2) litters in one calendar
year shall be a rebuttable presumption that such animals are owned or maintained for the purpose of commercial breeding and the owner and the
premises shall be subject to permit and licensing requirements as established in chapter 15 of this code. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 126/636
5-4.2: KENNEL PERMIT AND APPLICATION FEE:
In lieu of securing the license required by this chapter for each of the animals in a kennel, a person owning or operating a kennel may obtain a kennel
permit covering all of the animals maintained in the kennel. It shall be unlawful to fail to secure the permit required by this chapter. The application for a
kennel permit shall be filed with the police department, along with a copy of a valid city business license. The fees for kennel permits shall be set by
resolution of the city council in a fee schedule. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.3: VACCINATION CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
The police department shall not issue a kennel permit unless the person applying for the permit files a certificate or certificates signed by a licensed
veterinarian showing that all of the animals in the kennel which are over four (4) months of age have been vaccinated against rabies and which indicates
that the period of time elapsing from the dates of the vaccinations to the date of expiration of the kennel permit does not exceed thirty six (36) months in
the case of vaccination with live virus rabies vaccine or eighteen (18) months in the case of vaccination with killed virus rabies vaccine, as those types of
vaccines are defined in section 2606 et seq., of chapter 17 of the California code of regulations. During any period when the city of Porterville is
designated as a rabies area pursuant to sections 121575 - 122374 of the Health And Safety Code of the state of California, no killed virus vaccine shall be
used other than vaccine of bovine nerve tissue origin.
However, if one or more animals in the kennel are too ill to be vaccinated against rabies at the time the application for the kennel permit is filed with the
police department, and the application for the kennel permit is accompanied by a certificate signed by a veterinarian which states this fact, the police
department may process and issue the kennel permit in compliance with this chapter. The owner of the kennel shall thereafter have each such animal
vaccinated within thirty (30) days after the date on which it becomes well enough to be vaccinated and the owner of the kennel shall file the vaccination
certificate with the police department. If a person holding a kennel permit has failed to have an animal vaccinated pursuant to this section, the police
department may immediately revoke the kennel permit and give the holder of the kennel permit written notice of such revocation. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.4: PRELIMINARY INSPECTION:
The police department may inspect all kennels to determine whether the kennels are constructed and operated in such a manner as to prevent the animals
confined therein from running at large. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.5: PERMIT:
If the police department has determined that the kennels are constructed and operated in such a manner as to prevent animals confined therein from
running at large, and if the required vaccination certificates have been filed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the police department may
issue a kennel permit to the applicant. The kennel permit issued by the police department shall contain a serial number, the expiration date of the permit,
the address of the kennel, and such other information as the police department may require. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.6: TERM OF PERMIT:
Kennel permits shall be issued on an annual basis commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.7: DELINQUENT PENALTIES; SECURING INDIVIDUAL LICENSES IF KENNEL PERMIT DENIED; TIME LIMITS:
Commencing on January 1 of each year, the police department shall collect a delinquent penalty, in addition to the regular permit fee, before issuing any
kennel permit if the time limits set forth in this chapter have expired for any animal in the kennel at the time that the application for the permit is filed. The
delinquent penalty shall be in an amount equal to the regular permit fee as set forth in this chapter. If an application for a kennel permit is filed before the
time limits set forth in this chapter have expired, and if after the expiration of such time limits, the police department determines that a kennel permit will
not be issued, the police department shall send the owner of the kennel written notice that the kennel permit will not be issued. It shall be unlawful for the
owner of the kennel to fail to secure individual licenses for each of the animals in the kennel, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, within thirty (30)
days after receipt of such written notice of such violation. During the period between the date on which the application for the kennel permit is filed with the
police department until thirty (30) days after receipt of said written notice, the owner of the kennel shall not be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-
2015)
5-4.8: INSPECTION OF KENNEL:
The police department may at any time inspect any kennel for which a kennel permit has been issued. If the police department determines that the kennel
is not being operated in accordance with this chapter, the police department may revoke the kennel permit. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.9: DELIVERY OF VACCINATION CERTIFICATES TO PURCHASERS:
Whenever a person holding a kennel permit sells any animal in the kennel, he/she shall deliver a copy of the vaccination certificate for the animal to the
purchaser. If satisfactory evidence is presented to the police department that a person holding a kennel permit has failed to comply with the provisions of
this section, the police department may revoke the kennel permit. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-4.10: EFFECT OF REVOCATION OF KENNEL PERMIT:
If the police department revokes a kennel permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of the kennel to fail to secure
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 127/636
individual licenses for each of the animals in the kennel, pursuant to this chapter, within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice of such revocation
from the police department. Any person whose kennel permit has been revoked by the police department shall not be permitted to apply for a kennel
permit until the next calendar year. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
Chapter ARTICLE V
ARTICLE V. RABIES CONTROL
5-5.1: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE:
This article shall be in effect only at those times when the city of Porterville is not designated as a rabies area pursuant to sections 121575 - 122374 of the
Health And Safety Code of the state of California. During those periods when the city of Porterville is designated as a rabies area, the provisions of said
sections 121575 - 122374 of the Health And Safety Code, and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, are applicable rather than the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-5.2: ANIMAL SHOWING SIGNS OF RABIES:
Whenever the owner of an animal observes or learns that such animal shows symptoms of rabies or acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable
suspicion that it may have rabies, such person shall immediately notify the police department. Said person shall thereafter allow the police department to
inspect or examine the animal. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-5.3: ISOLATION OF RABID ANIMALS AND CLINICALLY SUSPECTED RABID ANIMALS:
The owner of any rabid animal or clinically suspected rabid animal shall isolate the animal in strict confinement under proper care and under the
observation of a veterinarian in a kennel, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the police department, and said animal
shall not be destroyed or released from confinement for at least ten (10) days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies and until the police
department gives written authorization for the release of the animal, with the exception that such animal may be euthanized with the permission of the
police department for the purpose of a laboratory examination for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody test in an approved public health laboratory.
(Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-5.4: ANIMALS BITING PERSONS:
Whenever the owner of an animal has knowledge that such animal has bitten any person, the owner shall immediately report that fact to the police
department and report the name and address of the person bitten and the time and place that such person was bitten. Upon order of the police
department, the owner shall quarantine the animal for the period of time specified in section 2606 of chapter 17 of the California administrative code with
regard to rabies areas, and shall allow the police department to make inspections and examinations of the animal from time to time during such period.
The police department may quarantine said animal upon the premises of the owner. However, if the owner of the animal so desires, the police department
shall place the animal in quarantine in a veterinary hospital, at the expense of the owner, in lieu of quarantine of the animal on the premises of the owner.
Quarantine shall be made by written notice delivered to the owner of said animal stating that the animal is quarantined and the instructions to be followed.
If the quarantine is upon the premises of the owner of the animal, the animal shall be confined within a locked enclosure so constructed that the animal
cannot escape or have contact with any other animal or human being other than the person responsible for its care or, at the discretion of the police
department, the animal may be kept under restraint by leash in charge of a responsible person, or under such restrictions as the police department may
prescribe. Said animal shall be kept in quarantine until the police department gives written authorization for the release of the animal from quarantine.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, such animal may be euthanized with the permission of the police department for the purpose of a laboratory
examination for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody test in an approved public health laboratory. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-5.5: ANIMALS IN CONTACT WITH RABID ANIMALS:
Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal or has been in intimate contact with a rabid or
suspected rabid animal shall be quarantined by the owner in a place and manner approved by the police department for a period of six (6) months or
destroyed, provided, however, that the following alternatives are permitted in the case of dogs and cats: if the dog or cat has been vaccinated against
rabies within two (2) years but not less than thirty (30) days with a live virus vaccine, or within one year but not less than thirty (30) days with a killed virus
vaccine, as those types of vaccines are defined in section 2606 et seq., of chapter 17 of the California administrative code, the dog or cat may be
revaccinated in a manner approved by the police department and quarantined in a place and manner approved by the police department for a period of
thirty (30) days. The provisions of this chapter concerning quarantine shall also apply to the quarantine of animals pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1824, 6-
16-2015)
5-5.6: VIOLATION OF QUARANTINE:
When any animal is quarantined by the police department, it shall be unlawful for the owner of the animal to violate the quarantine by removing said animal
from the premises where it is quarantined, allowing it to run at large, destroying it without authorization from the police department, concealing it from the
police department or disobeying any of the quarantine restrictions which have been imposed by the police department. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
Chapter ARTICLE VI
ARTICLE VI. PIGEONS
5-6.1: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 128/636
Pigeons which have been selectively bred for specific racing, homing, or sporting purposes shall be subject to the limitations of this article and shall only
be permitted in residential zoning districts upon obtaining a conditional use permit from the city council according to chapter 21, article 604 of this code.
(Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this article shall apply only to parcels six thousand (6,000) square feet and over, which are located within a residential zoning district.
(Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.3: LEG BANDING:
All racing, homing, or sporting pigeons shall be banded with a leg band. The "leg band" is defined as a seamless band, made of a durable material, which
designates the national organization with which the bird is registered, and indicates the year of birth of the bird. Birds which are not banded shall not be
considered to be racing, homing, or sporting pigeons. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.4: NUMBER ALLOWED:
The number of racing, homing, or sporting pigeons shall not cumulatively exceed one bird for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for lots
under ten thousand (10,000) square feet in size and two (2) birds for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for lots in excess of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.5: STRUCTURE/LOFT REQUIREMENTS:
The structure ("loft") housing the racing, homing, or sporting pigeons shall comply with setback, height, and lot coverage limitations in the underlying zone.
The loft shall be set back a minimum distance of ten feet (10') from residential structures on the site to provide adequate distance for clean and sanitary
loft maintenance, and a minimum distance of twenty feet (20') from the property line of any adjacent parcel when there are no more than twenty (20) birds.
The minimum distance from the property lines shall increase one foot (1') for every one bird over twenty (20) in number. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.6: LOFT MAINTENANCE:
Any loft used for housing the racing, homing, or sporting pigeons shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.7: RELEASE AND FEEDING OF PIGEONS:
All racing, homing, or sporting pigeons shall be confined to the loft, except for limited periods necessary for exercise, training, and competition. At no time
shall pigeons be allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others. Objects shall not be thrown at the birds during their training or exercise.
All birds shall be fed within the confines of the loft. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.8: NUMBER OF SQUABS ALLOWED; BREEDING OF PIGEONS:
Not more than twelve (12) squabs over six (6) weeks old shall be permitted to be kept or maintained or raised on the property where pigeons are allowed
in a residential zoning district. The squabs shall be counted in the cumulative total of pigeons allowed on the property by this article. Breeding of pigeons
shall be incidental to the keeping of pigeons for racing, homing, or sporting and the breeding of pigeons for commercial purposes shall be prohibited. (Ord.
1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.9: ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP:
Owners of racing, homing, or sporting pigeons are required to be current members of a nationally recognized racing, homing, or sporting pigeon
association. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.10: LIMITATIONS:
The limitations set forth in this article shall be deemed minimum limitations required for the keeping of pigeons as provided for herein. The city may, as a
condition to issuance of the permit required in chapter 21, article 604 of this code set forth additional requirements in said permit as may be necessary to
maintain the health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.11: ASSOCIATION MEMBERSHIP DOCUMENTATION:
The applicant shall provide documentation of current membership in a nationally recognized racing, homing, or sporting pigeon association with the
conditional use permit application. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.12: CITY RIGHT OF ENTRY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 129/636
The city shall have the right to enter the property for verification of conditional use permit compliance at any time. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-6.13: VIOLATION:
The conditional use permit may be revoked by the city council upon violation of any condition, regulation, or limitation of the permit issued, unless such
violation is corrected within ten (10) days of notice of such violation. Any permit may be revoked for any violation. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
Chapter ARTICLE VII
ARTICLE VII. VIOLATIONS
5-7.1: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
A. Administrative Citation: Upon a finding by the city official or representative vested with the authority to enforce the various provisions of this chapter that
a violation exists, he or she may issue an administrative citation and proceed with enforcement pursuant to chapter 2, article XIV of this code. The
administrative fines shall be as follows:
1. A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first violation;
2. A fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation of the same provision within one year; or
3. A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year, to a maximum of three (3)
such violations.
B. Misdemeanor/Infraction: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless the city makes a
determination to prosecute as an infraction with the concurrence of the city attorney. Upon conviction each person shall be subject to fine and/or
imprisonment pursuant to section 1-9, and subsections 2-144A and B of this code. A person who owns or is in charge of or controls or who possesses
an animal who permits, allows, or causes the dog to run, stray, be uncontrolled or in any manner be in, upon or at large upon a public street, sidewalk,
park or other public property or in or upon the premises or private property of another person is guilty of a misdemeanor if said animal bites, attacks, or
causes injury to any human being or other animal.
C. Separate Offense: Each day that any provision of this chapter is violated is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as a separate and
distinct offense.
D. Costs Of Enforcement: In addition to any other penalties or fines provided for in this chapter, any reasonable costs incurred by the city in seizing,
impounding, and confining any dangerous animal may be charged and recovered against the owner.
E. Infraction: Except as provided for in subsection B of this section, violation of any of the provisions covered in this chapter may be investigated and
punished as an infraction. An administrative citation may be issued in lieu of filing a criminal case. Each day a violation continues may be investigated
and regarded as a new and separate offense.
1. The punishment upon conviction may be:
a. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;
b. A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision within one year; or
c. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision within one year, to a maximum of three (3)
such violations.
2. For purposes of this section, bail forfeiture shall be deemed to be a conviction of the offense charged.
3. In addition to any other penalties or fines provided for in this chapter, any reasonable costs incurred by the city in seizing, impounding, and confining
any dangerous animal may be charged and recovered against the owner.
F. Misdemeanor: Four (4) or more violations of the same section of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be investigated according to
subsection B of this section. Each additional day the violations continue unabated shall be regarded as new and separate offenses.
G. Civil Action: The city attorney, or an attorney hired for such purposes by and at the request of the city council, may institute an action in any court of
competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin, or abate the condition found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or state codes specifically
adopted by reference, as provided by law, and the city shall be entitled to its attorney fees and costs.
H. Remedies Not To Supplant Procedures: These remedies shall not supplant or replace the procedures concerning dangerous animals as specified
elsewhere in this chapter.
I. Allocation Of Fees And Fines Collected: All fees and the city's share of all fines collected shall be used only to fund the implementation and enforcement
of the city's animal control program. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 130/636
Chapter ARTICLE VIII
ARTICLE VIII. ANIMAL CONTROL COMMISSION
5-8.1: ESTABLISHED:
An animal control commission is established in and for the city of Porterville. The animal control commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city
council. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.2: COMPOSITION:
The animal control commission shall consist of five (5) members who shall be residents of the city of Porterville. Commissioners shall be appointed by the
city council at its complete discretion by a majority vote. Members of the commission shall be representative of a cross section of the community. (Ord.
1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the animal control commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.4: TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
The term of office shall be four (4) years with terms staggered to prevent concurrent expiration of terms. All commission members shall serve at the
pleasure of the city council and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council at any time and for any reason. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.5: VACANCIES:
Vacancies, occurring otherwise than by expiration of the terms, shall be filled by appointment by the city council as soon as possible; such appointee is to
serve for the unexpired term of the vacant office. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.6: APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON AND VICE CHAIRPERSON:
The animal control commission shall appoint one of its members chairperson, and one of them vice chairperson. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.7: TERM OF OFFICERS:
The officers thus appointed shall serve one year, until their successors in office have been appointed by the animal control commission. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-
2015)
5-8.8: MEETINGS AND RECORDS:
The animal control commission shall hold meetings regularly as determined by the commission and shall designate the time and place thereof. The
commission may hold as many meetings as determined necessary for the performance of the duties prescribed in this chapter. The meetings shall be held
in compliance with the Brown act and all applicable laws, and the meetings and records of attendance shall be public. The commission shall adopt its own
rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. A record of attendance shall be kept regularly and reported to the city council at least once per
year. Members are expected to have at least seventy five percent (75%) attendance based upon the commission's regular meeting schedule (e.g., 9 out of
12 meetings if held monthly, and 3 out of 4 if held quarterly). Members who fail to meet the attendance requirement automatically vacate their seat and the
vacancies shall be filled per section 5-8.5 of this article. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.9: QUORUM:
Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
5-8.10: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
The animal control commission shall:
A. Advise the city council and staff on any matters concerning animal control and shelter programs;
B. Make recommendations to the city council and staff concerning regulations affecting animals and the care, control, and treatment of animals;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 131/636
C. Make recommendations to the city council and staff to strengthen the city's animal control and shelter programs;
D. Engage in a long term planning process through which it identifies major priorities and provides recommendations for the city council for policies and
procedures on animal control and shelter program operations;
E. Promote public awareness of the goals and operations of the animal shelter(s) and to enhance community relations with respect to animal control
program operations;
F. To advise and assist the city council and staff in conducting public education and outreach programs to city residents regarding animal owner
responsibility for licensing, spaying and neutering, and proper care of animals;
G. To review and recommend proactive enforcement programs that will result in reducing cases of animal overpopulation, neglect, abuse, and public
nuisance;
H. To review and provide recommendations to the city council and staff on all proposed amendments to this chapter;
I. Serve as a sounding board for staff to review their plans and ideas; and
J. Act on any matters referred by the city council or staff in accordance with the instructions provided with the said referrals. (Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
Chapter 5A
ARTS COMMISSION
Chapter Article I
FORMATION OF AN ARTS COMMISSION
5A-1: ESTABLISHED:
An Arts Commission is established in and for the City of Porterville. The Arts Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City Council. (Ord.
1797, 8-20-2013)
5A-2: COMPOSITION:
The Arts Commission shall consist of five (5) members, plus one youth member. Commissioners shall be appointed by the City Council at its complete
discretion. Members of the commission shall represent four (4) areas of arts: a) theatrical/performing arts; b) visual/graphic; c) music; d) youth. (Ord. 1841,
5-2-2017)
5A-3: COMPENSATION:
Members of the Arts Commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 1797, 8-20-2013)
5A-4: TERM OF OFFICE; REMOVAL:
The term of office shall be three (3) years with terms staggered to prevent concurrent expiration of terms with the exception of the youth representative.
All commission members shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed by a majority vote of the City Council at any time and for any
reason. (Ord. 1797, 8-20-2013; Ord. 1841, 5-2-2017)
5A-5: VACANCIES:
Vacancies, occurring otherwise than by expiration of the terms, shall be filled by appointment as soon as possible; such appointee to serve for the
unexpired term of the vacant office. (Ord. 1841, 5-2-2017)
5A-6: MEETINGS AND RECORDS:
The Arts Commission shall hold meetings regularly as determined by the commission and shall designate the time and place thereof. The meetings shall
be held in compliance with the Brown Act and all applicable laws, and the meetings and records of attendance shall be public. The commission shall keep
a record of its proceedings. A record of attendance shall be kept regularly and reported to the City Council at least one time per year. Members are
expected to have seventy five percent (75%) attendance based on the commission's regular meeting schedule (e.g., 9 out of 12 meetings if held monthly,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 132/636
and 3 out of 4 if held quarterly). Members who fail to meet the attendance requirement automatically vacate their seat and the vacancies shall be filled per
section 5A-5 of this article. (Ord. 1797, 8-20-2013)
5A-7: QUORUM:
A presence of a majority of the members (not including the student/youth member) of the established number of Commissioners shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1841, 5-2-2017)
5A-8: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
The Arts Commission shall:
A. Make recommendations to the City Council regarding development and promotion of practices and policies pertaining to the arts, keeping in mind the
adoption of policy is the prerogative of the City Council.
B. Foster the development and enjoyment of visual, cultural, performing, and other arts in the City of Porterville.
C. Work cooperatively with City entities and other advisory commissions to include an arts element in as many areas of City planning and development as
possible.
D. Develop and submit a work plan to the Council on an annual basis detailing the goals and objectives of the Arts Commission over the next year, five (5)
years and/or twenty (20) years. (Ord. 1797, 8-20-2013)
Chapter 6
BICYCLES
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL1
6-1: RIDING ON SIDEWALKS:
No bicycle shall be operated upon any public sidewalk. (Ord. 1537 § B21, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1608, 3-19-2002)
6-2: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
In addition to the penalty set forth in section 1-9 of this code, the police department of the city, or any of the members thereof, may impound and retain
possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and retain possession of the same until the license provided for in
section 6-3 of this chapter is obtained by the owner of such bicycle. (Ord. 1537 § B21, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article II
LICENSES
6-3: REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public
highways of the city, without first obtaining a license therefor pursuant to state Vehicle Code section 39000 et seq. (Ord. 1537 § B21, 8-6-1996)
6-4: REMOVING, DESTROYING, ETC., PLATE, SEAL OR REGISTRATION CARD:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in
which such license plate, seal or registration card is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this article shall prohibit the police department from
engraving numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which such number is illegible or insufficient for identification
purposes. (Ord. 1537 § B21, 8-6-1996)
Chapter 7
BUILDING REGULATIONS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 133/636
Chapter Article I
BUILDING CODE
7-1: ADOPTION:
Adoption of the 2016 edition of the California Administrative Code title 24, part 1; 2016 California Building Code part 2, volumes 1 and 2; the 2016
California Residential Code title 24, part 2.5; the 2016 Energy Code title 24, part 6; the 2016 edition of the California Historical Buildings Code title 24, part
8; the 2016 edition of the California Existing Buildings Code title 24, part 10; and the 2016 edition of the California Referenced Standards Code title 24,
part 12.
That certain codes in book form to which more particular reference is herein made, regulating the construction, erection, alteration, repair, removal,
demolition, conversion, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings in the City of Porterville, together with the amendments thereof, herein
specifically set forth, together with the penalty for violation herein set forth to be known as the building codes compiled by and adopted by the International
Code Council, Inc., together with the following appendixes: E, H, J, and V of the 2016 California Residential Code part 2.5; thereto are hereby adopted and
enacted by the Council of the City of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every sentence, paragraph, word and
clause in said codes mentioned or referred to herein or therein were fully and specifically set forth herein, with the exception of the penalty provision
thereof. (Ord. 1834, 11-1-2016)
7-2: COPIES ON FILE:
Reference is hereby made to one (1) copy of said California Building Code, 2016 edition, compiled by and adopted by the International Conference of
Building Officials, heretofore filed in the Office of the Building Official of the City of Porterville and said California Building Code is by reference adopted
herein as provided by law. (Ord. 1834, 11-1-2016)
7-3: BUILDING CODE AMENDMENTS:
There are no local amendments to the 2016 codes. The City of Porterville reserves the right to amend the codes mentioned herein by way of public
hearing and ordinance adoption at a later date if deemed necessary. (Ord. 1834, 11-1-2016)
7-3.1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1521, 11-21-1995)
7-3.1.1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1521, 11-21-1995)
7-3.2: BUILDING PERMIT FEES:
Building permit fees shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1066 § A, 12-3-1974; Ord. 1148 § A, 7-18-1978; Ord. 1212 § A, 8-5-1980; Ord.
1295 § A, 2-7-1984; Ord. 1371 § A, 1-6-1987; Ord. 1422 § A, 11-21-1989)
7-3.3: TEMPORARY STRUCTURES:
A. For purposes of this article the word "structure" shall include any building, tent, canopy, or any other type of construction approved by the City Council.
B. Upon written application to the City Council, the City Council is hereby empowered to issue a permit enabling an applicant in time of stress or
emergency or in conjunction with development of residential, commercial, or industrial projects, to erect, construct, maintain and utilize a temporary
structure within the City of Porterville.
C. Said permit so issued shall provide the type of construction to be permitted; the location of said structure; the size of said structure; the period of time
that said structure may be utilized; and provisions that said structure shall be demolished at the termination of said permit and all other requirements
and conditions deemed necessary or expedient by the City Council.
D. In the event the applicant fails to satisfy all conditions set forth by the City Council in the permit, the right to construct, maintain and utilize the temporary
structure may be terminated immediately by action of the City Council; and, in addition thereto, a violation of the conditions of said permit is hereby
declared to be unlawful.
E. Nothing herein shall permit an applicant to make use of any structure in violation of any zoning law, ordinance or regulation of the City. (Ord. 1066 § A,
12-3-1974; Ord. 1148 § A, 7-18-1978; Ord. 1212 § A, 8-5-1980; Ord. 1295 § A, 2-7-1984; Ord. 1371 § A, 1-6-1987; Ord. 1422 § A, 11-21-1989; Ord.
1476 § 1, 7-21-1992)
7-3.4: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 134/636
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building or structure in the City of Porterville, or cause the same to be done contrary to or in violation of the provisions of this article or of the Building Code
above adopted by reference, together with the amendments thereto; and any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article or of
said Building Code, as amended, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violations of the
provisions of this article or of the California Building Code, 2016 edition, is committed or permitted; and upon conviction of any such violation, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for a period of not exceeding six
(6) months or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1834, 11-1-2016)
7-3.5: BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The Public Works Director of the City, or his designee, shall have all the power and authority of and shall be charged with the performance of all duties and
functions of a building official who administers and enforces all City codes related to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, swimming pool and solar
energy construction work. (Ord. 1537 § B22, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
7-3.6: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision of application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.
(Ord. 1834, 11-1-2016)
Chapter Article IA
MECHANICAL CODE
7-4: ADOPTION:
Adoption of the 2016 edition of the California Mechanical Code, title 24, part 4 and referenced standards.
That certain Code in book form to which more particular reference is hereinafter made regulating the installation and maintenance of heating, ventilating,
cooling, and refrigeration systems, to be known and referred to as the California Mechanical Code along with the referenced standards is hereby adopted
and enacted by the Council of the City of Porterville as an ordinance of the City of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each
and every sentence, comma, paragraph, word, phrase, and clause in said Code mentioned or referred to therein or herein were and each thereof was fully
and specifically set forth herein.
Reference is hereby made to one (1) copy of the 2016 edition of the California Mechanical Code published by the International Association of Plumbing
and Mechanical Officials filed with the building official of the City of Porterville and said Code is by reference adopted herein as provided by law. (Ord.
1835, 11-1-2016)
7-4.1: HEATING AND COOLING PERMIT FEES:
Heating and cooling permit fees shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1069 § A, 12-3-1974; Ord. 1150 § A, 7-18-1978; Ord. 1211 § A, 8-5-
1980; Ord. 1372 § A, 1-6-1987)
7-4.2: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision of application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.
(Ord. 1835, 11-1-2016)
Chapter Article II
PLUMBING CODE
7-6: ADOPTION:
Adoption of the 2016 edition of the California Plumbing Code title 24, part 5, the referenced standards, and appendixes C and H.
That certain Code in book form to which more particular reference is hereinafter made, regulating the business of plumbing, and the installation of
plumbing fixtures and appliances, to be known and referred to as the California Plumbing Code, is hereby adopted and enacted by the Council of the City
of Porterville as an ordinance of the City of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every sentence, comma,
paragraph, word, phrase, and clause in said Code mentioned or referred to therein or herein were and each thereof was fully and specifically set forth
herein.
Reference is hereby made to one (1) copy of the 2016 edition of the California Plumbing Code, published by the International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials filed with the building official of the City of Porterville and said Code is by reference adopted herein as provided by law. (Ord. 1836,
11-1-2016)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 135/636
7-6.1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1297 § B, 2-7-1984)
7-6.2: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1297 § B, 2-7-1984)
7-7: WHEN CHECK VALVES REQUIRED; STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION:
Where any part of a building, which is being serviced or served by the sewer system, is lower than the sewer line which serves the building, the owner
shall install a check valve or back sewer valve in order to prevent sewage from entering or flowing into such lower area or portion of the building being
served by the sewer line.
The check valve shall have a cast iron body, with bearing parts of noncorrosive metal or material, and be so constructed and installed in order to ensure a
positive mechanical seal and remain closed except when discharging sewage or waste. Valve access covers shall be of the bolted type, with gaskets, and
every valve shall be installed in an approved manner so as to be readily accessible at all times and shall strictly conform to the specifications of the
Plumbing Code. (Ord. 627 § 1)
7-8: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS TO COMPLY WITH SECTION 7-7:
The public health and safety requires that all nonconforming connections or uses now existing in buildings or structures be remodeled or improved and
check valves or back water valves be installed in order to comply with the sanitary provisions and requirements of the City, and section 7-7 of this article
shall apply to all existing or hereafter installed plumbing connections. (Ord. 627 § 2)
Chapter Article III
ELECTRICAL CODE
7-9: ADOPTION:
Adoption of the 2016 edition of the California Electrical Code title 24, part 3.
That certain Code in book form to which more particular reference is hereinafter made, regulating the business of electrical, and the installation of electrical
fixtures and appliances, to be known and referred to as the California Electrical Code, is hereby adopted and enacted by the Council of the City of
Porterville as an ordinance of the City of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every sentence, comma, paragraph,
word, phrase, and clause in said Code mentioned or referred to therein or herein were and each thereof was fully and specifically set forth herein.
Reference is hereby made to one (1) copy of the 2016 edition of the California Electrical Code, published by BNi Publications, Inc., filed in the office of the
building official of the City of Porterville, and such Code, to wit: the 2016 edition of the California Electrical Code published by the BNi Publications, Inc., as
aforesaid now on file with the building official of the City of Porterville, is hereby adopted by reference as the Electrical Code of the City. (Ord. 1837, 11-1-
2016)
7-6.1: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision of application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.
(Ord. 1836, 11-1-2016)
7-10: AMENDMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1773, 12-7-2010)
7-11: PERMIT FEES:
Any person desiring an electrical permit shall, at the time of filing an application therefor, pay a fee as fixed by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 742 § 1;
Ord. 869 § A, 1-17-1967; Ord. 1022 § A, 6-6-1972; Ord. 1067 § A, 12-3-1974; Ord. 1151 § A, 7-18-1978)
Chapter Article IV
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
7-12: ADOPTION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 136/636
Adoption of the 2016 edition of the California Green Building Standards Code, title 24, part 11 and the mandatory portions of appendix A4, appendix A5,
and appendix A6.1 with the voluntary portions of said appendices remaining voluntary.
That certain Code in book form to which more particular reference is hereinafter made encouraging sustainable construction practices, to be known and
referred to as the California Green Building Standards Code is hereby adopted and enacted by the Council of the City of Porterville as an ordinance of the
City of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every sentence, comma, paragraph, word, phrase, and clause in said
Code mentioned or referred to therein or herein were and each thereof was fully and specifically set forth herein.
Reference is hereby made to one (1) copy of the 2016 edition of the California Green Building Standards Code published by the International Code
Council filed with the building official of the City of Porterville and said Code is by reference adopted herein as provided by law. (Ord. 1838, 11-1-2016)
7-12.1: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision of application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.
(Ord. 1838, 11-1-2016)
Chapter Article V
RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
7-13: DEFINITIONS:
ASSOCIATION: A nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT: Any of the following:
A. A community apartment project;
B. A condominium project;
C. A planned development;
D. A stock cooperative.
ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: The utilization of one or more of the following approved methods:
A. E-mail;
B. Facsimile;
C. The internet.
REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS (On A Solar Energy System): Those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly
decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allows for an alternative system or comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.
RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED
PERFORMANCE: A. For water systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent (10%) of the cost of the system, but in
no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent (10%),
as originally specified and proposed.
B. For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a
decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent (10%) as originally specified and proposed.
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: All of the following:
A. A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.
B. A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and
all state and city, health and safety standards.
C. A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 137/636
D. A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Either of the following:
A. Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.
B. Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.
SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1829, 11-17-2015)
7-14: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with state law and provides for timely and cost
effective installation of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This article encourages the use of solar energy systems by removing unreasonable
barriers and minimizing costs to property owners and the city to install solar energy systems. This article allows the city to achieve these goals while
protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1829, 11-17-2015)
7-15: APPLICABILITY:
This article applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally
established or permitted prior to the effective date hereof are not subject to the requirements of this article unless physical modifications or alterations are
undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1829, 11-17-2015)
7-16: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
A. All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city of Porterville.
B. Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified
by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California plumbing and mechanical codes.
C. Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable codes, the Institute Of Electrical And Electronics Engineers, and accredited
testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability.
(Ord. 1829, 11-17-2015)
7-17: DUTIES OF CITY IN REVIEWING SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM APPLICATIONS:
A. All documents required by the city to be completed for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the
publicly accessible city of Porterville website.
B. Electronic submittal of the required permit applications and documents by e-mail, the internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small
residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.
An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents submitted for permit in lieu of a wet signature.
Safety and performance standards established by the California electrical code shall provide an electronic "notarized" copy of proof of ownership of
said property and the contractor utilized by the applicant shall provide proof of current contractor's license and insurance.
Applicants are required to appear in person at the time of permit issuance. Permits will not be issued electronically and shall be available for issuance
each business day during regular hours of operation.
C. The city of Porterville engineering and building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop
solar energy systems shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review. This standard plan and checklist will be updated and reviewed
periodically by the engineering and building division and revised if necessary to comply with all applicable requirements.
D. The small residential rooftop solar energy system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall conform to the most current state codes.
E. All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code sections 65850.55, 66015,
66016, and state Health And Safety Code section 17951. (Ord. 1829, 11-17-2015)
7-18: PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 138/636
A. The city of Porterville engineering and building division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems within thirty (30) days of the adoption hereof. The engineering and building division shall issue a building
permit or other nondiscretionary permit the same day for over the counter application or within one to three (3) business days for electronic application
of receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved administrative process and standard plan. The building official may
require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific,
adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city of Porterville building appeals board.
B. Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety
requirements.
C. If a use permit is required, the building official may deny the application for the use permit if the official makes written findings upon substantive
evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method
to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible
alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city of Porterville building appeals board.
D. Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
E. "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost effective method, condition, or
mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to
ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of state law, including, but not limited to, subparagraphs (A) and (B) of
paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or
decrease its efficiency or specified performance.
F. The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, meaning a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association
created for the purpose of managing a common interest development, as the term "association" is defined in section 4080 of the Civil Code.
G. If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to, or given to, the applicant for resubmission.
H. Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the engineering and building division for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible
for expedited review. The city of Porterville engineering and building division has the authority/responsibility to perform safety inspections regarding
ingress and egress on roof clearances regarding solar panels at rooftops and at leading edges. The engineering and building division will also inspect
for proper flashing installation requirements, installation of smoke alarm(s) and carbon monoxide detectors, and that the requirements of SB 407 for the
replacement of noncompliant plumbing fixtures are being met.
I. The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two (2) business
days of a request being received and shall be assigned a two (2) hour inspection window.
J. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is required and, henceforth, shall be held to the same
requirements as all inspections outside of the purview of this article. (Ord. 1829, 11-17-2015)
Chapter Article VI
MOVING BUILDINGS
7-25: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector of the city. (Ord. 688 § 1)
7-26: WIDE, OVERWEIGHT OR OVERLONG PERMIT; REQUIRED; EXCEPTION:
No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer;
provided, however, that a permit will not be required for moving the following:
A. Temporary sheds or other structures used by contractors in conjunction with construction work.
B. Other small and unimportant structures when approved by the building inspector. (Ord. 1537 § B24, 8-6-1996)
7-27: WIDE, OVERWEIGHT OR OVERLONG PERMIT; APPLICATION; INSPECTION FEE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 139/636
Any person desiring a permit as required in section 7-26 of this article shall file with the city engineer an application therefor in writing on a form to be
furnished by the city. The applicant shall pay a fee as fixed by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be paid upon filing of the application. (Ord. 1537
§ B25, 8-6-1996)
7-28: WIDE, OVERWEIGHT OR OVERLONG PERMIT; CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
The application for the permit pursuant to section 7-26 of this article shall specify the following:
A. The character and size of the building to be moved.
B. The location from which and to which such building is to be moved.
C. The streets on, over or through which it is desired to move such building.
D. The building permit number for purposes of relocating the building, if the building is proposed to be located within the city. (Ord. 1537 § B26, 8-6-1996)
7-29: BUILDING RELOCATION; INSPECTION; COMPLIANCE WITH BUILDING REGULATIONS:
Prior to filing the application for the permit required in section 7-26 of this article, the building inspector shall inspect the building to determine the general
condition and shall, upon completion of such investigation, set forth the requirements necessary to secure compliance with the building ordinance, the
zoning ordinance, the provisions of this code and all other applicable ordinances and laws of the city. (Ord. 1537 § B27, 8-6-1996)
7-30: BUILDING RELOCATION; BUILDING PERMIT; BOND REQUIRED PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
The building official shall not issue a building permit for relocation unless the applicant or his authorized agent first submits required plans and posts with
the building official a bond executed by such applicant, as principal, and by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, as surety, or makes a
deposit as provided in section 7-31 of this article.
The surety bond required by this section shall comply with the following requirements:
A. It shall be joint and several in form.
B. It shall name the city as obligee.
C. It shall be in an amount equal to the estimated cost plus ten percent (10%) of the work required to be done in order to comply with all the conditions of
the relocation permit, such estimate to be made by the building official. (Ord. 1537 § B28, 8-6-1996)
7-31: BUILDING RELOCATION; BUILDING PERMIT; CASH DEPOSIT IN LIEU OF BOND; CONDITIONS GENERALLY OF
BOND:
If a cash deposit is made instead of a surety bond, it shall also be equal to the cost plus ten percent (10%) of such work. Such bond herein referred to in
section 7-30 of this article shall guarantee and ensure the complete performance of all work required in the permit within a period of six (6) months from
date of issuance of the permit. (Ord. 716 § 2)
7-32: BUILDING RELOCATION; DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The building official shall not issue a building permit for relocation of any building or structure which is so dilapidated, unsightly, or in such a condition of
deterioration or disrepair, that placing the building at the proposed relocation site would substantially diminish the value of other property or improvements
within a radius of one thousand feet (1,000') from the proposed relocation site. (Ord. 1537 § B29, 8-6-1996)
7-33: BUILDING RELOCATION; REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
The building inspector, at any time, for sufficient cause, may revoke or suspend any permit granted under this article. (Ord. 688 § 6)
7-34: LIABILITY INSURANCE; REQUIRED:
Every person moving a building in the city shall file with the city a liability insurance policy issued by a solvent corporation holding a certificate of authority
to do insurance business in the state, which policy shall conform in all respects to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 1537 § B30, 8-6-1996)
7-35: LIABILITY INSURANCE; CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE IN LIEU OF FILING INSURANCE POLICY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 140/636
In lieu of filing the insurance policy referred to in the preceding section, a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance corporation may be filed. The
certificate must show that a policy meeting the requirements of the preceding section has been issued, and shall set forth the expiration date of such
policy. (Ord. 688 § 5)
7-36: LIABILITY INSURANCE; INURE TO USE OF CITY; CONDITIONS GENERALLY; AMOUNT:
The liability policy required in section 7-34 of this article shall run to the city for the use and benefit of any person intended to be protected thereby and
shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to public or private property and the payment for any damages or losses resulting from any
malfeasance, misfeasance, nonfeasance or negligence in connection with any activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for as required in
section 7-26 of this article is granted, and shall also insure the person moving a building against loss from the liability imposed by law for injury to, or death
of, any person, or damage to any property growing out of the moving of such building, to the amount or limit of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) exclusive
of interest and costs, on account of injury to, or death of, any one person, and, subject to the same limit as respects injury to or death of one person, of
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) exclusive of interest and costs, on account of moving any one building resulting in injury to or death of more
than one person, and of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for damage to property of others, resulting from moving from any one building. (Ord.
688 § 5)
7-37: SUPERVISION OF MOVER:
Every building which is moved on, over or through any public street, way or park in the city shall be under the control of the mover and every such building
shall be moved in a careful manner and the work shall be prosecuted with diligence and to the satisfaction and approval of the city engineer. This section
in no way relieves the person having charge of the moving of any building of his obligation to furnish proper supervision. (Ord. 1537 § B31, 8-6-1996)
7-38: TIME DESIGNATED BY CITY ENGINEER:
A time for moving the building within the city shall be set by the city engineer and shall be during a period which will minimize interference with normal
traffic movement and will not otherwise endanger or inconvenience the public unnecessarily. (Ord. 1537 § B32, 8-6-1996)
7-39: NOTICE REQUIRED BEFORE COMMENCING WORK:
Notice must be given by the person to whom the permit is issued, or his representative, to both the public works department and the police department of
the city not less than twenty four (24) nor more than forty eight (48) hours before the actual work of moving a building or structure is to commence. (Ord.
1537 § B33, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
7-40: DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE OF TERM OR CONDITION OF PERMIT:
Whenever a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof shall be given to the permittee by the
building inspector, such notice to state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed to be reasonably necessary to
complete such work. After receipt of such notice the permittee must, within the time therein specified, either cause the work to be done or pay the city the
estimated cost of doing the work, as set forth in the notice, plus ten percent (10%) of such estimated cost. Upon receipt of notice that the permittee has
deposited such money, the building inspector shall cause the required work to be performed and completed. (Ord. 688 § 9)
7-41: APPROVAL OF STREETS OVER WHICH BUILDING TO BE MOVED:
The streets over which any building or structure is to be moved shall be approved by the city engineer and the chief of police. (Ord. 1537 § B34, 8-6-1996)
7-42: MOVED BUILDINGS PLACED ON FOUNDATION WITHIN SIXTY DAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as mover or the one causing the moving to be done as owner of the real property or as owner of the building or
structure, to permit any building or structure which has been moved to remain upon any real property in the city for more than sixty (60) days unless such
building or structure is attached to the ground by a proper foundation as required by the building code of the city. (Ord. 688 § 11)
7-43: CLEANLINESS, EXCAVATION OF OLD PREMISES:
There shall be issued a demolition permit prior to moving a building or buildings from lots within the city. Permittee shall remove all rubbish and materials
from the site and fill all excavations to existing grade leaving the premises in a safe and sanitary condition. The sanitary sewer house service shall be
excavated at the property line and capped in a suitable manner. (Ord. 1537 § B35, 8-6-1996)
7-44: OBSTRUCTING STREETS:
No person owning or having charge of the moving of any building, into, on, over, through, or from any public streets, ways or parks in the city, shall permit
such building to remain in any one location on any such street, way or park for a period longer than twenty four (24) hours except by written permission
obtained from the chief of police, or to obstruct traffic on any railroad. (Ord. 688 § 13)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 141/636
7-45: LIGHTS AND BARRICADES:
The person having charge of the moving of any structure shall maintain proper lights and barricades whenever such structure is on any public street, way
or park, during the hours of darkness. (Ord. 688 § 14)
7-46: REMOVAL OF WIRES AND STRUCTURAL SUPPORTS:
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted pursuant to this article makes it necessary to move, remove or
displace any pole or other structure supporting the wires, cables or other equipment of any public utility of the city, or to cut, displace or change the
location of any wire, cable or other equipment upon such poles or structure, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or his authorized
representative, shall obtain permission in writing from the owner of such pole or structure or the wires, cables or other equipment thereon, and shall notify
such owner at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will necessitate the removal of such obstructions.
The person to whom such permit is granted as required in this article for the removal of buildings shall not at the expiration of such time of notice or at any
time, cut, move or in any way disturb such public utility or city property; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workmen of the utility or the
city, whichever is the owner. (Ord. 688 § 15)
7-47: PAYMENT OF COSTS BY MOVER FOR WIRE REMOVAL:
The person to whom such permit is granted as required in this article for the removal of buildings shall pay to the public utility, or to the city, as the case
may be, any and all costs or expense for the removal, rearrangement or replacement of any pole or structural support of wires, cables or equipment or of
the equipment thereon or of any damage to such property. (Ord. 688 § 15)
7-48: REMOVAL OF TREES; NOTICE REQUIRED:
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted pursuant to this article makes it necessary to trim, move, remove or
replant any tree, plant or shrub belonging to or under the control of the city, the person to whom such permit has been granted, or his authorized
representative, shall notify the director of parks and leisure services at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the time that the moving of such building will
necessitate the removal of such obstructions. (Ord. 1537 § B36, 8-6-1996)
7-49: REMOVAL OF TREES; AUTHORIZATION:
The person to whom such permit is granted as required in this article for the removal of buildings shall not, at the expiration of such time of notice or at any
time, trim, move, remove, replant or otherwise disturb such trees, plants or shrubs; and such work shall be done only by the authorized workmen of the city
unless otherwise approved and so ordered by the director of parks and leisure services. (Ord. 1537 § B37, 8-6-1996)
7-50: REMOVAL OF TREES; PAYMENT OF COSTS:
The person to whom such permit is granted as required in this article for the removal of buildings shall pay to the city any and all costs or expense for the
trimming, moving, removing or replanting of any trees, plants or shrubs or of any damage thereto. (Ord. 688 § 16)
7-51: DAMAGE TO STREETS OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
In the event that the moving of any building for which a permit shall have been granted pursuant to this article causes damage to the public streets or other
public property, in addition to any other remedies the city may have, the city engineer may cause such damage to be repaired and the cost thereof shall be
deducted from the deposit required by section 7-40 of this article, or he may require the person to whom such a permit has been granted, or his authorized
representative, upon written notification from the city engineer to make all necessary repairs to such streets or property; provided, however, that should
such person to whom such permit has been granted, and to whom such notice has been given, or his authorized representative, fail to make such
necessary repairs within the period of time designated in such written notice, the city engineer may cause such necessary repairs to be made and the cost
thereof deducted from the deposit required by section 7-40 of this article. (Ord. 1537 § B38, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article VII
RESERVED
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article VIII
SWIMMING POOLS1
Chapter Article IX
UNIFORM BUILDING AND HOUSE NUMBERING SYSTEM
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 142/636
7-63: PLAN ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted a plan for the orderly numbering of houses, buildings, separate entrances, offices and all other entrances and locations from
public streets in the city of Porterville in accordance with the proposal of the planning commission of said city. (Ord. 788 § 1, 3-17-1964)
7-64: SPECIFICATIONS FOR NUMBERING:
Numbering shall be in accordance with the following provisions:
A. Numbering Required: All buildings fronting on streets, avenues, and public ways in the city of Porterville and within the metropolitan building numbering
area as hereinafter described shall be numbered in accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Issuance Of Numbers; Record Maintained: Each building location within the city limits shall be separately numbered and numbers shall be assigned
upon application with the building inspector or other city official designated by the council of the city of Porterville, who shall maintain a permanent
record of all numbers assigned.
C. Manner Of Assigning Numbers: Numbers shall be assigned in such a manner that even numbers shall be assigned on the north and east sides of the
streets in the city of Porterville and odd numbers shall be assigned on the south and west sides of streets in the city of Porterville.
D. Numbers Shown On Map: A record of said building numbers assigned and to be assigned shall be kept on a suitable map or maps in the office of the
city building inspector.
E. Street Orientation: Streets orientated north of the east-west baseline shall have a prefix "North" and streets located south of the east-west baseline shall
have a prefix "South". Streets located east of the north-south baseline shall have a prefix "East". Streets located west of the baseline shall have a prefix
"West".
F. Building Numbers: Building numbers shall be assigned beginning at the above stated east-west baseline at one hundred (100) numbers per six hundred
sixty feet (660') (1/8 of a mile) east and west of the line and building numbers shall be assigned beginning at Olive Street baseline at one hundred (100)
numbers per six hundred sixty feet (660') north and south of the said baseline.
G. Frontage: There shall be assigned approximately 13.2 feet, plus or minus, of frontage per number adjusted to conform with the actual distance in any
land section within the metropolitan building area.
H. Diagonal Streets: The numbering of diagonal streets shall be progressive in the same direction at the rate of one hundred (100) numbers per six
hundred sixty feet (660') with an adjustment being made in the frontage per number, depending on the degree of the diagonal.
I. Curved Streets: Curved streets shall be assigned the numbers assigned from the grid system at that point and progress according to the curvature of the
streets. Such curved streets and the assignment of numbers to buildings fronting on said streets shall have special consideration in the integration of
the system into this article as and when they shall hereafter occur.
J. Street Name Conflicts: The city engineer of the city of Porterville is hereby assigned the duty of processing all cases wherein street names on the same
alignment are different and of recommending one name for said street to the city council of the city of Porterville or the board of supervisors of the
county of Tulare if said streets are within the metropolitan building numbering area.
K. Baselines: Olive Avenue and its prolongation as shown on the map is hereby designated as the east-west baseline and Main Street, and its
prolongation north onto Division Street, is hereby designated as the north-south baseline. (Ord. 788 § 2, 3-17-1964; Ord. 1537 § B39, 8-6-1996)
7-65: SIZE, MATERIAL AND LOCATION OF BUILDING NUMBERS:
Building numbers shall be not less than three inches (3") in height and shall be of a durable material; shall be legible and shall be placed on said property
in such a manner as to be easily seen from the street on which the entrance to said property faces. (Ord. 788 § 3, 3-17-1964)
7-66: OWNER OR OCCUPANT'S DUTY TO NUMBER PROPERTY:
It is hereby made the duty of the owner or occupant of any house, building, separate entrance, office and all other entrances and locations to number or
cause to be numbered his or her house, building, separate entrance, office and all other entrances and locations in accordance with the provisions of this
article within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of any number assigned to said location or of any violation of this article from the building inspector or
any other official or employee of said city. (Ord. 788 § 4, 3-17-1964)
7-67: BUILDING INSPECTOR'S DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to notify the owner or occupant of a location of the number assigned to said location; the requirement of this
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 143/636
article that numbers be installed and maintained and, to determine whether the same are installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
article. (Ord. 788 § 5, 3-17-1964)
7-68: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms and provisions of this article within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of said violation shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county or city
jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 788 § 6, 3-17-1964)
Chapter Article X
BUILDING SETBACK LINES
7-69: FINDINGS OF CITY COUNCIL:
In order to promote, protect, and maintain the health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of Porterville, it is deemed necessary that building setback lines as
hereafter defined be established within and along all streets, alleys, and other thoroughfares within the city of Porterville. (Ord. 876 § 1, 5-4-1967)
7-70: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line running parallel with the centerline of a street at a distance hereafter established in this article.
STREET: As used in this article, shall include all streets, avenues, highways, and other thoroughfares within the city of Porterville. (Ord. 876 §§ 2, 3, 5-4-
1967)
7-71: CENTERLINE OF EACH STREET TO BE ESTABLISHED:
The city engineer shall establish the centerline of each street within the city of Porterville. (Ord. 876 § 4, 5-4-1967)
7-72: STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS PROHIBITED BETWEEN STREET AND BUILDING SETBACK LINES:
Between the building setback lines as they shall exist along all streets within the city of Porterville, it shall be unlawful to erect buildings of any kind; or to
erect any structure including, but not limited to, advertising structures or solid walls or to establish any well, whether for water, oil or other hydrocarbon
substance, or to make excavations or install any subsurface structure of any kind; provided, that such prohibition shall not apply to trees, agricultural crops,
open fences, or public utilities installed under authority of law. (Ord. 876 § 5, 5-4-1967)
7-73: BUILDING SETBACK LINES ESTABLISHED:
The building setback lines for each street within the city in feet shall be as set forth by chapter 21 of this code. (Ord. 876 § 6, 5-4-1967; Ord. 1355 § A, 6-3-
1986)
7-74: BUILDING PERMITS; COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE REQUIRED:
All officers and employees of the city of Porterville authorized or required by law or ordinance to issue permits, licenses or other evidences of authority for
the erection or locating of any building, structure or installation within the meaning of this article shall issue no such permit, license or other evidence
contrary to the provisions of this article and any such permit, license or evidence of authority issued in conflict with the provisions of this article shall be null
and void. (Ord. 876 § 7, 5-4-1967)
7-75: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE:
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall erect, locate or install, or who shall cause to be erected, located or installed any building, structure,
excavation, well, or subsurface structure, contrary to the provisions of this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period of not more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, association or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this article is permitted or continued by such person, firm, association or corporation, and
shall be punishable therefor as provided in this article; provided, that any building structure, well, excavation or subsurface structure existing on the
effective date of this article shall not be deemed to be a violation of this article. (Ord. 876 § 8, 5-4-1967)
7-76: PROHIBITED CONSTRUCTION DEEMED NUISANCE; ABATEMENT:
It is hereby declared that any prohibited construction within the provisions of this article within the building setback lines herein established shall be and is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance subject to abatement and further subject to all other legal remedies to the city of Porterville. (Ord. 876 § 9, 5-4-
1967)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 144/636
7-77: CONSTRUCTION OF ARTICLE; EFFECT ON ZONING ORDINANCE:
This article shall not nor shall it be construed to limit any zoning ordinance of the city of Porterville now in effect or hereafter adopted. (Ord. 876 § 10, 5-4-
1967)
7-78: VARIANCES:
If unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this article result through the strict and literal interpretations and enforcement
thereof in relation to properties which, because of size, shape, location or other special circumstances, might be unreasonable or inconsistently affected by
the provisions of this article, the city council of the city of Porterville, upon a written application from the owner or owners of such property, shall have the
authority to grant a variance from the provisions of this article as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so that the spirit of this article
shall be observed, public safety and welfare served and substantial justice done. Provided further, that the granting of such variance shall be subject to the
procedures set forth and described in the zoning ordinances of the city of Porterville, and before granting any variance the city council shall strictly follow
the procedures set forth in said zoning ordinances. (Ord. 1537 § B40, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article XI
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
7-80: CODE ADOPTED:
A. That certain code in book form to which more particular reference is hereinafter made, setting forth orderly procedures for the repair, vacation and
demolition of buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or
their occupants, to be known and referred to as the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings, is hereby adopted and enacted by the city
council of the city of Porterville as an ordinance for the city of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every
sentence, comma, paragraph, word, phrase and clause in said code mentioned or referred to therein were and each thereof was fully and specifically
set forth herein.
B. Reference is hereby made to one copy of the 1997 edition of the uniform code for the abatement of dangerous buildings compiled by the International
Conference of Building Officials, filed with the city clerk of Porterville and said code is by reference adopted herein as provided by law. (Ord. 1243 § A,
10-27-1981; Ord. 1296 § A, 2-7-1984; Ord. 1373 § A, 1-6-1987; Ord. 1425 § A, 11-21-1989; Ord. 1523 § A, 11-21-1995; Ord. 1573 § A, 5-18-1999)
Chapter Article XII
HOUSING
7-101: CODE ADOPTED:
A. That certain code in book form to which more particular reference is hereinafter made, setting forth procedures for the repair, rehabilitation, vacation or
demolition of substandard buildings used for human habitation which endangers the life, health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the
occupants thereof, to be known and referred to as the uniform housing code, is hereby adopted and enacted by the city council of the city of Porterville
as an ordinance of the city of Porterville, to all intents and purposes and to the same effect as if each and every sentence, comma, paragraph, word,
phrase and clause in said code mentioned or referred to therein or herein were and each thereof was fully and specifically set forth herein.
B. Reference is hereby made to one copy of the 1997 edition of the uniform housing code compiled by the International Conference of Building Officials,
filed with the city clerk of Porterville and said code is by reference adopted herein as provided by law. (Ord. 1243 § A, 10-27-1981; Ord. 1296 § A, 2-7-
1984; Ord. 1373 § A, 1-6-1987; Ord. 1425 § A, 11-21-1989; Ord. 1523 § A, 11-21-1995; Ord. 1573 § A, 5-18-1999)
Chapter Article XIII
PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORTS
7-125: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to comply with section 17953 of the California Health and Safety Code relating to buildings and structures accessory thereto,
requiring a preliminary soil report on every new subdivision as defined in sections 11535, 11535.1 and 11568 of the California Business and Professions
Code. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-126: PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT:
A preliminary soil report, prepared by a civil engineer who is registered by the state of California, based upon test borings or excavations which the city
engineer determines to be adequate shall be made of every new subdivision. The city engineer may waive the preliminary soil report if he determines that
because of knowledge of his department as to the soil qualities of the subdivision no preliminary analysis is needed. (Ord. 1537 § B41, 8-6-1996)
7-127: RECOMMENDATION FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 145/636
If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critical expansive soils or compressive or colube soils or other soil problems, which if not corrected,
would lead to structural defects, such a soil report shall require an investigation of each lot in the subdivision, unless a final report in accordance with
section 7-133 of this article is filed with the city engineer. The engineer shall recommend corrective action in his report to prevent structural damage to
each structure proposed to be constructed on the soil investigated. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-128: APPROVAL FOR BUILDING PERMIT:
The preliminary soil report, including the investigation and recommended corrective action to prevent structural damage, shall be filed with and approved
by the city engineer of the city of Porterville prior to issuance of a building permit. The building permit shall be conditioned upon the incorporation of the
approved recommended action for foundation treatment as part of the construction of each structure. Before approving said preliminary soil report,
including the investigation and recommendation, the city engineer shall determine that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural
damage to each structure to be constructed on each lot in the subdivision. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-129: LIABILITY:
The city of Porterville, the city engineer of the city of Porterville, his deputies, and department employees or other officers or employees of said city
charged with the administration and enforcement of this article shall not be held liable for any injury which arises out of any act or omission of the said city
officers or employees in performing any duty or act imposed by this article. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-130: PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT MINIMUM DATA:
The minimum data which must be furnished the city engineer in the preliminary soil report shall include, but not be limited to, that data set out by resolution
of the city council of the city of Porterville. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-131: PRELIMINARY SOIL REPORT RECOMMENDED CORRECTIVE ACTION:
The preliminary soil report shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following recommendations:
A. Corrective Proposals For Earth Work: In cases where unsuitable materials are found, proposals to replace, rework or blend, or to stabilize or modify
with additives either the natural site soils or the proposed fill materials, shall be supported by appropriate laboratory analysis and such other data as
may be necessary for evaluation of the proposal.
B. Specifications For Grading: A complete and detailed specification shall be prepared by the civil engineer for clearing, grubbing and all aspects of
grading, including filling with imported fill material, with special emphasis on preparation of surfaces to receive fill, moisture content, nature of field
density tests, horizontal and vertical survey control of the job, and minimum percent relative density to be obtained in the field as related to specified
type of laboratory density tests described above.
C. Statements Regarding Specified Grading: The engineer's professional recommendation regarding: 1) the safe load bearing capacity for such controlled
area; 2) the maximum slope ratios necessary for slope stability for proposed fill and cut slopes over two feet (2') in height; 3) the stability anticipated in
cut areas; and 4) the stability of underlying soils when subjected to saturation based on test data and other factual information.
D. Recommendation For Foundation Design: Recommendations for specifications of footing, foundations and/or slabs that will prevent future development
of structural defects in the foundations and superstructure attributable to differential movement of the supporting soils. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-132: GRADING INSPECTION AND SUPERVISION:
All grading involving a preliminary soil report shall be performed under the supervision of a civil engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer
to supervise and coordinate all site supervision and testing during grading operations. The preliminary soil report, and its recommendation, which has been
first approved by the city engineer, shall be used as a basis for the grading operations. If, in the course of fulfilling this responsibility as the supervising civil
engineer, he finds that the work is not being done in conformance with the preliminary report and grading plans approved by the city engineer or in
accordance with accepted practices, he shall immediately notify the person in charge of the grading work and the city engineer, in writing, of the
nonconformity and of the corrective measures to be taken. In the event the supervising civil engineer is relieved of or otherwise terminates his duties prior
to completion of the work shown on the grading plans, he shall report the fact, in writing, to the city engineer within forty eight (48) hours from the time
such termination begins together with a report on the status of the work at his last inspection. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-133: FINAL REPORTS:
The supervising civil engineer shall certify in a final report that all grading, lot drainage, and drainage facilities have been completed in conformance with
the approved preliminary report. An as built grading plan shall be submitted if final grade elevations vary by more than 0.3 foot from the original plan. The
final report shall also include a recommended soil bearing capacity statement as to the expansive or compressive qualities of the soil when subjected to
saturation, and summaries of field and laboratory tests. The approximate location of such tests and limits of compacted fill shall be shown on a final plan.
Final approval of grading shall not be given until all maps and reports, as required by this section, have been submitted and approved by the city engineer.
The building official of the city of Porterville shall not approve any building permit on any lot within any tract subject to this article until the final soil report as
described in this article has been submitted to him and recorded with the county recorder of Tulare County. (Ord. 1537 § B42, 8-6-1996)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 146/636
7-134: LIMITS OF ENGINEER'S DUTIES:
The duty of the engineer doing soil reports pursuant to this article shall be limited by the following:
A. After completion of the final report, any excavation made for the installation of sewer, water, gas, electric or other utilities in or around the building area
shall be sufficiently backfilled and compacted, and control of and responsibility for this work shall be the responsibility of persons doing this work unless
such control is specifically delegated by the property owner to the persons originally responsible for soil conditions as reported in the final report.
B. In the case of excavation for basements or other portions of structures which may require structural backfill, the persons responsible for the final report
shall have no professional duty in connection with such work unless they are specifically designated by the owner to control such work. (Ord. 900 § A,
3-19-1968)
7-135: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person, firm or corporation wilfully violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed,
continued, or permitted; and upon conviction, any such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or by
imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 900 § A, 3-19-1968)
7-136: ADDITIONAL CIVIL REMEDY:
Any violation of the provisions of this article and the standards established pursuant thereto is hereby determined to constitute a threat to the public health,
safety and welfare and is declared to be a public nuisance; and such violation may be enjoined in a civil action instituted by the city attorney. (Ord. 900 § A,
3-19-1968)
7-137: REVIEW BY BUILDING CODE REVIEW BOARD:
In order to provide for reasonable interpretations of this article and avoid unnecessary hardship in its enforcement, the building code board of appeals for
the city of Porterville is hereby granted jurisdiction to review all orders issued by the city engineer and his subordinates pursuant to this article. The board
may affirm, modify or set aside any such order. All decisions of the board shall be final and conclusive.
In order to provide the building code board of appeals with independent advice in regard to the matters that may come up pertaining to the application of
this chapter, where the board determines such advice is necessary, the board shall appoint an advisory committee composed of three (3) civil engineers.
This committee shall review all appealed matters arising under this article which are referred to it by the building code board of appeals and shall make
recommendations in accordance with their studies and findings. Said recommendations, where requested, shall not be binding on the building code board
of appeals, but shall be considered before their final decisions. (Ord. 1537 § B43, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article XIV
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CODE
7-138: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS:
7-138.1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION:
The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Porterville does
hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-138.2: FINDINGS OF FACT:
A. The flood hazard areas of the city of Porterville are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-138.3: STATEMENT OF PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone,
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 147/636
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas
caused by flood damage;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-138.4: METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES:
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes regulations to:
A. Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
erosion or flood heights or velocities;
B. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
C. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
D. Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
E. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord.
1777, 5-3-2011)
7-139: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application.
A ZONE: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure that is either:
A. Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
B. A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value.
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded
from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris
flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three
feet (3'); a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 148/636
BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood
is the term used throughout this article.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water
surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent (1%) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 2, 2011.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): The official map on which the federal emergency management agency or federal insurance
administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOODWATER: A. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the
overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
B. The condition resulting from flood related erosion.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate
map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This article and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas.
This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and
damage.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See definition of Flood, Flooding, Or
Floodwater.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing,
see FEMA technical bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1'). Also referred to as "regulatory floodway".
FLOODWAY FRINGE: That area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted.
FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION: As related to section 7-143 of this article, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the
public. In examining this requirement, the city of Porterville will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities
and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation
are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject
to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property,
unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
GOVERNING BODY: The city council of the city of Porterville, which is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health,
safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
HARDSHIP: As related to section 7-143 of this article means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The
governing body requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not
exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as
a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 149/636
more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
A. Listed individually in the national register of historic places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the
secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register;
B. Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a
district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
C. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of
interior; or
D. Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an
approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see definition of Basement).
A. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
1. The flood openings standard in subsection 7-142.1C3 of this article;
2. The anchoring standards in subsection 7-142.1A of this article;
3. The construction materials and methods standards in subsection 7-142.1B of this article; and
4. The standards for utilities in section 7-142.3 of this article.
B. For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see definition of Basement). This
prohibition includes below grade garages and storage areas.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent
or sale.
MARKET VALUE: As defined in the city of Porterville substantial damage/improvement procedures. See subsection 7-141.2B1 of this article.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American vertical
datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after June 2,
2011, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 2, 2011.
OBSTRUCTION: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or
collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.
100-YEAR FLOOD: See definition of Base Flood.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY: A defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective
implementation of those floodplain management regulations.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE: As related to section 7-143 of this article, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is
injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 150/636
use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
B. Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
C. Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
D. Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot (1').
REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not
possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this article or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SHEET FLOW AREA: See definition of Area Of Shallow Flooding.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is
shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred
eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include
the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of
a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have
been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
B. Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure".
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American vertical datum (NAVD) of
1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-140: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
7-140.1: LANDS TO WHICH THIS ARTICLE APPLIES:
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Porterville. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-140.2: BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 151/636
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) for "The Flood
Insurance Rate Map For Tulare County And The Incorporated Areas" dated June 16, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and
flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated June 16, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this article. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this article and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this article and which are recommended to the governing body by the floodplain administrator. The
study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at 291 N. Main Street, Porterville, CA 93257, city hall, public works department. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-140.3: COMPLIANCE:
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other
applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein
shall prevent the governing body from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-140.4: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another
ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-
2011)
7-140.5: INTERPRETATION:
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-140.6: WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall
not create liability on the part of the city council, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the federal emergency management agency, for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-141: ADMINISTRATION:
7-141.1: DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The public works director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this article by granting or denying development permits in accord with
its provisions. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-141.2: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR:
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Permit Review: Review all development permits to determine:
1. Permit requirements of this article have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing
structures;
2. All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
3. The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
4. The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the city of
Porterville; and
5. All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be
issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 152/636
B. Development Of Substantial Improvement And Substantial Damage Procedures:
1. Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers To Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings", develop detailed procedures for identifying
and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value".
2. Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.
C. Review, Use And Development Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 7-140.2
of this article, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer section 7-142 of this article.
Note: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two (2) methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain
Development In Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide For Obtaining And Developing Base (100-Year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995.
D. Notification Of Other Agencies:
1. Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
a. Notify adjacent communities and the California department of water resources prior to alteration or relocation;
b. Submit evidence of such notification to the federal emergency management agency; and
c. Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
2. Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:
a. Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
b. All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on
conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the "start of construction" definition.
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements are based on current data.
3. Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
E. Documentation Of Floodplain Development: Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:
1. Certification required by subsection 7-142.1C1 and section 7-142.5 (lowest floor elevations) of this article;
2. Certification required by subsection 7-142.1C2 (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures) of this article;
3. Certification required by subsection 7-142.1C3 (wet floodproofing standard) of this article;
4. Certification of elevation required by subsection 7-142.4A3 (subdivisions and other proposed development standards) of this article;
5. Certification required by subsection 7-142.7B (floodway encroachments) of this article; and
6. Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to
the federal emergency management agency.
F. Map Determination: Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 7-141.4 of this article.
G. Remedial Action: Take action to remedy violations of this article as specified in section 7-140.3 of this article.
H. Biennial Report: Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.
I. Planning: Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-141.3: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in section 7-140.2 of this article. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Porterville. The
applicant shall provide the following minimum information:
A. Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
1. Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 153/636
2. Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;
3. Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
4. Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
5. Base flood elevation information as specified in section 7-140.2 or subsection 7-141.2C of this article;
6. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
7. Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in subsection 7-142.1C2 of
this article and detailed in FEMA technical bulletin TB 3-93; and
8. Complete preliminary elevation certificate provided by the city of Porterville confirming and stating proposed elevation of lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures, including nonresidential structures being floodproofed.
B. Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in subsection 7-
142.1C2 of this article.
C. For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 7-142.1C3 of this article and detailed in
FEMA technical bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
E. All appropriate certifications listed in subsection 7-141.2E of this article. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-141.4: APPEALS:
The city council of the city of Porterville shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-142: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
7-142.1: STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION:
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
A. Anchoring: All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
B. Construction Materials And Methods: All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
1. With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
2. Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
3. With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and
4. Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
C. Elevation And Floodproofing:
1. Residential Construction: All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:
a. In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
b. In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or
elevated at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
c. In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under
subsection 7-141.2C of this article.
d. In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone) and not subject to the criteria in section 7-142.4 of this article, elevated
to:
(1) A height of at least two feet (2') above the highest adjacent grade, or
(2) Eighteen inches (18") above the highest top of curb elevation across the front of the lot, or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 154/636
(3) For the purpose of this article, construction completed prior to date of adoption of the chapter codified herein of any structure in zone A located
within the following described boundaries shall have the lowest floor including basement, elevated to a depth of one foot (1') above the highest
adjacent grade:
North boundary - Westfield Avenue
South boundary - Henderson Avenue
East boundary - Prospect Street
West boundary - Newcomb Street
New development or substantial improvements in this zone shall comply with the requirements of NFIP program and as outlined in this article.
Said boundary is shown on FIRM panel 1633 of 2550 (map number 06107C1633E), effective date of June 16, 2009, or
(4) Said base flood elevation shall be determined by one of the methods under subsection 7-141.2C of this article.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be
provided to the floodplain administrator.
2. Nonresidential Construction: All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with
subsection C1 of this section or:
a. Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under subsection C1 of this section, so
that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
c. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of subsections C2a and C2b of this section are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
3. Flood Openings: All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement
must meet the following minimum criteria:
a. For nonengineered openings:
(1) Have a minimum of two (2) openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade;
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwater; and
(4) Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow floodwater to directly enter; or
b. Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
4. Manufactured Homes:
a. See section 7-142.5 of this article.
5. Garages And Low Cost Accessory Structures:
a. Attached Garages:
(1) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic
entry of floodwaters, see subsection C3 of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials,
see subsection B of this section.
(2) A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade
parking areas, see FEMA technical bulletin TB-6.
b. Detached Garages And Accessory Structures:
(1) "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (2 car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low cost sheds), as defined in
section 7-139 of this article, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed
and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
(A) Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;
(B) The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood resistant materials;
(C) The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
(D) Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
(E) The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in section 7-142.7 of this article; and
(F) The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with subsection C3 of this section.
(2) Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in this section. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 155/636
7-142.2: STANDARDS FOR ELEVATION CERTIFICATES:
A. Certification of the elevation of the lowest floor or floodproofed elevation is required when the footings are set and finished floors are established.
Written confirmation shall be provided to the chief building official before proceeding to the next phase of construction. Failure to submit such written
certification shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. An elevation certificate shall be provided to the floodplain administrator and chief
building official prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. As built plans certifying the elevation of the lowest adjacent grades shall also be required.
B. Except within zones A and AO, the benches shown on the FIRM shall be used to calculate the elevation of the lowest floor.
C. If fill is used to elevate a structure above the base flood elevation, the permit holder may apply for a letter of map revision (LOMR), as set forth in
section 7-141.2 of this article. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-142.3: STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES:
A. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:
1. Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems; and
2. Discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
B. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-142.4: STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT:
A. All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty
(50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
1. Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE).
2. Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.
3. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator:
a. Lowest floor elevation.
b. Pad elevation.
c. Lowest adjacent grade.
B. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
C. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
D. All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-142.5: STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES:
A. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 2) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; 3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 4) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall:
1. Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
B. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section will be securely fastened to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:
1. Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
2. Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty
six inches (36") in height above grade.
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 156/636
7-142.6: STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
A. All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the
site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or
3. Meet the permit requirements of section 7-141.3 of this article and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection
7-142.5A of this article. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-142.7: FLOODWAYS:
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
A. Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within
zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot (1') at any point within the city of Porterville.
B. Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Porterville shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements,
and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in
any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
C. If subsections A and B of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply
with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section 7-142. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-143: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
7-143.1: NATURE OF VARIANCES:
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and
will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
The variance criteria set forth in this section 7-143 are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are
not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of
this article would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property
and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the governing body to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a
structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The
long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines
provided in this article are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are
designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-143.2: CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES:
A. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of onehalf
(1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of sections 7-141 and 7-142 of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2) acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
B. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in section 7-139 of this article) upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
C. Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
D. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
"Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this article. For example, in the case of variances to
an elevation requirement, this means the governing body need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the governing body believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local
ordinance.
E. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 157/636
1. The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and
2. Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
floodplain administrator in the office of the Tulare recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.
F. The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its
biennial report submitted to the federal emergency management agency. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
7-143.3: APPEAL BOARD:
A. In passing upon requests for variances, the governing body shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this article, and the:
1. Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
2. Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
3. Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future
owners of the property;
4. Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
5. Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
6. Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
7. Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
8. Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;
9. Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
10. Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
11. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
B. Variances shall only be issued upon a:
1. Showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional "hardship" to the applicant; and
3. Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public
expense, create a nuisance (see definition of "public safety and nuisance"), cause "fraud and victimization" of the public, or conflict with existing local
laws or ordinances.
C. Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections A through D of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and
does not create a public nuisance.
D. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 7-143.2A of this article and the purposes of this article, the governing body may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. (Ord. 1777, 5-3-2011)
Chapter 8
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
Chapter
PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS
8-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Porterville finds that the city has had past problems with door to door sales that are conducted in a manner detrimental to its
community members' safety. This includes, but is not limited to, such sales occurring late at night, posing a threat to the safety of those that are solicited as
well as those that engage in peddling and soliciting activities as defined below. Additionally such sales are at times misrepresented as being made by or
on the behalf of charitable nonprofit organizations, and these provisions will help deter such fraudulent conduct by requiring additional accountability from
those engaged in door to door sales. The public safety and convenience necessitates the exercise of police power through the enactment and
enforcement of the provisions proposed. However, these provisions are not intended to limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to solicit
funds, picket, protest, proselytize, or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 158/636
8-2: DEFINITION:
"Peddler", "solicitor", and/or "canvasser" (hereinafter referred to collectively in this chapter as "peddlers") includes "peddlers" as defined pursuant to
section 15-1 of this code and "solicitors or canvassers" as defined pursuant to section 15-1 of this code, and means any person who goes from house to
house, or from place to place in the city selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares and merchandise for present or future
delivery, or for services to be performed immediately or in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes a sample of such goods, wares
and merchandise, or not and whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person to act as a peddler within the city without having first obtained a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. This permit is required
in addition to any licenses required under chapter 15 of this code. The employees, agents, solicitors or representatives or any firm, irrespective of the form
of organization, may be covered under a single business license under chapter 15 of this code (if allowed under that chapter); however each individual
shall be required to obtain a permit pursuant to section 8-4 of this chapter unless exempt pursuant to section 8-12 of this chapter or under any other
provision of law. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applicants for a permit under this chapter shall file with the finance officer an application in writing on a form to be prescribed by the finance officer. (Ord.
1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-5: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
The application shall contain the following information:
A. The permanent home address and full local address of the peddler or solicitor;
B. The name and address of the person, firm or corporation by whom the peddler/solicitor is employed;
C. The length of service of each peddler/solicitor with such employer;
D. The place of residence and nature of the employment of the peddler/solicitor with such employer during the last preceding year;
E. The nature or character of the goods, wares, merchandise or services to be offered by the peddler/solicitor;
F. A personal description of the peddler/solicitor; including height, weight, eye color and hair color;
G. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
H. The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or
products are located at the time such application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery;
I. Photographs pursuant to section 8-8 of this chapter;
J. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the date of such
crime or violation, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
K. The time of day and/or evening during which the solicitation/sales activities will be taking place;
L. Any applicable state or federal permitting licensing information, when such a permit or license is required for the type of business or activity. (Ord. 1662
§ 1, 3-1-2005)
8-6: OTHER INFORMATION:
Such information shall be accompanied by such credentials and other evidence of good moral character and identity of each peddler/solicitor as may be
reasonably required by the finance officer. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-7: APPLICATION FEES:
A. The application fee, replacement application, and identification card fees shall be set by resolution.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 159/636
B. Fees and investigations as used in this section refer solely to individuals and not to firms. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-8: PHOTOGRAPHS REQUIRED:
Each application for a permit as required by this chapter must be accompanied by two (2) prints of a recent photograph of the peddler/solicitor, which
photographs shall not exceed two inches (2") square in size and shall be full front views of the face and head only of such peddler/solicitor. (Ord. 1662 § 1,
3-1-2005)
8-9: FINGERPRINTS REQUIRED:
At the time of making the application for a permit, each peddler/solicitor shall present himself/herself at the office of the chief of police of the city for the
purpose of being fingerprinted and supplying routine information required on the fingerprinting forms provided, without expense, by the city, including the
physical characteristics of each person, identifying marks or scars, age, name, address and signature. Such fingerprint records are to be taken in triplicate
and each individual so presenting himself/herself is advised that the city reserves the right to retain one of such fingerprint records in its files for permanent
safekeeping, and to send one such fingerprint record to the federal bureau of investigation of the department of justice at Washington, D.C., and to the
criminal investigation department of the California department of justice at Sacramento, California, for the purpose of filing. No fingerprint records will be
returned in the event the permit applied for is not issued or is subsequently suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-10: INVESTIGATION; CHARACTER AND BUSINESS RESPONSIBILITY:
The original copy of the application shall promptly be referred to the chief of police, who shall promptly make an investigation of the applicant's character
and business responsibility. If the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such
application the police chief's disapproval and the reason therefor and return the application to the finance officer. The finance officer shall notify the
applicant that the application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. If the chief of police finds that the applicant's character and business
responsibility are satisfactory, the police chief shall approve the application and return it to the finance officer, who shall promptly issue the permit and
identification card. The city may refuse to issue a permit to an applicant that has previously violated any provision of this chapter or chapter 15 of this code.
(Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-11: PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION CARD TO BE CARRIED ON PERSON:
Each peddler/solicitor issued a permit and identification card must be in possession of the permit and identification card at all times when engaged in the
business so permitted within the city. The peddler/solicitor must produce and show the permit and identification card on the demand of any person solicited
or of any police officer or official of the city. No person issued a permit or an identification card shall alter, remove or obliterate any entry made upon such
permit or card, or deface such permit or card in any way. Each permit and card shall be personal and not assignable or transferable, nor shall any permit
or card be used by any person other than the permittee or the person for whom the identification card is issued. The peddler/solicitor must wear the permit
so that it is visible at all times. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-12: EXEMPTION; TEMPORARY NONPROFIT FUNDRAISING:
The prescribed permit requirements shall not apply to nonprofit organizations which conduct occasional house to house retail sales of packaged wares
when the individuals are soliciting on behalf of such organizations, so long as prior to engaging in the activity, the organization submits an application to
the finance department, indicating the dates, time period and length of the temporary fundraising activity, and evidence of the organization's not for profit or
charitable status. The organizations and individuals shall be subject to all other conditions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the applicable
conditions set forth in section 8-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-13: CONDITIONS AND REGULATIONS:
The following conditions and regulations shall also apply in addition to those set forth in other parts of this chapter or elsewhere in this code:
A. Shouting; Calling Wares: No person acting under authority of any permit issued under this chapter shall shout or call the person's wares in a loud,
boisterous or unseemly manner, or to the disturbance of residents in the city.
B. Identification By Comparing Signature With That On Permit: Every peddler/solicitor, upon the request of any police officer or official of the city, shall sign
the peddler/solicitor's name for comparison with the signature upon the permit or card or the signature upon the permit application.
C. Order To Be Written In Duplicate: Any person acting under authority of any permit issued under this chapter who solicits orders for future delivery shall
write each order at least in duplicate, plainly stating the quantity of each article or commodity ordered, the price to be paid therefor, the total amount
ordered and the amount to be paid on or after delivery. One copy of such order shall be given to the customer.
D. Identification Required Upon Request: Every peddler/solicitor shall, upon request of any person solicited, provide his/her name, business address and
telephone number and the name, business address and telephone number of the person, organization, or entity on whose behalf solicitation is being
made.
E. Time: The time of day and/or evening during which the activities will occur shall be set at the time of application for the permit, and under no
circumstances will such activities occur before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 160/636
8-14: ENFORCEMENT:
A. A permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit;
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business as peddler/solicitor;
3. Any violation of this chapter;
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
5. Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
This section shall be self-executing and the suspension or revocation shall be effective immediately. The city clerk shall give notice of the suspension
or revocation of the permit and sufficient notice shall be given if mailed or delivered to the permittee at the permittee's last known local address.
B. The city may refuse to issue a permit to an applicant that has previously violated any provision of this chapter or chapter 15 of this code.
C. Any person subject to the permit requirements of this chapter who conducts the activities described in this chapter without first having obtained the
prescribed permit required under this chapter, in a case where the city decides to issue such a permit, may be required to pay a fee for such permit
equal to up to double the amount of the fee for said permit.
D. Activities conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute and be punishable as an infraction.
E. Activities conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and shall be subject to civil enforcement, including,
but not limited to, injunctive relief.
F. Violators of this and any other chapter of this code shall also be subject to any other applicable enforcement provisions set forth in this code.
G. All applicable remedies set forth in this code are deemed to be cumulative. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-15: APPEALS TO CITY COUNCIL:
In the event that any applicant or permittee desires to appeal from any order, revocation or other ruling of the finance officer, the chief of police or any other
official of the city, made under the provisions of this chapter, such applicant or any other person aggrieved shall file written notice of such appeal with the
city clerk and such matters shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council, at which time the city council shall hear and receive evidence,
written and oral upon all matters involved. The decision of the city council shall be final upon all parties concerned. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-16: PEDDLING/SOLICITING UNLAWFUL WHERE SIGNPOSTED:
It is unlawful for any person described in section 8-2 of this chapter to perform or attempt to perform the acts described in such section by ringing the
doorbell or knocking at the door or otherwise calling attention to the person's presence of or at any residence whereon a sign bearing the words "No
Peddlers", "No Solicitors" or words of similar import is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view, and no person, described in section 8-2 of this
chapter shall perform or attempt to perform any of the acts described in such section in any building, structure or place of business wherein a sign
prohibiting the activities, is painted or affixed so as to be exposed to public view. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-17: DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS; EXCLUDED:
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit persons from distributing handbills door to door within the city without a permit, nor shall this chapter prohibit
individuals from engaging in anonymous religious or political speech. However, such activities shall be prohibited if a sign has been posted by the property
or business owner or manager that clearly prohibits such activities, and such activities can be legally prohibited at the site under those circumstances.
(Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
8-18: SEVERABILITY:
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter are distinct and
severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses and/or phrases are declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs,
clauses, or phrases of this chapter. (Ord. 1662 § 1, 3-1-2005)
Chapter 9
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 161/636
Chapter
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER
9-1: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for disaster and emergency services, the protection of persons
and property within the city of Porterville in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the coordination of the disaster and emergency functions of the city
with all other affected persons and agencies, both public and private. Any expenditures made in connection with such disaster or emergency services,
including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property in the city. (Ord. 987
§ A, 10-6-1970)
9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this chapter:
DISASTER: Actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other public calamity. It shall not
include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to, any condition relating to a labor controversy.
EMERGENCY SERVICES: The preparation for carrying out disaster functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, and
to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from disasters. It shall not include, nor does any provision of this chapter apply to, any
condition relating to a labor controversy.
EMERGENCY SERVICES OFFICE: The physical facilities constituting the Tulare operational area's primary emergency operating center, and the
necessary staff and personnel to operate such facilities on a day to day or disaster emergency basis.
TULARE OPERATIONAL AREA: The unincorporated area of the county, and the cities of Dinuba, Exeter, Farmersville, Lindsay, Porterville, Tulare, Visalia
and Woodlake. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-3: EMERGENCY COUNCIL:
The emergency council of the Tulare operational area is hereby created and shall consist of the following members:
A. The chairman of the board of supervisors of the county. Said board of supervisors shall appoint an additional member of said board to serve as an
alternate member of the emergency council when the chairman is absent from the county or is not immediately available to perform his duties.
B. The mayors of the cities of Dinuba, Exeter, Farmersville, Lindsay, Porterville, Tulare, Visalia and Woodlake, or alternates appointed by the respective
city councils.
C. Two (2) persons residing in the unincorporated area of the county who shall be appointed by the other members of the emergency council.
D. The emergency services coordinator of the county, who shall be an ex officio member and who shall not be entitled to a vote at the meetings of the
emergency council. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-4: OFFICERS OF EMERGENCY COUNCIL:
The officers of the emergency council shall be a chairman, and such other officers as the council may deem necessary. The chairman of the board of
supervisors shall serve as chairman of the council. When he is absent from the county or is not immediately available to perform his duties, the other
member of the board of supervisors who is a member of the council shall serve as chairman. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-5: EMERGENCY COUNCIL MEETINGS:
The emergency council may hold regular meetings at a time and place established by the council. Special meetings of the council shall be called in
accordance with section 54950 et seq., of the Government Code of the state of California. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or the alternate
chairman designated pursuant to section 9-4 of this chapter. The council shall meet at least four (4) times each year. The council shall have the power to
adopt rules and regulations governing the conduct of its meetings. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-6: DUTIES OF EMERGENCY COUNCIL:
It shall be the duty of the emergency council to review and recommend for adoption by the board of supervisors and the respective city councils, disaster
and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and budgets as are necessary to implement such plans and
agreements. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-7: POWERS OF CHAIRMAN OF EMERGENCY COUNCIL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 162/636
The chairman of the emergency council is hereby empowered to perform the following acts:
A. Serve as the emergency services director of the Tulare operational area.
B. Request the city council of the city of Porterville to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency and the termination thereof, if
the city council is in session, or to issue such a proclamation if the city council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the city council at the earliest
practicable time.
C. Request the mayor to request the governor to proclaim a state of disaster when in the opinion of the chairman the resources of the area are inadequate
to cope with the disaster on a local basis. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-8: EXERCISES OR DRILLS:
The chairman of the emergency council shall order an exercise or drill of the entire emergency services organization at least once each year, and a
minimum of two (2) exercises or drills for selected portions of the emergency operating center staff each year. Participation in required state or federal
exercises, special drills for communications, radiological, fire, law enforcement or other specific services shall be in addition to the exercises or drills
required hereinabove. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-9: ACTS AUTHORIZED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS:
In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of disaster by the governor or the director of the
California disaster office, or in the event of a war caused state of extreme emergency, the chairman, as the emergency services director of the Tulare
operational area, is hereby empowered to perform the following acts:
A. Make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided,
however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the emergency council.
B. Subject to the approval of the city council, to obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of
life and property of the people, and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required, to commandeer the same immediately for public use.
C. Require emergency services of any city officer or employee, and in the event of the proclamation of a state of disaster or extreme emergency by the
governor in the region in which the city is located, to commandeer the aid of as many citizens as he thinks necessary in the execution of his duties.
Such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities which are provided by state law for registered civil defense and disaster
volunteer workers.
D. Requisition any necessary equipment or materials from any city department or agency.
E. Execute all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution adopted pursuant thereto, all powers conferred upon him by any
statute, by any agreement approved by city council, or by any other lawful authority. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-10: EMERGENCY SERVICES COORDINATOR:
There is hereby created the position of emergency services coordinator of the Tulare operational area who may be referred to as the coordinator. He shall
serve as the executive officer of the Tulare operational area and his staff shall serve as the staff of the emergency services office. The board of supervisors
of the county of Tulare shall consider the recommendations of the emergency council in the appointment or dismissal of the coordinator. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-
6-1970)
9-11: POWERS AND DUTIES OF COORDINATOR:
The coordinator shall have the following general powers and duties:
A. Represent the emergency council and its chairman as their executive officer for the purpose of coordinating all efforts within the Tulare operational area
for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter.
B. Identify and define questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between persons and agencies referred to in section 9-13 of this chapter and
submit recommendations for resolving such matters to the chairman.
C. Represent the Tulare operational area in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to disaster or civil defense, when authorized by the
chairman.
D. Prepare an operational plan with necessary service annexes and standing operating procedures to provide administrative guides for the Tulare
operational area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 163/636
E. Plan and conduct exercises and drills, as ordered by the chairman, for the emergency services organization or for the emergency operating center staff.
(Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-12: EMERGENCY POWERS OF COORDINATOR:
In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of disaster by the governor, or in the event of a war
caused state of extreme emergency, the coordinator is hereby empowered to perform the following acts:
A. Activate the emergency operating center including calling in, as necessary, service chiefs, standby staff and service dispatchers.
B. Cause the dissemination of appropriate warning signals and issue suitable advisory information to the emergency council, the emergency services
organization and the public.
C. Advise the California disaster office of the local situation.
D. Request mutual aid through the California disaster office if local deficiencies of personnel and/or equipment are indicated by the service chiefs.
E. Order the provision of security for the emergency operating center and communications staff. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-13: EMERGENCY SERVICES ORGANIZATION:
All officers and employees of the county and the cities included in the Tulare operational area, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them
during a disaster and all groups, organizations and persons, including persons commandeered under the provision of subsection 9-9C of this chapter who
by operation of law or agreement may be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such disaster, shall constitute
the emergency service organization of the Tulare operational area. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-14: FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF EMERGENCY SERVICE ORGANIZATION:
The functions and duties of the emergency services organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the emergency
council shall prescribe by resolution, subject to the approval of the board of supervisors of the county and the respective city councils. Insofar as possible,
the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government and the California disaster office. (Ord.
987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-15: ACTS UNLAWFUL DURING DISASTERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts during a disaster:
A. Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency services organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter.
B. To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give,
assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent or delay the defense or protection thereof.
C. To wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the federal government or
the state of California. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
9-16: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter which are declared to be unlawful shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the Tulare County jail for not more than six (6)
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 987 § A, 10-6-1970)
Chapter 10
RESERVED
(Rep. by Ord. 1144 § 1, 7-5-1978)
Chapter 11
DANCES AND DANCE HALLS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 164/636
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
11-1: PUBLIC DANCE DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter a "public dance" is hereby defined to include any place such as halls, rooms, buildings, restaurants, cafes and all other
places within the city wherein dancing may be engaged in, is open to the general public, and for which a fee is charged. For purposes of this chapter, a fee
shall be deemed to include an admission charge, a cover charge, a "minimum" or any other charge exacted from members of the general public. (Ord. 834
§ A, 8-3-1965)
11-2: PERSONS UNDER AGE TWENTY ONE PROHIBITED FROM WORKING OR PERFORMING SERVICES AT PUBLIC
DANCES WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SOLD OR CONSUMED:
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21), or for any person to employ, engage or otherwise permit any person under the age of
twenty one (21) to work or perform services of any kind whatsoever including, but not limited to, the services of a musician at any place where public
dancing is permitted, where alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-3: HOURS WHEN PUBLIC DANCES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or permit to be conducted public dancing within the city between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-4: UNLAWFUL TO ENGAGE IN PUBLIC DANCING DURING PROHIBITED HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in dancing at any public dance within the city between the hours specified in the preceding section 11-3 of this
article. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-5: PERSONS UNDER SIXTEEN YEARS OF AGE BARRED FROM PUBLIC DANCES UNLESS ACCOMPANIED BY PARENT
OR GUARDIAN:
No person under the age of sixteen (16) years, unaccompanied by a parent or guardian, shall enter any place where public dancing is permitted or carried
on, or loiter at or near the doors of said place within the city while said public dancing is being conducted therein, and it shall be unlawful for any person in
charge of, conducting, or carrying on such public dancing, to permit any person under the age of sixteen (16) years, unaccompanied by a parent of
guardian, to enter said place where said public dancing is being conducted, or engage in dancing in such place, or to loiter at or near the doors of said
place while such public dancing is being carried on or conducted. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-5.1: CHAPTER SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or amend any law, ordinance or regulation of any political subdivision in force within the city of Porterville
and all such laws, ordinances or regulations now in effect or hereinafter enacted shall be in addition to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-
1965)
11-5.2: CONDUCT OF PUBLIC DANCES; ATTENDANCE OF POLICE OFFICERS OR SPECIAL OFFICERS:
It shall be the duty of every person conducting a public dance to conduct and manage the same in a manner that is not inconsistent with good public
morals nor will any person allow or permit any unnecessary disturbance to the peace and quiet of the public.
In the event the chief of police should determine from the anticipated attendance expected at a public dance, or if he should determine that it is in the best
interests of the public in general, that one or more police officers should be assigned to duty at said public dance, then the chief of police is hereby
authorized to so assign said officer or officers. The expense of said assignment shall be paid to the city by the licensee. Nothing herein shall be deemed to
prevent the licensee from employing special officers or other persons at said dance. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-5.3: VIOLATION; CLOSING OF PUBLIC DANCE:
In the event any police officer of the city determines that any law, ordinance, or regulation in force within the city is being violated he shall order the person
conducting a public dance to immediately cease said violation and/or close said public dance. It shall be unlawful for the licensee to continue said public
dance and it shall be unlawful to dance at said public dance after a proper order to close said dance has been made and given. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-5.4: EMPLOYMENT OF DANCING PARTNERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to employ any other person to act as a dancing partner at a public dance and it shall be unlawful for any person to
accept said employment. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 165/636
Chapter Article II
LICENSE TO CONDUCT DANCES
11-6: REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to open, establish, keep, maintain or conduct any public dance hall within the city, or to carry on or conduct or engage in
the business of conducting any public dancing within the city without first obtaining a license as provided in this article. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-7: APPLICATION; CONTENTS:
For the purpose of procuring a license required by section 11-6 of this article such person shall file an application in writing therefor with the chief of police,
which application shall contain the following:
A. The name and residence of the applicant, if a natural person or persons; and the name and principal place of business of the applicant, if a corporation,
together with the names and addresses of its officers.
B. The particular place and premises in such city wherein it is proposed to establish, open, conduct, maintain, or engage in the business of conducting
public dancing and whether or not any alcoholic beverage will be sold or consumed on said premises and the square footage of said premises.
C. A statement that no license has been formerly issued to the applicant or applicants, or to any agent of them, and following issuance said license has
been canceled or revoked.
D. The estimated average attendance the applicant or applicants expect at said dance. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-8: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; GROUNDS FOR DENYING APPLICATION:
Upon receipt of the application set forth in section 11-7 of this article together with the license fee required by the provisions of this chapter the chief of
police shall make a thorough investigation of the person or persons applying for said license and the chief of police shall deny the issuance of the license if
he finds that the person or persons making application for said license are not of good moral character or if the person be a corporation, that the officers
and representatives of such corporation are not of good moral character, or the premises where the public dancing is to be conducted does not comply
with the provisions of any law, ordinance or regulation of any political subdivision effective within the city, or are injurious to the public health and safety; or
the person or persons making application for said license have had a license forfeited, suspended or revoked under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-9: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
In the event the chief of police after completing the investigation required in this chapter finds that a license should be issued then he shall cause his
findings to be submitted to the city license collector and the city license collector shall issue a license to the person or persons making said application.
(Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-10: APPEAL PROCEDURE IF LICENSE APPLICATION DENIED:
In the event the chief of police denies the application for a license the applicant may, within ten (10) days after receiving written notice of denial, appeal the
decision with the city clerk. The city council within thirty (30) days after filing of the notice of appeal shall fix a time for the hearing of such appeal, which
hearing shall be heard not less than two (2) weeks from the date of the meeting of the city council at which the time for hearing is set, and notice of such
hearing shall be given by the city clerk by publication in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city. At the time fixed for hearing of such
application or at such time at which such hearing may be continued by the city council, and upon proof to the satisfaction of the council that notice of such
hearing was given it shall proceed with the hearing of such appeal, and if it shall satisfactorily appear to the council that the applicant has complied with all
of the provisions of this chapter and that the applicant is a proper person to hold the license herein provided for, the council may, at its discretion, order the
city license collector to issue said license. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-11: LICENSE FEE:
Any person to which a license may be issued under this chapter must pay for such license, to the license collector at the time of the issuance thereof, a fee
as fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
11-12: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The city council may upon its own motion and shall upon the verified complaint in writing of any person, investigate the conduct of any public dance and
the council shall have the power to temporarily suspend, permanently revoke, or condition a license issued hereunder if it finds any of the following:
A. Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining a license.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 166/636
B. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Commission of any act which under this chapter would be sufficient ground for denial of an application for a license.
D. Disturbance of the peace in or about the premises for which the license was issued or permitting the peace to be disturbed in or about said premises.
E. Upon written statement made by the chief of police of the city of Porterville at a regular meeting of the city council, that such public dance or dance hall
is being conducted in a manner detrimental to public health, safety or welfare.
In the event said license is temporarily suspended, permanently revoked or conditioned, the city council shall give notice to the licensee by mailing the
same to the premises to which said license was issued, of said suspension, revocation or condition and it shall thereafter be unlawful for the licensee to
conduct or permit to be conducted public dances on the premises to which said license was issued. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of said notice from
the city council the licensee may demand a hearing on the action of the city council by filing a written demand with the city clerk. The city council at its next
regular meeting shall fix a time for said hearing which shall not be less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the date at which the time for
said hearing is fixed. At the time set for the hearing the city council shall hear all pertinent evidence relating to said license and shall either terminate the
temporary suspension, revocation or condition or shall permanently suspend, revoke or condition said license. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-13: BUSINESS CONDUCTED AT PLACE AND PREMISES DESCRIBED IN APPLICATION; LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE;
EXCEPTION:
The license required by section 11-6 of this article, when issued, shall be authority to the person to whom the same has been issued, to establish, open,
keep, maintain, conduct and carry on at the particular place and premises described in the application therefor, but at no other place, the business of a
public dance hall, and of conducting public dancing therein, but such license shall not, nor shall any interest therein be assignable or transferable, and
such license shall be valid only when held by the person to whom the same has been issued, and while the business thereunder shall be conducted and
carried on at the particular place and premises described in the application therefor; provided, however, that the city council may for good cause shown,
and upon personal application of the holder of such license, permit such license to be used for another suitable and proper place in the city by the person
to whom such license has been issued, but this proviso shall not be construed in any way as permitting any business to be conducted in more than one
place at the same time under such license. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-14: CONTENTS OF LICENSE; POSTING:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to investigation, suspension, revocation or conditioning by the city council as provided in this chapter
and each license issued shall contain a statement that such license is subject to investigation, suspension, revocation or conditioning by the city council.
It shall be the duty of the licensee to post said license in a conspicuous place at the place to which said license has been issued and to keep the same
posted until it expires and public dancing in said place is unlawful when said license is not so posted. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-15: WHEN LICENSE VALID; LICENSE RECORD:
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid only when signed by the chief of police or in his absence, the city manager. The city license collector
shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued, to whom issued and the place to which said license is issued and the expiration date of said license.
(Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-16: LICENSE TERM; RENEWAL; PROCEDURE IF RENEWAL APPLICATION DENIED:
No license shall be granted or issued under this chapter for a period longer than one year; provided, however, that a license may be renewed from year to
year or any lesser period without the filing of a new application upon written request for renewal to the chief of police and upon payment of the fee set forth
in section 11-11 of this article.
In the event the chief of police refuses to authorize the renewal of said license or within five (5) days after receipt of the written request fails to authorize
the renewal of said license the person requesting said renewal may appeal to the city council in the same manner as set forth in section 11-10 of this
article. The time for filing the written notice of appeal shall run from the date of denial of the chief of police or five (5) days after filing the written request for
renewal whichever is the earlier. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
11-17: WAIVER OF CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
The city council may waive any provision of this chapter in the event it finds that the net proceeds of a public dance are to be used for charitable or
educational purposes or if said public dance is to be conducted under the supervision and direction of school authorities. (Ord. 834 § A, 8-3-1965)
Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 167/636
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
12-1.1: CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTION:
A. Adoption: There is hereby adopted by the Council of the City of Porterville for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire or explosion, that certain Code known as the California Fire Code, published by the International Code Council being
particularly the 2016 edition thereof together with the following appendices thereto, and the California Fire Code standards are hereby amended and
changed as follows:
Adoption of appendices: Appendix chapter 4, appendix B as amended by this Code, appendix C, appendix D as amended by this Code, appendices E,
F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, and N.
B. Fire Code Amendments:
1. Section 105.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
105.1.1 Permits required. A property owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or modify
systems and equipment that are regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be performed, shall first make application to the Building
Department and obtain the required permit.
2. The exception to section D104.2 of Appendix D is deleted.
3. The exception to Section D106.1 of Appendix D is deleted.
4. Exceptions 1 & 2 of section D107.1 of Appendix D are deleted.
5. Sections 108, 108.1, 108.2, and 108.3 are deleted.
C. Fire Code Copy On File: One (1) copy has been and now is filed in the Office of the Fire Marshal of the City of Porterville and the same hereby adopted
with the amendments herein set forth and incorporated as fully as if at length herein and provisions thereto shall be controlling within the limits of the
City of Porterville. (Ord. 1839, 11-1-2016)
12-1.1.1: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of this article that can be given effect without the invalid provision of application, and to this end the provisions of this article are severable.
(Ord. 1839, 11-1-2016)
12-1.2: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; ESTABLISHED; SUPERVISION; ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER:
The Fire Code adopted by section 12-1.1 of this article shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the City which is
hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department. (Ord. 715 § 2; Ord. 880 § G, 5-16-1967; Ord.
1568, 1-19-1999)
12-1.3: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE MARSHAL IN CHARGE:
The Fire Marshal, named and appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department, shall be in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. (Ord. 715 § 2; Ord. 880
§ G, 5-16-1967; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-1.4: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; MEANING OF TERM FIRE MARSHAL:
Where the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention is given the title "Fire Marshal" the words "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" shall be held to mean
the Fire Marshal. (Ord. 715 § 3; Ord. 880 § G, 5-16-1967; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-1.5: APPLICABILITY OF COUNTY AIR POLLUTION RULES AND REGULATIONS TO ALL BURNING:
All burning within the City of Porterville shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Air Pollution Control District, County of Tulare, State of California.
(Ord. 1083 § A, 11-4-1975; Ord. 1569, 1-19-1999)
12-1.6: STORAGE, OPERATION AND USE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES:
Nothing contained in the referenced edition of the Fire Code shall be construed as to exempt any person, firm or corporation from complying with all
applicable regulations and restrictions of the zoning ordinance of the City of Porterville regarding the storage, operation and use of liquefied petroleum
gases (LPG). LPG may be used as a second fuel for emergency generators as permitted by the Fire Code. LPG will also be permitted for fueling mobile
equipment. (Ord. 1083 § A, 11-4-1975; Ord. 1302 § C, 3-6-1984; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 168/636
12-1.7: APPEALS FROM ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department or the Fire Marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of this Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant
may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department or the Fire Marshal to the official Appeals Board, named and appointed under the Fire
Code of the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed and the decision of the Appeals Board shall be final. (Ord. 715 § 7; Ord. 880
§ G, 5-16-1970; Ord. 1563, 1-19-1999)
12-1.8: OPEN BURNING, RECREATIONAL FIRES, AND PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACES:
All open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor fireplaces shall comply with the requirements set forth in the California Fire Code.
Nothing within this article shall be construed as exempting a person from complying with the requirements set forth with San Joaquin Valley Air Pollution
Control District.
Landowners must implement Best Management Practices or reasonable alternatives to open burning for controlling and disposing of tumbleweeds on their
property as set forth with San Joaquin Air Pollution Control District. A burn permit may be issued for burning tumbleweeds once the district has deemed
that the only disposal method for the site is by open burning and the smoke will not affect smoke sensitive areas or contribute to a nuisance.
Permits are to be issued by SJVAPCD and permittee must comply with all requirements. Permittee must also notify the City of Porterville Fire Department
prior to burning. (Ord. 1769, 11-16-2010)
12-1.9: PERMITS FOR NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES:
The City Manager, Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after
giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now
enumerated in such Code. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof
to interested persons. (Ord. 715 § 8; Ord. 880 § G, 5-16-1967; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-1.10: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Code adopted by section 12-1.1 of this article, or its amendments, or fail to comply therewith,
or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply
with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Appeals Board or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, and any person
violating any of the terms and provisions of this chapter with its amendments, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in the City or County Jail, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 715 § 10; Ord. 880 § H, 5-16-1967; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-1.11: INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OR WORK OF FIRE DEPARTMENT1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any operation or work of the Fire Department of the City of Porterville or any of the members thereof
while the same are responding to or operating at the same or any fire or other emergency within the City of Porterville. (Ord. 966 § A, 2-5-1970; Ord. 1568,
1-19-1999)
Chapter Article II
FIREWORKS
12-2.1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, definitions shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them in section 12500 et seq., of the Health And Safety Code of
the state of California, and, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this article are defined as follows:
CITY: The city of Porterville.
DANGEROUS FIREWORKS: Any fireworks specified as such in the state fireworks law, section 12500 et seq., of the Health And Safety Code of the state
and such other fireworks as may be determined to be dangerous by the state fire marshal.
ELIGIBLE ORGANIZATION: An organization which has met all of the following criteria for a continuous period of not less than one full year preceding
submittal of an application for the permit required by this article (and which continues to do so thereafter):
A. The organization must be a duly organized not for profit charitable, religious, civic, patriotic or community service organization;
B. The organization must be headquartered within and clearly affiliated or identified with Porterville;
C. The organization must be one which provides direct and regular community services and benefits to the citizens of the city; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 169/636
D. The organization must hold its regularly scheduled meetings within the city;
E. Must maintain a bona fide membership of at least twenty (20) members;
F. The organization must have a tax exempt identification number assigned to them;
G. One application per tax exempt ID number will be allowed; and
H. One permit per tax exempt number will be allowed.
FIRE CHIEF: The fire chief or his/her duly authorized designee.
FIREWORKS: Any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or device prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or
toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers or other devices of like construction
and any devices containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablet or other device containing an explosive substance; except that the term
"fireworks" shall not include any auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty five one-hundredths (0.25) of a grain of explosive
content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS: Any fireworks which do not fall within the definition of "dangerous fireworks" or "exempt fireworks" per Health And Safety
Code section 12529. The California state fire marshal's seal of registration shall be applied to all classified fireworks and pyrotechnic devices by a licensed
manufacturer, importer, exporter or wholesaler and shall indicate the classification assigned by the state fire marshal.
STAND: Any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale or offering for sale of fireworks pursuant to a permit duly issued.
(Ord. 1650 § 2, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011; Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.2: SALES OF FIREWORKS; PERMITS REQUIRED:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any dangerous fireworks in the city.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any "safe and sane" fireworks in the city without first obtaining a permit therefor. (Ord. 1650
§ 3, 4-6-2004)
12-2.3: PUBLIC DISPLAYS OF FIREWORKS:
The fire chief shall have power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks by a
jurisdiction, fair associations, amusement parks, other organizations or for use of fireworks by artisans in pursuit of their trade. Every such use or display
shall be handled by a licensed operator approved by the fire chief and shall be of such character and so located, discharged or fired so as, in the opinion
of the fire chief after proper investigation, not to be hazardous to property or endanger any person. Said rules and regulations are as follows:
A. Applications: Applications for permits shall be made in writing at least ten (10) days in advance of the date of the display. After such privilege shall be
granted, sale, possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
B. Bond For Fireworks Display Required: The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the city's risk
manager for the payment of all damages which may be caused either to a person or persons or to property by reason of the permitted display and
arising from any acts of the permittee, his agents, employees or subcontractors.
C. Disposal Of Unfired Fireworks: Any fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in a way safe for the
particular type of fireworks remaining. (Ord. 1650 § 3, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011)
12-2.4: NUMBER OF PERMITS LIMITED/PREAPPLICATION:
The maximum number of permits to sell "safe and sane" fireworks which may be issued pursuant to this article during any one calendar year shall not
exceed one permit for each four thousand (4,000) residents of the city, or major fraction thereof, based on the most recent population figure as determined
by the federal decennial census and updated annually by the California state department of finance. If the number of preapplications received up to and
including the last day for making applications pursuant to this article exceeds the number of permits to be issued for the city, the fire chief shall thereafter
supervise a public drawing to determine an order of priority for each preapplication. Preapplications can be obtained at the fire department or online at the
city of Porterville's website between January 1 and the last business day of January. All applicants will be assigned a number in the order in which the
preapplication is received. The drawing will be held between February 16 and February 28 each year. (Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.5: SALES OF SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS; APPLICATIONS FOR PERMITS:
Permits to sell "safe and sane" fireworks shall be issued by the fire chief. Application packets for a permit will be furnished to eligible organizations whose
number has been drawn. Each organization must meet all the applicable requirements set forth in the application for permits section and the permit
issuance section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 170/636
A. Any eligible organization desiring to sell "safe and sane" fireworks in the city of Porterville shall obtain a permit application from the fire department.
Permit applications shall be obtained during the period commencing the first business day of March and ending the last business day in March.
B. Such applications shall be signed by a bona fide officer of the eligible organization, wherein the officer, on behalf of the organization and its agents,
shall agree to abide by state laws and administrative regulations and all the stipulations of this code and the permit if permission to operate a fireworks
stand shall be granted to the organization.
C. Completed applications shall be returned to the fire department no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last business day of March each year. Any
eligible organization making an application for such permit to sell "safe and sane" fireworks that fails to return the completed application prior to five
o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last regular business day in March shall not be issued a permit to sell "safe and sane" fireworks.
D. The licensee shall use the net proceeds derived from its operations under such license only for such nonprofit, charitable, religious or eleemosynary
service projects that shall be of direct benefit to the city of Porterville and for no other purpose. (Ord. 1650 § 3, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011; Ord.
1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.6: PERMIT ISSUANCE BASED ON DRAWING SELECTIONS:
A. All eligible organizations shall obtain and submit to the fire department the following forms supplied by the fire department. Forms will be supplied to
those organizations whose drawn assigned number is sequentially within the total number of permits to be issued. All other applicants will be placed on
a waiting list in the sequence of their drawn assigned number. If an applicant does not satisfy the requirements of this section within the time periods
identified in this section, the next drawn assigned number on the waiting list will be notified and provided with the following paperwork:
1. The property owner's release form signed by the property owner authorizing permission to erect a fireworks stand on his property;
2. The fireworks storage form indicating where and how the fireworks will be stored when not in the approved stand;
3. The state fire marshal's license to sell safe and sane fireworks;
4. A copy of the temporary seller's permit issued by the state board of equalization; and
a. The certificate of insurance required by section 12-2.14 of this article.
b. A statement of organization eligibility.
c. A site plan indicating location of stand, distance to nearest building, ingress, egress, parking, etc.
B. These forms must be returned to the fire department by the last business day of March.
C. No permit issued or authorized shall be transferable or assignable.
D. When all the application requirements have been completed and the fireworks stand location has been approved, the fire department shall authorize the
erection of a fireworks stand. Each qualified organization shall pay to the administrative services director or designee a permit fee amount as listed in
the master administrative fee schedule amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. This fee will include a refundable cleanup deposit.
Each permit shall be for only one stand per eligible organization and shall be forwarded to the fire department for delivery as set forth in subsection E of
this section.
E. Permits will be effective only when issued by the fire department after the final inspection of the stand shows compliance with all the requirements of
this article. (Ord. 1650 § 3, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011; Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.7: PERIOD OF DISCHARGE:
Safe and sane fireworks, as defined by section 12529 of the California Health And Safety Code, as amended ("fireworks"), may be discharged within the
city limits of the city of Porterville ("city") during the period beginning at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on June 28 and ending at eleven fifty nine o'clock
(11:59) P.M. on July 4 of any year. (Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011)
12-2.8: PROHIBITIONS ON DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or permit the ignition, explosion or projection of any fireworks upon,
over, or onto the private property of another, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of any fireworks within fifteen feet (15') of any
residence, dwelling or any other structure, public property, fields or waterway. (Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011)
12-2.9: TIME PERIOD FOR SALE:
"Safe and sane fireworks" may be sold within the city limits of the city of Porterville during the period beginning twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on June 28 and
ending at ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on July 4. The hours of operation of any stand shall be limited to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. daily
during the days identified in this article, except that hours of operation of any stand on June 28 shall commence at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon. (Ord. 1650
§ 3, 4-6-2004)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 171/636
12-2.10: PROHIBITIONS:
A. The manufacture of fireworks is prohibited within the jurisdiction.
B. No person shall possess, sell, deliver, deal in, use, explode or fire, or cause to be used, exploded or fired, any form of fireworks designated as
"dangerous fireworks" by section 12505 of the Health And Safety Code of the state of California.
C. The possession, sale, delivery, dealing in, use, exploding or firing of any form of fireworks designated as "safe and sane fireworks" by section 12529 of
the Health And Safety Code of the state of California is expressly prohibited, except as limited by this article.
D. It shall be unlawful to store any fireworks in any residence, home, garage, or automobile within the city of Porterville. It shall also be unlawful to store
any fireworks in any building or other place within the city of Porterville without having first applied for and received a permit pursuant to section 12-2.2
of this article.
E. No fireworks shall be stored within one hundred feet (100') of any gasoline service station or any garage located within twenty five feet (25') of any other
structure. Any facility for the storage of fireworks shall maintain a minimum setback from the street curbing of ten feet (10').
F. No person shall light, or cause or permit to be lighted, any fireworks, or any other article or material, within any structure approved for fireworks storage,
or within fifty feet (50') thereof.
G. No smoking shall be allowed in any structure that is used for storing fireworks nor within fifty feet (50') of said structure. "No Smoking" signs shall be
prominently displayed. (Ord. 1650 § 4, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011)
12-2.11: REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any eligible organization to which a permit has been issued:
A. To operate in violation of California Code Of Regulations title 19, chapter 6, regulating the storage, transportation, sale and use of fireworks.
B. To obtain or use more than one permit for one stand per year.
C. To fail to clear all flammable or burnable materials within thirty feet (30') from any fireworks stand and to maintain such conditions during the period
prescribed for the sale of fireworks.
D. To allow smoking within fifty feet (50') of any such business location or stand or to fail to post "No Smoking" signs with such wording in red letters not
less than four inches (4") in height on a white background on all sides of any such stand.
E. To fail to have immediately available within the stand a certified fire extinguisher or other fire extinguishing device of a type approved by the fire
department.
F. To sell fireworks earlier than twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on June 28 or later than ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on July 4.
G. To fail to dismantle and remove any stand or structure of any nature where fireworks were sold as of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. July 8.
H. To sell fireworks to persons under sixteen (16) years of age.
I. No person other than a member (or their spouse) of the organization or a volunteer who is associated with the organization having a permit shall be
permitted to sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks. All fireworks stands shall have the safety regulations posted inside the stand in an
approved location. The size of the safety poster will be approved and provided by the fire department. A maximum of one member for every four (4)
linear feet of stand is permitted within the stand at any one time (i.e., if the stand is 32 feet long, 32 divided by 4 equals 8 members allowed in the
stand) and all persons selling fireworks must be at least eighteen (18) years old.
J. No sleeping inside the fireworks stand will be permitted at any time.
K. No person shall use or handle fireworks while under the influence of intoxicating liquids or narcotics. Alcohol and narcotics are prohibited within the
fireworks stand.
L. All electrical/spark producing appliances (fans, coolers, air conditioners, etc.) are prohibited inside the fireworks stands and shall not block the means of
egress. (Ord. 1650 § 4, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011; Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.12: FIREWORKS STANDS; REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 172/636
All retail sales of "safe and sane fireworks" shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand and sales from any other building or structure is
prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:
A. No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty five feet (25') of any other building or within one hundred feet (100') of a gasoline pump, or within one
hundred feet (100') of another fireworks stand, when measured closest point to closest point. Canopies within ten feet (10') of a stand shall be
considered an extension of the stand for measurement of setback distances. Minimum setback from the street curbing, alley, or driveway shall be ten
feet (10'). Stands shall not cover or impede any public rights of way.
B. No stand shall have a floor area in excess of four hundred (400) square feet. The width and length of each stand shall be a maximum of ten feet by forty
feet (10' x 40'), respectively.
C. Each stand must have at least two (2) exits located on separate walls. Fireworks stands with only three (3) sides and open from the back will not require
exits. Fireworks stands shall have exits at least thirty inches (30") in width at both ends of the structure. An aisle with a minimum width of thirty inches
(30") shall lead to each exit. Exits shall remain unobstructed. No supplies or other materials shall be stored in front of exit doors. All exit doors shall
remain unlocked and unlatched whenever the stand is occupied.
D. Each stand shall keep easily accessible a minimum of one 21/2-gallon water pressure type fire extinguisher and one 2A10BC rated dry chemical fire
extinguisher and each shall be in good working order and bear a current inspection sticker. Extinguishers must be of a type approved for such use by
the Porterville fire department.
E. All stands must be constructed of solid wood or metal.
F. After hours, stands must be properly secured or a security guard must be provided to patrol the premises. Under no circumstances shall the night
watchman sleep within the fireworks stand.
G. All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. July 5.
H. Fireworks stand may be brought to the site one week prior to June 28 and must be dismantled and removed by five o'clock (5:00) P.M. July 8.
I. Temporary lighting may be installed in the fireworks stands. Approved temporary lights must have a guard protecting the bulb/fixture and all wiring and
fixtures must be 3-wire and grounded.
J. Primary power to the temporary lighting may be by means of on site commercial power in a fixed facility or by means of an on site portable generator.
Generators must be located at least twenty five feet (25') from the fireworks stand. Location of portable generators must be approved by fire
department.
K. Fuel for portable generators is not allowed to be kept on the premises.
L. No switches, electrical receptacles (plug ins), or splices are permitted within the stand.
M. Extension cords to the stand are to be heavy duty, minimum of fifteen (15) amp capacity, and protected from vehicular damage. Romex is not an
acceptable extension cord.
N. All trash shall be removed from the premises and the fireworks stand each evening at the close of business.
O. No person shall light, or cause or permit to be lighted, any fireworks or any other article or material within any such stand, or within fifty feet (50')
thereof.
P. No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises. No person who is under the influence of alcoholic beverages shall enter or be allowed into the
sales booth.
Q. Signage will be clearly displayed at each site providing for the fines as specified in section 12-2.20 of this article.
R. Canopies within twenty five feet (25') of a stand must be labeled by the manufacturer as fire resistive. The total allowable canopy area within twenty five
feet (25') of a stand shall be no larger than two hundred (200) square feet.
S. Canopies within twenty five feet (25') of a stand shall meet the requirements set forth in the California code of regulations title 24, part 9, chapter 24 and
title 19, division 1. (Ord. 1650 § 4, 4-6-2004; Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011; Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.13: FIREWORKS STANDS; LOCATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 173/636
A. In no instance shall any fireworks stand be located within a residential zoned district.
B. No stand shall be located closer than one hundred feet (100') from another. (Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011)
12-2.14: CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE:
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the eligible organization shall procure a certificate of insurance acceptable to the city. The certificate shall name the city
of Porterville, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers as "additional insured". The certificate shall evidence coverage in an amount determined by
the city's risk manager; providing, however, the amount shall not be less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined bodily injury and property
damage for each occurrence, and the deductible, if any, shall not be greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The certificate shall specify the time,
location, and dates to be covered by the policy. The certificate shall be provided to the fire department no later than five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last
regular business day in March of the subject year or at such other time as the chief of the fire department may allow. (Ord. 1330, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1568, 1-
19-1999; Ord. 1601, 5-1-2001; Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
12-2.15: STATE FIREWORKS LAW:
The provisions of this article shall be construed so as not to conflict with the state fireworks law. (Ord. 1330, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999; Ord. 1601, 5-
1-2001)
12-2.16: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
Any violation of this article or other city laws, or the terms and conditions of the permit, or state laws or administrative regulations, or safety rules of the fire
department shall be grounds for the immediate revocation of the permit. All officers, agents, and employees of the eligible organization shall be
responsible for compliance with all the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1330, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999; Ord. 1601, 5-1-2001)
12-2.17: NONISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
The final decision to issue permits shall rest with the fire chief. In cases such as civil unrest, severe drought conditions, or any other such situation deemed
to be harmful or to have the possibility of creating an extreme hazard to persons and/or property the fire chief shall be the final authority in granting permits
for fireworks sales. The right to refuse permits to applicants who have violated the regulations in this article in previous years shall also rest with the fire
chief. (Ord. 1330, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999; Ord. 1601, 5-1-2001)
12-2.18: SEIZURE OF FIREWORKS:
The fire chief shall have the authority to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all stocks of fireworks offered or
exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this article. (Ord. 1776, 4-5-2011)
12-2.19: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the use of torpedoes, flares, or fuses by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal
purposes of illumination; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic, or sports events or military ceremonials or
demonstrations; or the sale, discharge or display of fireworks by permittees having a permit as herein provided; or the use and display of fireworks of
whatever nature by any person engaged in the production of motion pictures, theatricals, or operas when such use and display is a necessary part of such
production; or the transportation of fireworks through the city in regular course, and in original packages or containers from any point outside of the city to
any other point outside the city. (Ord. 1330, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999; Ord. 1601, 5-1-2001)
12-2.20: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Fines for the manufacture, possession, sale, delivery, use, or discharge of dangerous fireworks within the city of Porterville shall be one thousand five
hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 1799, 11-5-2013)
Chapter Article III
WEEDS, RUBBISH, LITTER, TIRE AND HAZARD ABATEMENT
12-3.1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions are to be construed as herein set forth, unless it shall be
apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
ABATE: To repair or replace, remove, destroy or otherwise remedy the condition in question by such means and in such a manner and to such an extent
as the enforcement officer in his/her judgment shall determine is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
ABATEMENT STANDARDS: Those minimum requirements set forth by the enforcement officer by which property shall be abated and maintained in order
to comply with section 12-3.4 of this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 174/636
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The chief of the fire department of the city and shall include any official or officials in the fire department duly appointed by
said chief or the city manager to administer the provisions of this article.
PREMISES: Any building, lot or parcel of real estate or land or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks, parking
strips and alleys.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The owner of any premises and/or any agent, lessee or other person occupying or having charge or control of the same.
RUBBISH: Waste material including, but not limited to, garbage, waste paper and debris from construction or demolition.
WEEDS: All undesired plants of rank or profuse growth growing upon streets, alleys, sidewalks or private property in the city and including, but not limited
to, any of the following:
A. Weeds which bear or may bear seeds of a wing or downy nature;
B. Weeds and indigenous grasses which may attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent property;
C. Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous;
D. Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to public health. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.2: ENFORCEMENT AGENCY:
Porterville fire department shall have jurisdiction to administer the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.3: MAINTAINING SIDEWALKS AND GUTTERS:
The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of the occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee, or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there
are a paved sidewalk and/or curb and gutter, shall maintain said sidewalk and/or curb and gutter free of dirt, litter, weeds, residues from disking and other
debris. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.4: NUISANCE; AUTHORITY TO ABATE:
A. Each of the following conditions is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever an enforcement officer shall determine that any of the
conditions exist upon any premises, he/she may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this article and make the costs of abatement a
lien on the subject real property:
1. The existence of weeds on the premises, or public sidewalks, curbs and gutters, streets or alleys in front of, adjacent to or behind said premises;
2. The existence of any accumulation of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, debris or combustible trash upon any roof or in any building,
entranceway, court, yard, vacant lot or open space; or of any weeds, grass, vines or other growth, when the same endangers property or is liable to
be fired;
3. The existence of any garbage or rubbish upon the premises contrary to the provisions of section 13-4 of this code;
4. The existence of any vines or climbing plants growing into or over any street, tree or any public hydrant, pole or electrolier; or the existence of any
shrub, plant or vine growing on, around or in front of any hydrant, alarm box, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or any other appliance or facility
provided for fire protection purposes, in such a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto by the fire department;
5. The existence of an excessive amount of tires on property that does not conform with commercial use as set by the zoning ordinance of the city of
Porterville;
6. Any other condition or use of property which is in fact a fire hazard or which results or can result in the impairment of the ability of the fire department
to respond to and suppress fires.
B. The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of the occupant or a tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any real property in the city, shall be
responsible for the removal or destruction of all such weeds and other debris as set forth in this section from his property and from the abutting half of
any street or alley between lot lines as extended.
C. The enforcement officer and/or his/her authorized representatives shall have the authority to determine the amount and types of weeds and other debris
which constitute a nuisance pursuant to this section and must therefore be abated. The decision of said enforcement officer shall be final. (Ord. 1568,
1-19-1999)
12-3.5: ANNUAL NOTICES:
A. The enforcement officer is authorized and directed to annually declare that the existence of any of the conditions set forth in section 12-3.4 of this article
constitute a public nuisance and direct that notice of such declaration shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Said
declaration shall be made on or before April 1, of each year. Said notice shall further direct all such persons to abate any conditions set forth in section
12-3.4 of this article which may exist on said person's property or to appear before the city's fire marshal at a stated time and place to show cause why
such conditions should not be abated by the city at such person's expense.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 175/636
B. Said notice shall also be mailed to the owner and/or other responsible persons of real property which is, or may be in violation of section 12-3.4 of this
article. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.6: FORM AND MANNER OF NOTICE:
A. The notice required pursuant to section 12-3.5 of this article shall be substantially in the following form:
APN. NO.
TO THE PROPERTY OWNER:
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN, that on (date) , (year) , pursuant to Section 12-3.5 of the Municipal Code of the City of Porterville, the Chief of the Fire
Department of the City of Porterville declares that the following conditions set forth in Section 12-3.4 of said Municipal Code constitute a public
nuisance and that such a nuisance must be abated by the destruction or removal of said conditions:
A. The existence of weeds on the premises or public sidewalks, curbs and gutters, streets or alleys in front of, adjacent to or behind said premises.
B. The existence of any accumulation of wastepaper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter, debris, tires, or combustible trash upon any roof or in any
building, entrance way, court, yard, vacant lot or open space, or of any weeds, grass, vines or other growth when the same endangers property or is
liable to be fired.
C. The existence of any garbage or rubbish upon the premises contrary to the provisions of Section 13-4 of the Municipal Code.
D. The existence of any vines or climbing plants growing into or over the street, tree or any public hydrant, pole or electrolier; or the existence of any
shrub, plant or vine growing on, around or in front of any hydrant, alarm box, standpipe, sprinkler system connection or any other appliance or facility
provided for fire protection purposes, in such a way as to obscure the view thereof or impair the access thereto by the Porterville Fire Department.
E. The existence of an excessive amount of tires on property that does not conform with commercial use as set by the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Porterville.
F. Any other condition or use of property which is in fact a fire hazard or which results, or can result, in the impairment of the ability of the Porterville
Fire Department to respond to and suppress fires.
Destruction and/or removal of said conditions must be completed and maintained by (date) , (year) in accordance with the attached Fire Prevention
Bureau "Abatement Standards".
Failure to abate said conditions by the date specified above, shall result in the City acquiring jurisdiction to abate the conditions at the owner's
expense pursuant to Section 12-3.9 of the Municipal Code.
All property owners who wish to object to the proposed removal of weeds, rubbish, refuse, tires and dirt are hereby notified that they have the right to
attend a meeting with a representative of the Porterville Fire Department to be held at Porterville Fire Station No. 1, 40 West Cleveland Avenue,
Porterville, California, on (date) , (year) at (time) . Sufficient cause must be shown why said conditions should not be abated.
Charges. Property owners or responsible persons who through their inaction have caused the City of Porterville to have their nuisance abated, are
deemed to have committed a misdemeanor or infraction pursuant to Section 12-3.14 and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in the City or county jail, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. The property owner or responsible person shall be liable for actual costs of abating such nuisance as defined herein.
Any costs incurred for such abatement will constitute a special assessment on the property. The cost of abating such nuisances shall include a
charge of $ per parcel to cover the costs of administering this Article. MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 12-3.11 PROVIDES THAT AFTER THE
ASSESSMENT IS MADE AND CONFIRMED, IT IS A LIEN ON THE PROPERTY.
Any property owner, or other responsible person, who, after notification by the Enforcement Officer, fails to abate a condition as set forth in Section
12-3.4 shall become liable for the expenses of fighting any fire which may occur which is determined to have been caused by or attributed to said
conditions. Such expenses shall become a lien upon the property.
THE FAILURE OF ANY OWNER OR OTHER PERSON TO RECEIVE THIS NOTICE SHALL NOT AFFECT THE ENFORCEMENT OF THIS
ORDINANCE.
B. A copy of this notice shall be sent to the owner of the premises and may also be sent to any other of said persons sought to be charged with the
responsibility of abatement. The notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, and addressed to the owner as such person's name and address appear
on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Tulare, or as known to the enforcement officer or other person authorized to give such notice.
The notice to any other person to be charged with the responsibility of abatement shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid and addressed to such person
as his/her name and address are known to the enforcement officer or the person authorized to give notice.
C. The failure of any owner or other person to receive this notice shall not affect the enforcement of this article. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.7: HEARING:
At the time fixed in the notice provided pursuant to section 12-3.6 of this article, the fire marshal or his/her designated representative shall hear and
consider any and all objections to the proposed abatement of such conditions, and may continue the hearing as necessary. The enforcement officer shall
have the opportunity to respond to any such objections. At the conclusion of the hearing, the fire marshal shall rule on all such objections. In cases where
the fire marshal overrules an objection, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to proceed and perform the work necessary to abate the
conditions causing such nuisance if said property owner or other responsible person fails to abate said nuisance on or before the date set forth in the
notice. The affected property owners or other responsible person, may appeal the decision of the enforcement officer to the city council by filing a written
appeal. The appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the decision of the enforcement officer. Any property owner
or other responsible person who fails to appear at said hearing and present objections shall be deemed to have waived the right to present any such
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 176/636
objections and the city shall thereafter have the jurisdiction to proceed and perform any work necessary to abate the conditions causing such nuisance
upon the expiration of the time allowed in the notice to the property owner. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.8: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Upon the expiration of the time period set forth in the notice to property owners pursuant to section 12-3.6 of this article, the city shall acquire jurisdiction to
abate any such condition constituting a nuisance pursuant to section 12-3.6 of this article which has not been abated by the property owner in question or
which has been deemed to constitute a nuisance in the course of the hearing process set forth above. Whenever the city has acquired jurisdiction to abate
such a nuisance, the enforcement officer or his/her designee is expressly authorized to enter upon private property for purposes of abating such conditions
and the cost thereof shall be charged to the owner and/or other responsible person. Any property owner or responsible person shall have the right to abate
said condition, or have the same abated at their own expense; provided, such condition has been abated prior to the arrival of the enforcement officer or
his/her authorized representative to do so. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.9: ACCOUNT AND RECORD OF COST:
The enforcement officer shall keep an account of the cost of abating such nuisance and shall embody such account in the report and assessment list
which shall be filed with the city clerk and presented to the city council. The allowable cost of abating such nuisance shall include a charge sufficient to
cover the costs of administering this article. Said administrative charge shall be determined by the city council by resolution. The report and assessment
list shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient to identify such lot or parcel, together with the charge proposed to be assessed
against each such separate lot or parcel. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.10: NOTICE OF REPORT:
The city clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list at the city hall, together with the notice of filing thereof and of the time and place when
and where it will be submitted to the city council for hearing and confirmation. Said notice shall advise property owners that they may appear at the time
and place of hearing, and object to any matter related thereto. A like notice shall also be mailed to each and every property owner and/or other responsible
person who owns or has control of any lot or parcel listed on said report. The notice shall be sent by first class mail to the property owner at the address
appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of the county of Tulare or to the last known address of the enforcement officer. Notice shall be sent by first
class mail to any other such responsible person at such person's last address known to the enforcement officer. Such notice, as posted and mailed, shall
be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF HEARING
ON REPORT AND
ASSESSMENT FOR WEED,
RUBBISH, LITTER, TIRE AND
HAZARD ABATEMENT
Notice is hereby given that on (date) , (year) , the Enforcement Officer of the City of Porterville filed with the City Clerk of said City a report and
assessment on the abatement of weeds, rubbish and litter within the City, a copy of which is posted on the bulletin board at the entrance to City Hall.
Notice is further given that on (date) , (year) , at the hour of m. in the Council Chambers, of City Hall, said report and assessment list will be presented
to the City Council of said City for consideration and confirmation, and that any and all persons interested, having any objection to said report, and shall
appear at said time and place and be heard.
Dated:
/s/
City Clerk
(Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.11: HEARING ON COST ASSESSMENT:
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the city council shall hear the same together with any objections which may be raised
by any of the property owners or other responsible persons liable to be assessed for the work of abating such nuisance, and said enforcement officer shall
attend such meeting with his/her record thereof. At the conclusion of such hearing, the council may make such modifications in the proposed assessments
as it may deem necessary, after which such report and assessment list shall be confirmed by resolution. The cost of abating such nuisance upon, adjacent
to, or in the front or rear of, the various lots or parcels of land respectively referenced to in such reports, shall constitute special assessments against such
representative parcels or lots, and after thus made and confirmed, shall constitute a lien on such property for the amount of such assessments, until paid.
(Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.12: COLLECTION ON TAX ROLL:
After confirmation of the report, a copy shall be provided to the city administrative services director or designee, and payments may be received by him/her
for the amount due until such time as the matter is referred to the Tulare County auditor for placement on the tax rolls. On or before August 10 of each
year, a certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the Tulare County auditor for the amounts of the respective assessments against the
respective parcels of land as they appear on the current assessment roll. They shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for property taxes. All laws and ordinances applicable to the levy collection and enforcement of city taxes are made
applicable to such special assessments, and the lien of said assessment shall have priority of the taxes with which it is collected. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.13: PROCEDURE NOT EXCLUSIVE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 177/636
The procedure provided in this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedure or procedures provided in ordinances of this city or by
state law for the abatement of any of the conditions described herein, and abatement hereunder shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or
criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.14: VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or its amendments shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than six (6) months in the city or
county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The property owner or responsible person shall be liable for actual costs of abating such nuisance as
defined herein. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.15: IMMEDIATE DANGER; SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Whenever any condition on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to constitute imminent or immediate danger to the health or
safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, any enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative shall have the authority to summarily and
without notice abate the same. The expenses of such abatement shall become a lien upon the property and be collectible as provided in sections 12-3.8
through 12-3.12, inclusive, of this article. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
12-3.16: CHARGE FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION SERVICES:
Any property owner, or other responsible person, who, after written notification by the enforcement officer or his/her authorized representative, fails to
abate a condition constituting public nuisance as set forth in section 12-3.4 of this article shall become liable for the expenses of fighting a fire which is
determined by the fire department to have been caused by or attributed to, in whole or part, said condition constituting such a public nuisance. Such
expenses shall be charged to the property owner and/or other responsible person and shall become a lien upon the property and be collectible as
provided in sections 12-3.8 through 12-3.12 inclusive, of this article. The property owner or responsible person shall be liable for actual costs of abating
such nuisance as defined herein. (Ord. 1568, 1-19-1999)
Chapter 13
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Chapter
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
13-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this chapter to regulate the collection, transport, and disposal of solid waste in order to protect the public safety,
health and welfare and to enhance the environment of the people of Porterville. Further, it is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the collection and
disposition of recyclables generated within the city and to establish reporting requirements and guidelines that shall be followed by licensees to minimize
the amount of such recyclables deposited into landfills. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993)
13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly
demonstrates a different meaning:
ALLEY SERVICE: Such service where solid waste containers are placed at the property line in through alleys.
BIN CONTAINER SERVICE: A stationary container supported on casters or skids and approved by the city manager or his designee for mechanical
handling by the collection trucks.
COMPACTED WASTE: Solid waste which is mechanically compressed to reduce the dimensions of the waste.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTES: Shall mean and include the waste building materials, packaging, and rubble resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair, and demolition of pavements and structures.
CURB SERVICE: Such service where the solid waste containers are picked up by the city at the front curb line of the customer's property.
DISCARDED: Thrown away, abandoned, worthless, or having lack of economic value.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation and use of foods, including discarded food containers and wrappers
and all other abandoned putrescible organic matter.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE: Those wastes resulting from products purchased by the general public for household use which, because of their
quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may pose a substantial known or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, disposed, or otherwise managed. The city manager or his designee shall determine those substances deemed
hazardous for the purpose of the city's disposal system.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 178/636
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: Solid wastes or waste material resulting or left over from industrial processes and manufacturing operations, including, but not
limited to, fibers, fabrics, plastics, styrofoam, rubber, resins, metals, slag, wood products such as sawdust and shavings, packing materials, putrescible
material from food processing plants and slaughterhouses, condemned foods, cinders and ashes from power plants and incinerators, and miscellaneous
manufacturing wastes. Such industrial waste is distinguished from ordinary commercial refuse or so called trade wastes which emanate from stores,
hotels, restaurants, and markets.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building designed for residential occupancy and shall include duplexes, triplexes, apartments of four (4) or more units,
bungalows in a bungalow court, apartment houses, flats, condominium units, and mobile homes.
RECYCLABLES: Shall include those materials that have value and can be diverted from landfill disposal. "Recyclables" can further be defined as those
materials that by collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, reconstituting, and processing can be returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials for new, reused, or reconstituted products.
REFUSE: Rags, household ashes, wearing apparel, household goods and such worthless, useless, unused, rejected and cast off matter produced by and
as the result of human habitation and the transaction of business within the city, that can be properly and safely collected and transported in a collection
vehicle.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: Any detached building used exclusively for occupancy by one family, excluding bungalows in a bungalow court, residential
condominium units, and mobile homes.
SOLID WASTE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes; including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition
and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and
semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" does not include hazardous, low level radioactive, or medical wastes.
"Solid waste" as herein defined shall not include materials source-separated by the generator for the purpose of recycling, reuse, repair or composting.
SPECIAL PICK UP: The collection of solid waste that exceeds the scope of standard residential or commercial service as set forth in this chapter, or any
material not defined in this section as solid waste.
STANDARD RESIDENTIAL CONTAINER: Roll out container(s) provided by city.
WASTE MATTER: Solid waste such as heavy or bulk materials which can be properly and safely collected and transported by special pick up vehicles.
The city manager or his designee shall determine those materials suitable for special pick up service.
YARD WASTE: Lawn clippings, tree and shrubbery trimmings, and leaves that can be properly and safely collected and transported in a collection vehicle.
(Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-3: RULES ESTABLISHED:
The following rules, as contained in this chapter, covering the handling of accumulations of garbage, refuse, yard waste, and waste matter to be observed
by the occupants of places of residence and places of business in the city are hereby established. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-4: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
A. Prohibitions:
1. Solid Waste Accumulations: It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or occupant of any building, lot or premises in the city to suffer, allow or permit
the accumulation of solid waste of any description to become or remain offensive, unsightly or unsafe to public health or hazardous from fire, or to
deposit, transport, keep, accumulate or permit or cause any solid waste to be deposited, placed or accumulated upon any lot or parcel of land, or any
public or private container, place, street, land, alley or driveway except in the manner prescribed in this chapter.
2. Illegal Use Of Containers: It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit refuse into containers, bins, or roll off containers which are not assigned to
the property at which the refuse is generated.
3. Illegal Collection Or Removal Of Recyclables: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the city or the city's designee, to collect or remove
materials which have been segregated for the purpose of recycling and placed in a designated recycling receptacle.
4. Placing Prohibited Materials In Recycling Receptacles: It shall be unlawful for any person to willingly place any materials in the recycling receptacles
that do not meet the criteria defined under section 13-2 of this chapter.
5. Taking Or Pilfering Of Recyclables: It shall be unlawful for any person to take or pilfer, for his/her own use or benefit:
a. The recyclables of any other person.
b. The recyclables from any city operated drop off facilities. Recyclables donated to the drop off facility are considered the property of the city.
6. Refuse Disposal Into Or Near Recycling Drop Off Facilities: It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of "refuse", as defined under section 13-2
of this chapter, into or around city operated drop off facilities.
B. Nuisance Declared: Each and all of the conditions specified in subsection A of this section constitute a public nuisance, and are unlawful, in violation of
this chapter and are subject to immediate abatement by any officer of this city. Any costs associated with enforcement and abatement which the city
incurs may be charged to the offending party or property owner for reimbursement.
C. Recycling Location An Individual Choice: Nothing herein shall prohibit a person from selling, giving away, or otherwise legally diverting their own
recyclable materials to a location of their choice. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-5: MANDATORY SERVICE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 179/636
It shall be mandatory for every property owner within the city to receive city disposal service and billing therefor, except those industrial businesses whose
volume of waste might exceed what services the city could offer. Minimum levels of city residential, commercial, and industrial refuse service shall be
determined by city council and set by resolution. City refuse service above the minimum level may be required to protect public safety, health, and welfare,
as required by this chapter. The necessity of such increased levels of service shall be determined by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-
1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-6: UNLAWFUL DISPOSITION OF SOLID WASTE GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on the business of hauling or removing garbage, refuse or waste matter within the city without
written permission from city manager. Any person engaging in or carrying on the business of hauling or removing recyclables must have the written
permission of the city manager as set forth in section 13-19 of this chapter. Disputes over whether material should be classified as recyclable or solid
waste will be resolved by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-7: RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE:
A. Frequency, Amount, And Location Of Collection: The city shall provide collection service from all dwelling units in the city at frequencies and amounts to
be determined by city council and set by resolution. Residential service shall be at curbside unless otherwise authorized by the city manager or his
designee.
B. Responsibilities Of Curb Service Customers: All curb service customers shall place their solid waste containers at the curb or property line and shall
remove the empty containers in accordance with time schedules as determined by the city manager or his designee.
C. Alley Service Customers; Placement Of Containers: Alley service will only be provided if criteria developed by the city manager or his designee is met,
and such service is compatible with overall collection service objectives. Customers receiving alley service shall place their solid waste containers at
the property line in through alleys and shall remove the empty containers in accordance with time schedules as determined by the city manager or his
designee.
D. Container Service: Bin container service may be used in residential areas for apartments and multiple dwellings and for single-unit dwellings if approved
by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1537 § B45, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-8: SOLID WASTE RECEPTACLES:
The occupant, tenant or lessee of any house, dwelling, flat, apartment building, mobile home, motel, hotel, restaurant or other place of business or
residence within the city where solid waste is produced or accumulated and where individual container service is authorized shall keep, in a place where it
will not constitute a nuisance, a city approved container for receiving and holding all of the solid waste which accumulates on the premises between the
time of successive collections. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-9: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1537 § B46, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-10: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Where commercial collections are made from private alleys and accessways, said approaches shall be maintained in such a manner as not to be a
hazard to collection personnel and equipment, and provide a safe and convenient entrance to and through the premises for the purpose of collecting
refuse.
B. The approach to containers furnished by the city must be kept clear. An inaccessible container will not be dumped at the scheduled time. There will be
an extra charge to dump a container other than at the regularly scheduled time, or if it is necessary to return to the collection site due to inaccessibility
of the collection container.
C. Overfilled containers and excess trash on top of containers pose a hazard to collection vehicles and personnel and may not be dumped at the
scheduled time. If an overfilled container is able to be dumped, it shall constitute a special haul and will require an extra charge.
D. Compacted commercial waste requires special handling due to increased weight associated with compaction. Compacted waste will be subject to
increased collection charges and may require restrictions on the volume of waste accumulated between collection days.
E. All persons or businesses utilizing city owned containers are responsible for the sanitary conditions of each container or receptacle and the proximity
thereof and must keep lids and doors closed when not in use. A charge may be assessed when steam cleaning of containers is requested by
customers. All persons and businesses will be responsible for burned or damaged containers due to other than normal wear and tear and will be
charged for necessary repairs. Bin containers may be fitted with lid locks at the request of the customer. A charge will be assessed for installation and
repair of such locks.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 180/636
F. Items that are likely to cause damage to regular city containers or the collection vehicles will not be regularly picked up. Such examples are, but are not
limited to, timbers or tree trunks larger than four inches (4") in diameter or longer than five feet (5'), engine blocks, heads, transmissions, axles, spring
assemblies, tires or draft shafts, all of which shall constitute a special haul. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-11: BIN CONTAINER PADS AND ENCLOSURES:
A. All bin container services shall require a concrete bin pad to ensure that the bin can be conveniently serviced. Each bin type container, regardless of the
cubic yard capacity, shall require a concrete pad six inches (6") thick and six feet by ten feet (6' x 10') for each bin. The bin container pad shall be
poured to the existing ground level, ensuring that the pad is neither too high nor too low, creating collection problems. There shall be a fence erected
around the bin pad storage area. Such fencing shall conform with city specifications as specified by the city manager or his designee.
B. Temporary bin service may be provided at a residential or commercial site at the request of the customer for short term cleanup activities and do not
require a bin enclosure. Temporary bin service shall not be utilized in lieu of permanent disposal service. Temporary bin location and on site duration
may be limited so as not to constitute a public nuisance. Temporary bins determined to constitute a public nuisance may be immediately removed at
the discretion of the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 1537 § B47, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002; Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
13-12: SPECIAL PICK UP, DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION EVENT SERVICES:
A. The removal of dirt, sod, tree stumps, stones, broken concrete, furniture and appliances and other building materials is not considered to be normal
household solid waste service. Periodic collection of accumulations of excess solid waste within the city, in addition to that provided for above, shall be
made on the request of a resident. These services will be handled on a special pick up basis for which an extra charge is made. Tree and shrub
trimmings which cannot be accommodated in the city provided yard waste cart shall be handled on a special pick up basis for which an extra charge
will be made.
B. The following services are considered "special requests" and will be charged an additional fee as determined by city council and set by resolution.
"Special requests" include, but are not limited to: extra pick up of residential, commercial, and industrial containers; same day delivery, emptying, or
removal of temporary bins; same day delivery, emptying, removal or relocation of temporary or permanent roll off containers; standby time of collection
personnel at customer request or to accommodate customer needs; same day return to empty a container or bin that was inaccessible, overfilled, or
contaminated.
C. The disposal of substances determined to be household hazardous materials shall be restricted to special collection events or sites as approved by city
council.
D. The city manager or his designee shall determine those waste materials suitable for special pick up service. (Ord. 1537 § B48, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1615, 10-
1-2002)
13-13: ENFORCEMENT; POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER OR HIS DESIGNEE:
A. The city manager or his designee shall supervise the collection and removal of all solid waste by the city and shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.
He shall have the right to inspect any and all premises for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. Any
person denying or obstructing such inspection shall be subject to the penalties herein provided.
B. The city manager or his designee shall establish routes and days for collection and may change same from time to time. When such routes and days
are established or changed, he shall give such notice thereof as he may deem advisable.
C. In all cases where he shall find practical difficulty in complying with the requirements of this chapter as to the placing of refuse for collection by the city,
he shall designate where such solid waste shall be placed or kept for collection by the city and the conditions under which it shall be collected.
D. The city manager or his designee, with the approval of the city manager, shall make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this chapter as may be necessary, reasonable and proper to effect the expeditious, economical and efficient collection and removal of solid waste by
the city. Such rules and regulations may also relate to the required frequency of refuse collection at various locations, the type and number of refuse
containers required, and the vehicles used in making such collections. The determination of the city manager or his designee shall be conclusive. (Ord.
1537 § B49, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-14: CHARGES FOR COLLECTION; TIME AND MANNER OF PAYMENT:
A. Fees and charges for the collection and disposal of solid waste collection by the city will be fixed by resolution of the city council.
B. Solid waste collection charges shall be included in the regular city utility bill to customers who also have city water service. When the solid waste
customer does not have city water service, a separate bill for solid waste service shall be mailed to the customer who owns or controls the premises
serviced.
C. All charges for solid waste service included on utility bills, or if not a part of the city utility bill, shall be due and payable at the same time as other utility
charges. If a bill for solid waste is not paid within thirty (30) days after billing date, a charge of ten percent (10%) as a penalty for said delinquency shall
be made and added to the amount and become a part of said delinquent utility bill; and the city may discontinue all city utility service to the premises if
the bill should remain delinquent on the forty fifth day after billing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 181/636
D. All solid waste service charges are the responsibility of the customer whose name appears on the utility billing for the service. If unpaid by the customer
billed who controls the premises, they shall be secured at any time by filing for record in the office of the county recorder of any county, a certificate
specifying the amount of such charges and the name and address of the customer liable therefor. From the time of recordation of the certificate, the
amount required to be paid, together with interest and penalty, constitutes a lien upon all real property in the county owned by the customer or
afterwards, and before the lien expires, acquired by him. The lien has the force, priority, and effect of and shall be regarded as a judgment lien, which
may be extended, if unpaid, by the recording of a renewal certificate before the expiration of ten (10) years of the previously recorded certificate. (Ord.
1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-15: BUILDING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
The design of any new, substantially remodeled or expanded building or other facility shall provide for proper storage or handling which will accommodate
solid waste and recyclable material removal or collection. The design shall demonstrate to local land use and building permit issuing authorities that it
includes the required provisions. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-16: UNLAWFUL TO BURN SOLID WASTE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste by burning the same within the limits of the city. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-
2002)
13-17: PENALTY FOR CONTAMINATION OF YARD WASTE:
Any customer whose yard waste container is contaminated with items other than "yard waste" as defined in section 13-2 of this chapter may be assessed
an additional charge, the amount of which is set by resolution by the city council. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-18: COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS:
The city may establish a separate collection service for recyclable materials, including compostable wastes, and establish specific guidelines for such
service, which are consistent with the rules and regulations contained within this chapter. The city may also establish a permit for the collection of
recyclable wastes. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-19: RECYCLING HAULER PERMIT REQUIREMENT AND APPLICATION:
In order to more effectively regulate, control, and monitor the amount of recyclables being deposited in landfills and document the amount diverted from
the solid waste stream, it is in the best interest of the city to require those persons desiring to gather, collect, transport, or otherwise dispose of recyclables
to obtain from the city a permit to do so. Said permit to gather, collect, transport, or otherwise dispose of recyclables shall be nonexclusive. Each permit
awarded hereunder shall specifically describe the type of recyclable material to be collected and disposed of. Any person desiring to obtain a recycling
hauler permit to collect, gather, transport, or otherwise dispose of recyclables shall pay a fee and make an application as set forth in guidelines determined
by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-20: REFUSAL TO ISSUE PERMIT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city manager or his designee from refusing to grant or renew any application for a recycling hauler
permit when it appears that such permittee's proposed services are inconsistent with the intent of this chapter as defined in section 13-1 of this chapter, or
do not serve the best interest of the people of Porterville. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-21: TERM AND RENEWAL:
The term of the permit shall become effective upon notification by the granting authority, and shall be through the end of the calendar year it was awarded.
A recycling hauler permit may be renewed with the hauler's business license according to terms set forth by the city manager or his designee. (Ord.
1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-2002)
13-22: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
To assist the city in meeting its diversion goals as specified by the California integrated waste management act of 1989 (AB 939) and other state or local
laws, the permittee shall maintain records including the following information:
A. The description and nature of the material (e.g., bottles, cardboard, grease, etc.) collected.
B. The name(s) and address(es) of each collection site within the city of Porterville, including amount, weight, or tonnage of the recyclables collected at
each site.
C. Name and address of the site(s) where the above recyclables were disposed.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 182/636
The permittee shall maintain such records for a period of five (5) years and shall, upon reasonable request, make such records available for the city's
inspection.
The permittee shall also supply additional information when requested by the city manager or his designee. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-
2002)
13-23: HOME GENERATED SHARPS WASTE MANAGEMENT PROGRAM:
A. Purposes: The city of Porterville finds and declares all of the following purposes for this section:
1. To achieve the mandates imposed by the integrated waste management act of 1989 (AB 939) on a regional basis;
2. To enact a comprehensive and innovative system for the proper and legal management of home generated "sharps" waste, as defined in subsection
B of this section in the city of Porterville in accordance with section 118286 of the California Health And Safety Code;
3. To enact a law that establishes a program that is convenient for consumers and the public to return and ensure the safe and environmentally sound
disposal of home generated sharps waste, and to provide a "no cost" system for consumers for the return of home generated sharps waste;
4. To assure that the costs associated with the handling and disposal of home generated sharps waste are the responsibility of the producers and
retailers of home generated sharps waste, and not local governments or their service providers, state or local government, or taxpayers;
5. To reduce the likelihood of the illegal disposal of home generated sharps waste;
6. To ensure that all costs associated with the proper management of home generated sharps waste are internalized by the producers and retailers of
home generated sharps waste at or before the point of purchase, and not at the point of discard;
7. To assure that manufacturers and retailers of sharps, while working to achieve the goals and objectives of this section, shall have the flexibility to
partner with each other, with governmental programs, and with private and nonprofit business enterprises that provide collection and processing
services, to develop and promote a safe and effective home generated sharps waste management system; and
8. To provide for the safe and convenient collection and disposal of one hundred percent (100%) of the home generated sharps waste discarded in the
city of Porterville at no cost to the consumer and to comply with the requirements pursuant to state Health And Safety Code prohibiting the disposal
of home generated sharps waste in trash, recycling, yard waste, or landfills as of August 1, 2014.
B. Definitions:
CONSUMER: An individual who has purchased sharps for personal use for humans or animals.
CONTAINED: All home generated "sharps" (as defined herein) waste is properly secured in a "receptacle" (as defined herein) prior to delivery to a
retailer for disposal.
DISTRIBUTOR: A person who sells sharps to a retailer.
HOME GENERATED: All "sharps" as defined herein derived from a household, including a multi-family residence, or a single-family residence.
PORTERVILLE AREA: The geographic area that includes the boundaries of the city of Porterville, California.
PROPER DISPOSAL OF HOME GENERATED SHARPS WASTE: Disposal in compliance with the applicable provisions of the California Health And
Safety Code by means of an approved/certified medical waste disposal company.
RECEPTACLE: An FDA approved, rigid and puncture resistant container with a sealable lid that is designed specifically for transporting sharps for
disposal.
RETAILER: Any entity, including, but not limited to, a person or business, or whatever form of organization, which sells sharps to a consumer, including
a manufacturer of sharps who sells directly to a consumer.
SHARPS: Hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous needles, lancets, and other devices that are used to penetrate the skin for the delivery of
medications, to humans or animals.
C. Sharps Management:
1. By August 1, 2014, every retailer of sharps sold in the city of Porterville shall establish, within the retail outlet, a system for the acceptance and
collection of home generated sharps waste for proper disposal.
2. Each system established by a retailer for the acceptance and collection of home generated sharps waste that is enclosed in sealed, puncture
resistant receptacles during the retailer's normal hours of operation, for proper disposal shall, at a minimum, include all of the following elements:
a. A convenient location within the retail establishment for the "take back" from the consumer of home generated sharps waste at no cost to that
consumer.
b. Appropriate signage, prominently displayed within five feet (5') of any entrance to the retail establishment and easily visible to the consumer,
indicating that the retail establishment accepts and collects contained home generated sharps waste from consumers.
c. An appropriately secured receptacle or receptacles for the collection of contained home generated sharps waste within the retail establishment.
The retailer shall assure that all home generated sharps waste is properly contained in a sharps receptacle and placed in a secured drop off
location.
d. Assurance that the collected home generated sharps wastes are disposed within the time period established by applicable state law, as
determined, from time to time by the Tulare County environmental health service department, acting as the local enforcement agency.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 183/636
e. Comply with all applicable provisions of the California medical waste management act, Health And Safety Code section 117600 et seq.
3. A retailer who is required to accept contained home generated sharps waste shall, at a minimum, provide the following take back services:
a. The take back from the consumer of contained home generated sharps waste that the retailer sold or previously sold to the consumer, at no cost
to that consumer. In that event, the retailer may require proof of purchase of the prior sales. The retailer shall only be required to accept contained
home generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the amount previously sold to the consumer.
b. The take back of contained home generated sharps waste from a consumer purchasing sharps from the retailer, at no cost to the consumer. In
that event, the retailer shall only be required to accept contained home generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the amount being
purchased.
c. The take back from the consumer of contained home generated sharps waste that the retailer did not sell or previously sell to the consumer, at no
cost to that consumer. The retailer shall only be required to accept contained home generated sharps waste in an amount not to exceed the
equivalent of one 2-quart size sharps container per week, per consumer, from any consumer who resides in the city of Porterville area. (Ord. 1814,
6-17-2014)
13-24: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or wilfully and knowingly refusing to comply with the rules, regulations and determination of the
city manager shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1494A, 7-20-1993; Ord. 1615, 10-1-
2002)
Chapter 14
LIBRARY
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
14-1: ESTABLISHED:
As authorized by section 56 of the charter of the city, as amended, a free public library is hereby established under control of the city for the dissemination
of knowledge of the arts, sciences and general literature, and the performance of general library functions usually carried on and conducted by a public
free library. (Ord. 1538 § 2, 8-20-1996)
14-2: USE TO BE FREE TO ALL RESIDENTS OF CITY AND NONRESIDENT TAXPAYERS; VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES:
The public library of the city shall be free to the inhabitants and nonresident taxpayers of the city; subject, however, to such rules and regulations as may
be established by the library and literacy commission in accordance with city policy, and such rules, regulations and bylaws, fines and penalties as may be
established by the city council. Any person who violates any rules, regulations or bylaws passed and adopted by the city council or the library and literacy
commission, or who shall promptly fail to pay and discharge any fine and penalty levied by reason of a violation of any rule, regulation or bylaw may be
excluded from exercising any of the privileges of the public library of the city. (Ord. 1538 § 2, 8-20-1996; Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
Chapter Article II
LIBRARY AND LITERACY COMMISSION
14-3: DUTY TO MANAGE LIBRARY; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created a library and literacy commission consisting of seven (7) members, who shall be residents of the city of Porterville. The
commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. Said commissioners shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of a majority of
the city council. (Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
14-4: VACANCIES:
Vacancies on the library and literacy commission shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments
are made. All appointments shall be made for a three (3) year period on a rotating 4-3 basis and shall conform to chapter 11 of the Government Code
(sections 54970 and 54975). (Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
14-5: APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRPERSON, VICE CHAIRPERSON AND SECRETARY:
The library and literacy commission shall appoint one of its members chairperson, one of them vice chairperson, and one secretary. (Ord. 1768, 11-16-
2010)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 184/636
14-6: TERM OF OFFICERS:
The officers thus appointed shall serve for one year, until their successors in office have been elected and appointed by the library and literacy
commission. (Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
14-7: MEETINGS:
The library and literacy commission shall prescribe the time and place of its meetings and shall meet not less frequently than once each month; provided,
however, that no meetings need be held during the months of June, July and August. All meetings shall conform to section 54950 et seq., of the state
Government Code, also commonly known as the "Brown act". (Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
14-8: SPECIAL MEETINGS; QUORUM; RECORDS:
Special meetings of the library and literacy commission may be called at any time by the chairperson or by four (4) of the commissioners, by written notice
mailed or personally delivered to each member, and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing,
at least twenty four (24) hours before the time specified for the proposed meeting as specified in the California Government Code section 54950 et seq.; a
majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business and the commission shall cause a proper record of all its proceedings
to be kept and maintained. (Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
14-9: POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY:
A. Shall recommend library policy to the city council for adoption.
B. Shall define the objectives and goals of the library.
C. Shall advise the city council and staff on the management and control of the library and literacy services.
D. May establish all reasonable rules and regulations necessary for the day to day operation of the library.
E. Shall give due attention and study to library and literacy services.
F. Shall interpret and advocate library and literacy services to the community.
G. Shall take initiative to reach out to city entities and other advisory commissions in planning for future community library and literacy services and facility
needs.
H. Shall serve as the sounding board on which staff may test their plans and ideas.
I. Shall define "literacy" for the purpose of measure H. (Ord. 1768, 11-16-2010)
Chapter 15
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter Article I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:
ADVERTISING SOLICITOR: Any person who goes from place to place within the city selling or offering to sell advertising service using any advertising
method.
AMUSEMENTS, AMUSEMENT RIDES: One or more merry-go-rounds, exhibitions, flying horses, Ferris wheels, or other similar devices.
ARCADE: A commercial establishment containing any combination of five (5) or more apparatuses, devices and/or machines operated by payment of fees
and where the apparatus, devices and/or machines make possible a game or contest.
AUCTION SALES: All sales by auction of personal and/or real property.
BUSINESS: Professions, trades and occupations, and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 185/636
CARD ROOM: Any room in which there are card tables used, kept or intended for use in the playing of any kind of legal card game where the same is
conducted as a business or in connection with a business.
CARNIVAL: A group of two (2) or more shows, entertainments, games, devices, mechanical rides, amusements, vaudeville or dramatic or minstrel
performance, or games, tricks, devices or wheels, the result of the operation of which is dependent upon chance or skill, and as a result of the operation of
which things or representatives of value are given or paid. The charging of a single admission fee to a carnival shall not limit the provisions of this chapter.
CITY: City of Porterville, Tulare County, state of California.
COLLECTOR: The administrative services manager or designee of the city and duly authorized assistants and/or deputies of the director.
CONTRACTORS: Means and includes those trades licensed by the state contractors' licensing board.
FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS OR ESTABLISHED BUSINESS WITHIN THE CITY: A permanent store, office or place where business is legally and
regularly transacted from month to month in such manner as business of that nature is generally or customarily carried on and conducted and when the
circumstances show an intention to become an established, fixed and continuous part of the regular and legitimate business life of the city. In questionable
cases, such facts must be shown by the exhibition of a bona fide lease or rental agreement to the premises where such business is to be conducted, such
lease or rental agreement to be for a minimum period of not less than ninety (90) days.
FLEA MARKET OR SWAP MEET: Any collection of two (2) or more vendors gathered together in a common area segregated by spaces, booths or other
designated selling locations for the purpose of selling, offering to sell, bartering, or offering to barter, or any combination thereof, goods, wares,
merchandise or articles of value. This definition shall be liberally construed so as to apply to any activity commonly known and referred to as a flea market,
swap meet, or farmers' market.
FLEA MARKET OR SWAP MEET OPERATOR: Any person, corporation or organization conducting, managing or engaging in the business of operating a
swap meet, flea market, or farmers' market.
FLEA MARKET OR SWAP MEET VENDOR: Any person, corporation or organization, and all employees and agents thereof, who purchases or acquires a
space or spaces from a flea market or swap meet operator, or who purchases or acquires the right to be on the premises for the purpose of operating a
business at a flea market, swap meet, or farmers' market.
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of
goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited to, the following types of sales: adjusters; adjustment; alteration;
assignees; bankrupt; benefit of administrator; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditors committee; creditors; end;
executors; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvent; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receivers; trustees;
quitting business; going out of business.
GOODS: Any goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property capable of being the objects of a sale regulated hereunder.
GROSS RECEIPTS: Shall include the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act or
service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of or in connection
with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be all receipts, cash credits and property of any kind or nature,
without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable,
or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Included in "gross receipts" as concerns telephone companies shall be only those receipts derived from providing
telephone service within the city and only receipts resulting from intrastate telephone service. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be cash discounts
allowed and taken on sales; credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold; any tax required by
law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; such part of the sale price of property returned by
purchasers upon recession of the contract of sale as is refunded whether in cash or by credit; amounts collected for others where the business is acting as
an agent or trustee to the extent that such amounts are paid to those from whom collected.
Note: All receipts of a business should be included under gross receipts with the following exceptions:
A. Cash discounts allowed.
B. Trade in allowances.
C. Sales tax.
D. Excise tax.
E. Any other tax included in or added to the price of the product.
F. Sales return allowances.
G. Amounts collected as an agent which are to be paid to others. (An example of this might be a down payment collected by a realtor or a stock
purchase price collected by a stockbroker.)
INSURANCE BROKER: A person who, for compensation and on behalf of another person, transacts insurance other than life with, but not on behalf of, an
insurer.
ITINERANT VENDOR OR ITINERANT MERCHANT: All persons, both principal and agent, who engage in a temporary or transient business in the city,
selling or offering to sell goods, wares or merchandise or any other thing of value, with the intention of conducting such business for a period of less than
ninety (90) days, and who for the purpose of such business hires, leases or occupies any room, doorway, vacant lot, building or other place, for the
exhibition for sale of goods, wares, merchandise or other thing of value. If any such place, occupied or used for such business, is rented or leased for a
period of less than ninety (90) days, such fact shall be presumptive evidence that the business carried on therein is a transient business; and any person
so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this section or from payment of the license taxes herein provided for such business, by reason of
any temporary association with local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 186/636
The provisions of this definition shall not apply to commercial travelers or selling agents, selling their goods exclusively to merchants, dealers or
traders, whether selling for present or future delivery, by sample or otherwise, nor to peddlers, as the same is defined in this chapter. Further, the
provisions of this definition shall not apply to persons selling fruit, vegetables, eggs, butter or other farm or ranch products of their own farm or dairy,
exclusively, nor shall it apply to food products defined as "cottage foods" pursuant to the Health And Safety Code, live plants or plant cuttings, or
homemade arts or crafts when such items are offered for sale by the preparer at a coordinated farmers' market or similar event approved through the
city.
PAID PROMOTER: Every person, and each agent or representative of such person conducting, carrying on or managing, for any compensation
whatsoever, the business of selling tickets for, or promoting by advertising or otherwise, any activity within the city.
PARADE: Any march or procession consisting of persons, animals, or vehicles, or a combination thereof, except funeral processions, upon any public
street, sidewalk, alley, or public place, which march or procession does not comply with normal and usual traffic regulation or control.
PEDDLER: Any person who goes from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets, within the city selling or offering to sell, barter or
exchange, and making or offering to make immediate delivery of any goods, wares, merchandise or anything of value, in the possession of the peddler to
persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers of such commodities; provided, that a producer who furnishes directly and delivers any
poultry, eggs, butter, fruit, vegetables or meat being exclusively the produce of his own garden, farm, ranch, or dairy to persons within the city, shall not be
deemed a peddler within the meaning of this definition.
PERSON: All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, societies, and
individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee.
PERSONAL LOANS OR SUPPLIER OF FINANCING: Every person who either for himself or any other person engages in the business of loaning money,
advancing credit, loaning credit, whether security of any kind (personal or real property) is taken for such loan or advance or not, or purchasing or
discounting of any obligation of money due or to become due or any evidence of any obligation of money due, whether such obligation is secured or
guaranteed or not. Nothing in this definition shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person conducting a banking business or financial corporation
exempt under the laws of California, or to persons required to be licensed by the state of California under provisions of the "personal property brokers act",
or to the holder of a pawnbroker's license.
QUARTER: A period of three (3) calendar months. The "quarter" as referred to in this chapter shall commence on the first days of July, October, January,
and April and end on the last days of September, December, March and June. A quarter shall include any fraction thereof.
RECYCLABLE WASTE HAULER: Any person who goes from place to place, or business to business, within the city collecting and hauling recyclable
waste materials such as bottles, cans, cardboard, oil, paper or paper products, or any other substance for the purpose of reclamation or other use. Nothing
in this definition shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person conducting business as a junk dealer.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE: A sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will
cease and discontinue business at the place upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and then will remove to and resume business at a new location
in the city or will continue business from other existing locations in the city.
SEMIANNUAL: A period of six (6) calendar months. The semiannual period as referred to in this chapter shall commence on the first days of July and
January and end on the last days of December and June. A semiannual period shall include any fraction thereof.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER: Any person who goes from house to house or from place to place within the city, selling or taking orders for, or offering to
sell or take orders for, any goods, wares or merchandise or any article, for future delivery, or selling or taking orders for any service or services to be
furnished or performed in the future at any place within the city other than a fixed place of business, or for making, manufacturing, treating or repairing of
any article or thing whatsoever, for future delivery.
STREET VENDORS/PUSH CART VENDORS: Every person conducting, carrying on or managing the selling or offering for sale any food, beverages,
goods, wares, merchandise of any type including, but not limited to, plants, flowers, toys, paintings, furniture, or rugs, or articles of personal property, in
his/her possession, if the offer for sale occurs from a basket, box or any other type of receptacle, stand, wagon, motor vehicle, push cart, or any other type
of vehicle. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984; Ord. 1531 § A1, 6-18-1996; Ord. 1586 § A1, 5-16-2000; Ord. 1820, 12-16-2014)
15-2: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter is enacted to raise revenue for municipal purposes and to assure the orderly conduct of the business community of the city. (Ord. 1324, 12-
18-1984)
15-3: SUBSTITUTE FOR OTHER REVENUE ORDINANCES:
Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license
tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance or chapter of this code and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions
of other ordinances. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-4: EFFECT OF CHAPTER ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS PREVIOUSLY ACCRUED:
Neither this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance or chapter of this code shall in any manner be construed to affect
prosecution for violation of any other ordinance or chapter committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any
penal provisions applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be
posted, filed or deposited; and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-5: LICENSE REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 187/636
A. General Business License: There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations transacting business within
the city, license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade,
profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from said city so to do or without complying with any and all
applicable provisions of this chapter.
This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with
applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California.
Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United States or of the
state of California shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter.
B. Card Room: A license shall be obtained by any person to conduct, operate, or carry on, or permit to be carried on, the business of a card room.
C. Junk Dealer And/Or Collector: A license shall be obtained by any person before engaging in the business of maintaining or operating, conducting,
carrying on, or managing a junk or secondhand dealership.
D. Branch Establishments Or Multiple Businesses: A separate business license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the
business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each business license shall authorize the holder
to transact and carry on only the business described thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such business license; provided, that
warehouses used in connection with or incidental to a business taxed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of
business or branch establishments; and provided further that any person conducting two (2) or more types of businesses at the same location and
under the same management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may at his option,
pay only one tax calculated on all gross receipts of the businesses under the schedule that applies to the type of business of such person which
requires the highest percentage payment on such gross receipts.
Vehicles, coin operated machines or any other type of operation incidental to the licensed business shall fall within the gross receipts schedule
designated for said business. However, wherein two (2) or more businesses are operated under the same ownership or management that are licensed
under the "flat rate" section of this chapter, that flat rate of each type of business shall apply.
E. Sale Of Salvaged Goods: No license shall be required under the provisions of this chapter for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise salvaged from
any fire, wreck or other calamity in the city. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-5.1: REFUSAL TO ISSUE LICENSE:
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from refusing to grant to any person a license to carry on and conduct any business
in the city, when it shall appear to the city council that such business is, or is reasonably certain to be, carried on in such manner as to be unlawful,
immoral or a menace to the health, safety, peace or general welfare of the people of the city, or that the applicant is not a fit or proper person to carry
on such business, or of such character and reputation as to render it reasonably certain that such business will be carried on by the applicant in an
illegal or immoral manner, or in such manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, peace or general welfare of the people of the city,
or that the applicant has theretofore been convicted of any crime in connection with, or while engaged in the operation of a similar business in the city,
or has been convicted of any crime affecting the moral character of such applicant.
B. The city council shall refuse to issue a business license to any applicant where it is apparent that the issuance of such license would allow for the
practice, operation or carrying out of any activity that conflicts with any local, state or federal law. (Ord. 1817, 10-7-2014)
15-6: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Interstate Commerce: Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by
virtue of the constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from the payment of such taxes as are herein
prescribed.
None of the license taxes provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case
where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the collector for
an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory or unreasonable as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within
six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and
the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the collector may deem necessary in order to determine the
extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The collector shall then conduct an investigation and, after having first obtained the written
approval of the city attorney, shall fix as the license tax for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license tax has
already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license tax so fixed. In fixing the license tax to be charged, the collector shall
have the power to base the license upon a percentage of gross receipts or any other measure which will assure that the license tax assessed shall be
uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license tax as prescribed by this
chapter. Should the collector determine the gross receipts measure of license tax to be the proper basis, he may require the applicant to submit, either
at the time of termination of applicant's business in the city, or at the end of each six (6) month period, a sworn statement of the gross receipts and pay
the amount of license tax therefor; provided, that no additional license tax during any one calendar year shall be required after the licensee shall have
paid an amount equal to the annual license tax as prescribed in this chapter.
Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the collector stating the facts upon which exemption is
claimed.
The collector shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section
without payment to the city of the license tax required by this chapter. The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a
licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption
as provided herein.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 188/636
B. Charitable And Nonprofit Organizations: The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to
conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or carried on wholly
for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly, by an individual such to be classified as a nonprofit
corporation or organization; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific,
historical, literary, religious or moral subjects within the city whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be
appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; nor shall any license tax be required for the conducting of any
entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county, or municipal organization
or association whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects
for which such organization or association was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to exempt any such organization or association from complying with any of the provisions of this
chapter requiring a permit from the city council or any commission or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling or
occupation. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-7: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A. General Business License: Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for same to the collector
of the city. Every applicant for a business license shall pay to the collector, in addition to the prescribed license tax, a nonrefundable application fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00) prior to processing of said application.
Where the application is approved, the application fee shall be applied to the business license fee for the first licensing period. Where approval of the
application is denied, or if the applicant withdraws or cancels request for business license, or if the business license is not issued for any reason, the
twenty five dollar ($25.00) application fee will be retained by the city to cover processing costs of the application. Upon payment of the prescribed
license tax the collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain: 1) the name of the person to whom the license is issued; 2) the
business or profession licensed; 3) the place where such business or profession is to be transacted and carried on; 4) the date of the expiration of such
license; and 5) such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established business or profession, in all cases where the
amount of license tax to be paid is measured by gross receipts, such person shall furnish to the collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of
license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form provided by the collector, sworn to before a person authorized to administer
oaths, setting forth such information as may be therein required and as may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the
applicant.
If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by gross receipts, he shall estimate the gross receipts for the period to be
covered by the license to be issued. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax
to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish the collector with a sworn statement, upon a form furnished by the
collector, showing the gross receipts during the period of such license, and the license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid in the
manner provided by this chapter for the ascertaining and paying of renewal license taxes for other businesses or professions, after deducting from the
payment found to be due, the amount paid at the time such first license was issued.
The collector shall not issue to any such person another license for the same or any other business or profession, until such person shall have
furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax as herein required.
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the collector for his guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be
paid by the applicant, a written statement, upon a form to be provided by the collector, written under penalty of perjury, or sworn to before a person
authorized to administer oaths, setting forth such information concerning the applicant's business or profession during the preceding year as may be
required by the collector to enable him to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Card Room License: Every person desiring to conduct, operate or carry on the business of a card room shall make written application to the chief of
police for a license to do so on forms provided by him. The chief of police shall make such investigation of the applicant and of the premises as he
deems necessary or is deemed necessary by the city council. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-8: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
A. General Business License: The collector shall issue a business license to any person applying therefor when he is satisfied that the business will not
conflict with any law, ordinance or regulation of the city.
B. Card Room License: The chief of police shall report the findings of his investigation as described in subsection 15-7B of this article, together with his
recommendation, to the city council. The city council may, in its discretion, issue the license subject to such conditions as it deems reasonable, or
refuse to issue the license. The city council shall be the sole judge of the sufficiency of whether the issuance or denial of the license is detrimental to
the public health, morals, general welfare or the public peace. The decision of the city council shall be final.
C. Street Vendors/Peddlers Business License: The following information will be collected prior to the issuance of a street vendor/peddler license:
1. A description of the type of food/merchandise to be sold.
2. A description of the type of conveyance or vehicle and proposed locations.
3. Evidence of Tulare County health department certificate.
4. Evidence of general liability insurance, automobile liability, and workers compensation (when applicable).
a. General liability insurance, including public liability, property damage insurance, and products liability, the form of which shall be subject to the
approval of the city risk manager, indemnifying the city from any liability whatsoever arising out of the carrying on of any business authorized by
such permit. Such insurance shall name the city, its officers, employees, agents and volunteers as additional insured, shall provide for cross
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 189/636
liability between insured and provide that the applicant's insurance is primary to any insurance coverage administered or owned by the city. The
amounts of insurance coverage shall be in the form of a one hundred thousand dollar ($100,000.00) umbrella policy aggregate per incident;
b. Workers' compensation insurance as required by state statutes, when operators are employees and not owners; and
c. Automobile liability coverage as required by state statutes.
5. Evidence of payment of the city's business license fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually per vehicle, cart or any other type of conveyance.
6. Photo identification cards to be carried by vendor.
7. Evidence of state sales tax identification number or certificate of state sales tax exemption.
8. Evidence of sound registration statement approval by city police department in accordance with section 3-12 of this code for those street vendors
with sound systems.
9. This requirement shall not apply to caterers licensed under section 15-23, gross receipts, classification B, of this code. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984; Ord.
1531 § A2, 6-18-1996)
15-9: LICENSE RENEWAL:
The collector shall renew any general business license upon payment of the proper fee and when the conditions set forth under subsection 15-8A of this
article are met. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-9.1: TERMINATION OF BUSINESS:
Any business which shall remain within closed doors, without being open to the public for the transaction of business for thirty (30) days shall be deemed
and considered to be finally terminated, and the license to conduct same shall be declared to be forfeited, and any person desiring to reopen or continue
such business will be required to take out a new license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
In the event that the period of thirty (30) days is not or appears to be not sufficient time for the closing of such business, the proprietor or operator of the
business may make application to the city council for an extension of time, submitting such evidence as he may have in support of his application, and the
decision of the city council shall be final.
The terms conducting business continuously or remaining in business in the city shall mean any business which is open to the public for the transaction of
business on every legal business day of the year, Sundays and legal holidays being excepted. An exception will be made in case of a business which is
being prepared for a sale or for the purpose of inventory taking at which time not to exceed five (5) days' closure will be allowed; provided, that any
business, which from its nature is seasonal or operative for only a portion of each year, may be excepted from the above definition if the applicant for a
license will file with the city a declaration or statement of this fact when applying for license; provided, further, that in no case shall a greater than fifty
percent (50%) reduction be made from the regular license rate on account of the seasonal nature of the business. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-10: PENALTIES:
A. All license taxes due hereunder shall be paid in the office of the collector unless otherwise expressly provided.
B. For failure to pay a license tax for a general business license when due, whether for renewal of an existing license or for failure to make application and
payment for license prior to first day of commencing business, the collector shall add successive, cumulative penalties in the amount of twenty five
percent (25%) of the business tax per month on the last day of each month after the due date thereof, providing that the amount of such penalty to be
added shall in no event exceed three hundred percent (300%) of the amount of the business tax due.
C. License taxes shall be considered due and payable and delinquent as follows:
1. Application and payment for license must be made prior to the first day of conducting business and shall be considered delinquent at eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. on the first day of conducting such business.
2. Annual license taxes shall be due on July 1 and shall be delinquent at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on July 31.
3. Semiannual license taxes shall be due on the first day of July and January and shall be delinquent at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last day of the
first month in which the semiannual tax is due.
4. Quarterly license taxes shall be due on the first day of July, October, January and April, and delinquent at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last day of
the first month in which the quarterly tax is due.
5. Monthly license taxes shall be due on the first day of the month for which the license is sought and delinquent at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the last
day of said month.
6. Weekly license taxes shall be due on Monday of each week and shall be delinquent at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Friday of said week.
7. Daily license taxes shall be due on its effective date and delinquent at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of due date.
D. In lieu of paying said license taxes at the office of the collector as specified in subsection A of this section, said license taxes may be deposited in
United States mail, postage prepaid, on the due date, provided the transmitting envelope contains a postage cancellation stamp showing cancellation
not later than twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on the due date.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 190/636
E. If the due day falls on Saturday, Sunday or a holiday, the due day shall be the next regular business day on which the city hall is open to the public.
F. The collector may, for good cause, extend for not more than thirty (30) days the time for filing any report or paying any sum required to be paid
hereunder. The extension may be granted at any time provided a written request therefor is filed with the collector prior to the delinquency date.
G. The provisions in this section are in addition to and shall not limit the provisions of section 15-21 of this article. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-11: ENFORCEMENT, INSPECTIONS AND AUDITS OF BUSINESSES:
It shall be the duty of the collector, and he is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police shall render such
assistance in the enforcement hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector or the city council.
The collector in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him hereunder and, acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants, shall examine or
cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
The collector and each and all of his assistants and any police officer of the city of Porterville shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge,
and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to procure a business license herein, and demand an exhibition of said license. Any person
having such business license theretofore issued, in his possession or under his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties provided for by the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the collector and each of his assistants to
seek a complaint from the appropriate authority to be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of said provisions.
No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action
such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit and
verification by the collector, his deputies, or authorized employees of the city, who are hereby authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and
records of any licensee or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.
All licenses, applicants for licenses, and persons engaged in business in the city are hereby required to permit an examination of such books and records
for the purposes aforesaid.
The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section or any other section of this chapter shall be confidential except that the business name,
address, telephone number, the owner's name and dates business commenced or closed, which information shall be subject to public inspection. (Ord.
1324, 12-18-1984)
15-11.1: LICENSE FEE DEBT; MINIMUM FEE:
The amount of any license imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city; and any person carrying on any trade, calling, profession or
occupation mentioned in this chapter without having a license from the city to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction, for the amount of license imposed on such trade, calling, profession or occupation by the provisions of this chapter.
A suit may be brought against any person for any license fee in this chapter specified, due and unpaid, in the name of the city, in any court of competent
jurisdiction. The city attorney is authorized to bring such action when in his judgment there is reason to believe the amount can be collected, and an
attachment may also be issued.
The conviction and punishment of any person for transacting any trade, calling, profession or occupation without a license shall not excuse or exempt such
person from the payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of conviction, and nothing in this chapter shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
If any person fails or refuses to file any required return within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the collector, fails to file a corrected
return; or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails or refuses to apply for a business license, such person shall be required to pay a
license at such return as the collector may, after investigation, fix as the proper return to be paid by such person, in any event not less than a minimum
license tax of seventy dollars ($70.00) semiannually and shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
If any license or penalty be not paid when due, the same shall be delinquent, and such nonpayment shall constitute a violation of the terms of this chapter,
and the applicant shall be subject to the penalties provided by this chapter, and the city shall be entitled to enforce the collection of such license fee in the
manner specified in this chapter, and the collector may rescind and revoke any license issued, or the right to do or carry on business in the city. (Ord.
1324, 12-18-1984)
15-12: REVOCABILITY OF LICENSE:
The city council reserves the right to revoke the license granted any person, when, after notice to the licensee and upon hearing had, it shall appear the
business licensed is unlawful, immoral or a menace to the public health, safety, morals, peace or general welfare, or is, or has been carried on in an illegal
or immoral manner, or in such manner as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, peace or general welfare of the people of the city.
A. General Business License: The collector may revoke any license for extended nonpayment of the license fees or for violation of any of the regulations
set forth in this chapter. Said revocation may be appealed to the city council by the licensee as set forth in subsection 15-13A of this article.
B. Card Room: A card room license may be revoked at any time by the chief of police if, in his judgment, such action is necessary. Said revocation may be
appealed to the city council as set forth in section 15-13B of this article. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-13: APPEALS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 191/636
A. General Business License: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may
appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal.
The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
post office at Porterville, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine
all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this chapter.
B. Card Room License: The licensee may appeal revocation of a license by filing a written appeal with the city council within ten (10) calendar days of the
action by the chief of police. The city council shall hear the appeal and shall affirm or revoke said action as in its judgment appears to be in the public
interest. The decision of the city council shall be final. If the licensee does not appeal within the ten (10) calendar day period, the revocation of the
license shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-14: FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENT OR CORRECTED STATEMENT:
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or if after demand therefor made by the collector he fails to file a corrected
statement, the collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as he may be able to obtain. If such
a determination is made, the collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post
office at Porterville, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his last known address. Such person may, within fifteen (15) days
after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the collector for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is
made, the collector shall cause the matter to be set for hearing within thirty (30) days before the city council. The collector shall give at least ten (10) days'
notice to such person of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The council shall consider all
evidence produced; and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner
prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-15: ADDITIONAL POWER OF COLLECTOR:
In addition to all other power conferred upon him, the collector shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn
statement for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the further
power, with the consent of the city council, to compromise any claim as to amount of license tax due. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-16: ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER; LICENSE OR LOCATION:
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable; provided that where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a
business at a particular place, such licensee may upon application therefor have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such
business under said license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984; Ord. 1540, 9-3-1996)
15-17: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
15-18: DUPLICATE LICENSE:
A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any license previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee
filing statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the collector a duplicate license fee of five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 1324, 12-18-
1984)
15-18.1: REFUNDS:
License taxes, penalties and costs collected or received by the city may be refunded as herein provided and not otherwise if a signed and verified claim
therefor is filed with the collector within six (6) months after the date of payment. Such refund may be made only under the following conditions:
A. Where a refund is specifically authorized by the provision of law requiring payment of the license, permit or application fee.
B. Where the money is paid to secure a license or permit not required by law.
C. Where the amount paid was in excess of the amount required by law.
D. Where the money paid was not required by law.
E. Where the applicant for any license has not, at any time after the commencement of the period or term during which the requested license would have
been effective, commenced or engaged in the business or occupation, or performed any act for which the license was required.
F. Where the money paid was not required by law, or was erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city through mistake, inadvertence or error of
law or of fact, and whether paid or charged under color of any provision of this chapter, or otherwise.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 192/636
This section is remedial in purpose. Its terms and requirements shall not be deemed to limit or qualify the lawful right of any person to bring or maintain an
action or proceeding based upon the general law of this state for any remedy provided by law. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-19: POSTING AND KEEPING LICENSES:
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:
A. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the
premises where such business is carried on.
B. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person at all
times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-20: REGULATIONS:
A. Card Tables:
1. Conformance With State Law: It is the stated purpose of this subsection to regulate card rooms, licenses and permits in the city of Porterville
concurrently with the state of California, and to impose local controls and conditions upon establishments operating card rooms and card tables as
permitted in the "gambling control act" as codified in division 8, chapter 5 of the California Business and Professions Code.
2. Licenses: Each card table shall be assigned a separate license with such license designating the number of the table and the location of the table,
and the exact place of business where such card table is to be maintained. The operator shall attach to each licensed table a metal identification
number, which shall be plainly visible at all times; and no license or identification number shall be transferable; provided, however, that it may be
moved to a new location with the approval of the city council.
3. Hours Of Operation: Playing at all card tables shall absolutely cease and terminate at two o'clock (2:00) A.M. of each day; and it is hereby declared
to be unlawful for any person to deal, participate in, play, carry on or bet at, against, rent, open up, carry on, conduct or have charge of or to control
any card table in the city between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. of each day.
4. Patron Security And Safety: All licensees shall have in effect a security plan to address the safety and security of patrons in and around the card
room. The plan, and any amendments thereto, must be filed with and approved by the chief of police. The licensee shall be liable for the security and
safety of its patrons to the extent required by law. Any information about security measures that is provided to the city by an establishment operating
a card table shall be confidential and not open to public inspection.
The physical arrangements of the gambling area and parking lots of the establishment operating card tables shall meet the requirements and
specifications determined necessary by the chief of police for the security and safety of citizens, patrons, and police officers. During all hours of
operation, the outside doors to the establishments wherein card tables are operated and the main doors to rooms wherein the tables are located
must be unlocked and accessible to the general public. Any part and all of the establishment where a card table is operated shall be open to police
inspection during all hours of operation.
5. Wagering Limits: Unless otherwise authorized by the chief of police based upon a finding of necessity because of the rules relating to a particular
game, a maximum of ten (10) hands may be dealt at any one table. The maximum number of persons who may participate in play at a table may be
limited by the licensee consistent with the provisions of this chapter, provided that in any event, the number of persons present in any establishment
or room shall not exceed the occupant load as otherwise prescribed by law. There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the establishment
premises the minimum buy-in and wagering limits. Not later than July 1 of each calendar year, the licensee shall execute under penalty of perjury
and file with the chief of police a declaration stating the following: a) the minimum buy-in, table and wagering limits and any and all charges or other
fees assessed of all players at a table; and b) a set of the then current posted detailed house rules applicable to the games played. There is no
wagering limit imposed by this subsection. However, all wagering limits fixed by the licensee shall be posted as required in this subsection, and shall
comply with all state laws and all ordinances of the city.
6. Number Of Gambling Tables: Not more than three (3) card tables shall be located at each establishment. Not more than nine (9) tables total shall be
located in the city of Porterville, and not more than three (3) establishments operating such tables shall be located in the city of Porterville.
7. Location: No license shall be issued except for a location deemed suitable by the city council.
8. Permit Required For Dealers And Employees: All card room dealers and employees shall be required to obtain a permit from the chief of police. In
addition, all card room dealers and employees are required to submit to a fingerprint based criminal history background check by the department of
justice. Permit applicants are responsible for all fees charged for applying for and obtaining the permit and submitting to the background check. The
chief of police shall deny said permit for any of the following reasons, as set forth in California Business and Professions Code section 19850A(a):
a. Failure of the applicant to clearly establish eligibility and qualification in accordance with California Business and Professions Code, division 8,
chapter 5;
b. Failure of the applicant to provide any information, documentation, and assurances required by said chapter of the Business and Professions
Code or requested by the director of the division of gambling control, department of justice, or failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to
qualification, or the supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria;
c. Conviction of the applicant for any crime punishable as a felony;
d. Conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude within the ten (10) year period immediately preceding the
submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to sections 1203.4, 1203.4a and 1203.45 of the California
Penal Code;
e. Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by section 186.2 of the Penal Code;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 193/636
f. Wilful and obstinate defiance by the applicant of any legislative investigatory body, or other official investigatory body of any state or of the United
States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to gambling; official corruption related to gambling activities; or criminal
profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by section 186.2 of the Penal Code; or
g. The applicant is less than twenty one (21) years of age.
The department of justice's division of gambling control may object to the issuance of a work permit by the city for any cause deemed reasonable
by the division.
9. Revocation And Appeal:
a. By The Chief Of Police: The chief of police may refuse to issue or may revoke the permit of a card room dealer or employee at any time if, in his
judgment, such action is necessary. A person whose application for a permit is denied or a person whose permit is revoked, if the decision to deny
or revoke was made solely by the chief of police, may appeal the action of the chief of police to the city council in accordance with the procedure
set forth in subsection 15-13B of this article.
b. By The Division Of Gambling Control: If the division objects to the issuance of a work permit, the permit shall be denied. Any person whose
application for a work permit has been denied because of an objection by the division may apply to the California gambling commission for an
evidentiary hearing in accordance with regulations. In addition, the California gambling control commission may notify the chief of police to revoke
a work permit, if the commission makes the necessary findings after a hearing, pursuant to California Business and Professions Code section
19912A.
B. Coin Operated Machines:
1. Contents Of Applications: At the time a license is applied for, the applicant shall give the serial number, and kind or character of such machine.
2. Display Of License Or Stamp: No person shall maintain any vending, weighing, entertainment or amusement machine within the city without having
posted thereon in a conspicuous place a stamp or label, which shall be issued and supplied by the collector, which stamp or label shall indicate the
number of the license, together with the date of expiration thereof; and in the event any duly qualified officer of the city finds any such machine being
maintained in the city without such stamp or label being maintained thereon in a conspicuous place, or without such stamp or label indicating that
there is a valid and unexpired license issued covering such machine, it shall be his duty to seize and hold such machine for the payment of the
license tax, which machine shall be disposed of upon the nonpayment of such tax as provided by the laws relative thereto.
3. Transfer Of License: In the event any person discontinues maintaining any vending, weighing, entertainment or amusement machine duly licensed
pursuant to this chapter during a period when such license remains unexpired, the licensee may substitute another similar machine in place of the
machine, the use of which is so discontinued, and may maintain such substituted machine without the payment of an additional license tax for the
unexpired period of the license carried on such discontinued machine; provided, however, that such person surrender the unexpired license of such
discontinued machine to the collector and obtain from the collector a new license for such unexpired period for the replacing machine.
4. Location Of Machines: No license as provided in this chapter shall be issued for the maintaining of any vending, weighing, entertainment or
amusement machine upon any public street, sidewalk, alleyway or court within the city.
C. Junk Dealers And/Or Collectors:
1. Permit Required: Before any person shall engage in the city in the business of buying or selling old rope, brass, copper, tin, lead, rags, slush, empty
bottles, paper, bagging, or other junk whether at a fixed place of business or as an itinerant peddler, he shall make application to the city council for a
permit to engage in such business. Such application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall make an investigation concerning the character
of the applicant, and within seven (7) days shall report thereon to the city council. Upon receiving such report, the city council shall grant or deny the
applicant a permit to engage in such business, and such permit shall be granted unless it shall appear from such report of the chief of police that the
applicant is not a person of good moral character, or has not a good character in respect to honesty and integrity; provided, however, that no such
permit shall be granted unless the city council find that such applicant, or if the applicant be a corporation, the manager thereof, has been a resident
of the city for not less than ninety (90) days prior to such application.
2. Registration Of Purchases: Every person maintaining or operating a junk shop or junkyard shall keep at his place of business a substantial well
bound book, and shall promptly enter therein an exact description of all personal property purchased by him or it, the date of purchase, name and
residence or place of business of the person from whom purchased, and all particular or prominent marks of identification that may be found on such
property. Such book shall be kept neat and clean, and all entries made therein shall be neatly and legibly written in ink. Such book shall at all times
during the ordinary hours of business be open to the inspection of the chief of police, or any other city officer.
3. Required Holding Period: All junk purchased by owners or keepers of junk shops or junkyards shall be held for a period of at least nine (9) days
before the same shall be sold.
4. Pawning And Pledging Prohibited: No owner or keeper of a junk shop or junkyard shall receive any personal property by way of pledge or pawn, nor
shall any owner or keeper of a junk shop or junkyard engage in the business of pawnbroking on the same premises wherein a junk shop or junkyard
is located.
5. Hours Of Business: No junk peddler shall purchase or collect any junk in the city between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
A.M.
6. Revocation Of Permit: The city council may revoke the junk dealer permit granted to any person upon failure of such person to conduct and carry on
such business in accordance with the provisions of this subsection; and such permit may likewise be revoked, if in the conduct of such business, any
law of the state, county or city be violated.
7. Places Of Business: It shall be unlawful for any owner, tenant or lessee of any premises in the city, or the owner, tenant or lessee of any trailer
house, trailer, truck, automobile, motor vehicle or other vehicle to keep, place or maintain thereon, or to permit the keeping, placing or maintaining
thereon, of any trailer house, trailer, truck, automobile, motor vehicle or other vehicle which is used or which is to be used for a dental or chemical
laboratory or for the display or selling of merchandise therein, or to use or permit the use of any trailer house, trailer, truck, automobile, motor vehicle
or other vehicle on any premises in the city for business, religious, educational, retail, commissary, shop, storage, office purposes or for other type of
commercial retail purpose.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 194/636
D. Bingo Games:
1. Bingo Games Allowed Only By Eligible Organizations With Proper City Permit: Bingo games within the city are illegal except those organizations
exempted from the payment of the bank incorporation tax by sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, and 23701l of the
California Revenue and Taxation Code and by mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations; provided, that the proceeds of such
games are used only for charitable purposes; and provided, that these eligible organizations have applied for and received the proper city bingo
license and conformed to section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter.
2. Application And Fee For License: Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application, in
writing, to the office of the finance director on a form provided by the city. The issuing authority shall be the finance director, after approval of the
chief of police. The license shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance. The license fee, whether for the initial license or renewal, will be
fifty dollars ($50.00) annually. If an application for a license is denied, one-half (1/2) of the license fee paid shall be refunded to the organization.
3. Contents Of Application: Said application for a bingo license shall obtain the following information:
a. The name, address, date, place of birth, physical description and driver's license number of every officer of the charitable organization.
b. The name, address, date, place of birth, physical description and driver's license number of not more than twenty (20) members who will be
authorized to operate the licensed bingo games on behalf of the organization.
c. The particular property within the city including the street number owned or leased by the applicant, and used by such applicant for an office or for
the performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted together with the
occupancy capacity of such place.
d. The proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games.
e. That the applicant agrees to conduct the bingo games in strict accordance with section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and this chapter as they
may be amended from time to time and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the chief of police when there is a
violation of this chapter or other applicable laws.
f. The application shall be signed by said applicant under penalty of perjury.
g. The annual license fee shall accompany the application.
h. The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate or determination of exemption under section 23701d of the California Revenue
and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise tax board in Sacramento, showing exemption under
said section 23701d.
4. Investigation Of Applicant: Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the finance director shall refer the application to the appropriate
departments of the city for investigation, as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true, and whether or not the property of the
applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property in which bingo games may lawfully be conducted, as to fire, occupancy and other
applicable restrictions.
5. Contents Of License: Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to conduct bingo games within the city, and the police
department has investigated the application, the finance director shall issue a license to said applicant, which shall contain the following information:
a. The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued.
b. The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted.
c. The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted.
d. The days of the week and times during which games may be conducted.
e. The date of the expiration of such license.
f. Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of this subsection.
6. Consent: The application for or acceptance of a license constitutes:
a. Consent to the entry of any peace officer to investigate the location identified in the application before the issuance of a license, as well as during
any game thereafter.
b. Consent to the chief of police or his agents to review or audit the charitable organization's records relating to the conduct of bingo games into the
special account required by California Penal Code section 326.5(j) for the purposes of verifying compliance with the financial interest and special
fund requirements of Penal Code section 326.5 and with this chapter and with all other applicable laws and regulations.
7. Violation A Misdemeanor: Any person who conducts a bingo game without the proper license as required by this chapter, or who operates a bingo
game in violation of any of the requirements of this chapter, or who operates any bingo game after the suspension or revocation of a bingo license is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
8. Summary Suspension Or Revocation: The chief of police may suspend or revoke a license for any violation of the provisions of this subsection or of
any applicable law or regulation, or for any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for the license, or in the
promotion, supervision, operation, conduct or staffing of any bingo game.
9. Notice Of Suspension Or Revocation: When it appears that there is probable cause for a suspension or revocation, the chief of police shall prepare a
written statement showing the cause and the specific action to be taken. This written notice shall be served on an officer or member of the
organization listed on the license application.
10. Appeal Process:
a. After receiving the written notice of suspension or revocation, the affected licensee may file a written request for an appeal hearing with the city
manager. The decision of the city manager will be final. The written request for an appeal hearing must be filed with the city manager's office no
later than seven (7) calendar days after receiving the written notice of suspension from the chief of police.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 195/636
b. This appeal hearing must be held within thirty (30) days of the request being filed with the city manager. Upon the conclusion of the appeal
hearing, the city manager shall issue his written decision within ten (10) days.
c. Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year
from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is the cancellation of the exemption granted under section 23701d
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of said exemption.
11. Definition Of Bingo: As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or
symbols designated on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.
12. Maximum Amount Of Prize: The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.
13. Profits To Be Kept In Separate Fund Or Account: All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be
commingled with any other fund or account. The licensee shall keep full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in
connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The city, by
and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and licensee shall fully cooperate
with the city by making such records available.
14. Financial Interest In Licensee Only: No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in
the conduct of such bingo game.
15. Exclusive Operation By Licensee: A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall
not receive a profit, wage or salary from bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any
phase of such game.
16. Bingo Games Open To Public: All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization.
17. Attendance Limited To Occupancy Capacity: Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be
limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building department of the
city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person.
18. Bingo Games Conducted Only On Licensee's Property: A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which
property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued
under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application.
In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is
organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this
chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.
Nothing in this subsection should be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by
such organization.
19. Bingo Cards: Only preprinted cards that bear the legend, "for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local
ordinances" are to be used in any bingo game.
20. Minors Not To Participate: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.
21. Intoxicated Persons Not To Participate: No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.
22. Hours Of Operation: No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than ten (10) hours out of any twenty four (24) hour period. No bingo game
shall be conducted before ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. nor after twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight of any day.
23. Participant Must Be Present: No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and
place in which the bingo game is being conducted.
24. Receipt Of Profit By A Person A Misdemeanor Under State Law: It is a misdemeanor under section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state of
California for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by
a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
25. City May Enjoin Violation: The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of section 326.5 of the California
Penal Code or of this subsection.
26. Severability: If any portion of this subsection is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this subsection. The city council hereby declares that it would have
adopted this subsection and each portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections or portion be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
E. Community Civic Events:
1. City Council Findings: The city council finds and declares that it has historically closed city streets in portions of the downtown area, for the purpose
of assisting certain community and regional events benefitting the city, the community at large, and nonprofit organizations operating in the city.
Control over the operation of these community civic events has traditionally been turned over to the entity sponsoring the event. The city council finds
and declares that there is a need to provide written guidelines and regulations on how these community civic events shall operate.
2. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection is to establish a legal framework for the operation of community civic events, to set forth minimal
requirements for sponsors of these events, to meet the need for order and control during these events, and to ensure that the theme or character of
the event is maintained, and that use of public property is compatible with the event.
3. Definition: "Community civic event" (hereafter referred to as "CCE") shall mean the sponsoring and conducting by a nonprofit organization of a civic,
artistic, cultural, charitable, educational, veteran or benevolent activity of community interest. The council shall require reasonable proof of the
nonprofit status of the sponsoring organization.
4. Participation: Participation in a CCE and use of public right of way shall be limited to those members of the sponsoring organization, in good
standing with the organization, and those persons and vendors as may be approved by the sponsoring organization.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 196/636
5. Permit Required: The CCE sponsor shall obtain a CCE permit from the city not less than thirty (30) nor more than one hundred eighty (180) days
before the commencement date of the proposed permit activities; provided, that the council may waive these time requirements if it determines such
a waiver to be in the public interest. Upon receipt of an application, the business license clerk shall circulate the application to the following
departments for comments and approval: police department, fire department, finance department, department of community development, public
works department, parks and recreation department, and risk management department. These departments may impose terms and conditions upon
the CCE permit and issuance and approval of the permit is conditioned upon compliance with the required conditions. At a minimum, the permit shall
include conditions for holding the city harmless, maintaining minimum limits of liability insurance in accordance with city standards, providing security
and traffic control, providing adequate restroom and sanitation facilities, and paying for the cost of city services. The nonprofit sponsor of the CCE
shall be exempt from a license fee. Said permit shall be valid for a maximum of four (4) consecutive days. If an event runs for four (4) consecutive
days, one of those days must include a Saturday, Sunday or national holiday. No person or sponsoring organization shall fail to keep the permit, at all
times, at the place where the activities are being conducted, nor fail upon demand therefor to exhibit such permit to any public officer. The permit
may be revoked for noncompliance with the conditions of the permit and the provisions of this subsection. Revocation may be made by the council,
city manager, chief of police, or their designees. If the grounds for revocation occur during the CCE, the council, city manager, chief of police or their
designee shall first advise the CCE sponsor of the grounds for revocation and provide an opportunity to correct the same. The permit may also be
revoked during the CCE if fire or another emergency requires the CCE to be terminated to protect the public safety. When the permit is revoked for
this reason, all CCE participants must immediately comply with instructions from any city police officer or fire department personnel.
6. Application: The application for the CCE permit shall contain:
a. The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the CCE chairperson, and the addresses and telephone numbers of each.
b. The location and outside perimeter of the CCE area, indicated upon a map of the area.
c. The date and times at which the CCE activities are to take place.
d. A description of the CCE activities which will be conducted.
A preliminary list of persons who will be engaging in the CCE, and a preliminary list of persons engaging in temporary selling activities at any time
during the dates and times for which a temporary selling permit has been granted shall be furnished to the city no later than one week before the
CCE is to take place. An amended list of all participants is required to be submitted in conjunction with the payment of business license fees per
subsection E16 of this section.
The council shall cause such application to be investigated and shall grant the permit if it determines that the proposed CCE activities will not
disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or create a hazard to the public; that the proposed CCE activities
are not of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police personnel to regulate such CCE activities that it prevents
reasonable police protection for the city; that the concentration of persons, equipment and materials is not so great in the CCE areas that it would
prevent proper fire, police and ambulance protection; and that the CCE permit applicant agrees to be responsible for cleanup necessitated by the
proposed activities. The council may, in its discretion, require a cleanup deposit to guarantee that cleanup takes place. The council shall condition
the granting of permits upon compliance with the provisions of this subsection and also with such other conditions as the council may deem
necessary to impose for the proper protection of persons and property.
7. Responsible Party: The sponsoring organization shall be responsible for the CCE and for all necessary planning, physical facilities, equipment, fire
lanes, and removal, cleanup, and staffing. The sponsoring organization shall be responsible for any necessary permits and code requirements for the
conduct of such CCE as may be required by county and state agencies and coordination with appropriate city departments, such as police and fire.
All necessary certificates and approvals by any health or other governmental organization shall be in possession of the person representing the
sponsoring entity in such CCE.
8. Management: Subject to the minimum requirements imposed by this subsection, the CCE sponsor shall:
a. Promulgate rules and regulations for the CCE, including rules and regulations to maintain the theme or character of the CCE. A copy of the rules
and regulations shall be submitted to the business license clerk prior to the CCE.
b. Have control over the terms and conditions under which persons chosen to provide vending services will operate at a CCE including, but not
limited to, products sold, hours of sale, fees, vendor locations and issuance of seller permits.
c. Take any other actions which are necessary for the efficient management and operation of the CCE.
9. Minimum Requirements: The CCE sponsor shall abide by the following minimum requirements. These minimum requirements shall be deemed a
part of the permit conditions and may be supplemented by resolution of the city council.
a. Maintain openings between vendor booths or sizes, and at locations and distances, required by the city. The required openings shall be identified
on the CCE sponsor's street plan.
b. Not use any permanent or semipermanent paint or other markers to delineate or mark the location or other direction on any public street, sidewalk,
alley or parking lot.
c. Not discriminate in the selection of any vendor on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or familial status, or violate any law with
respect to the selection of any vendor.
d. Require that all vendors obtain and display all appropriate permits, licenses, and certificates, and comply with all applicable federal, state and local
laws, ordinances, and regulations.
e. Require that all vendors maintain their spaces in a clean and sanitary condition, including the removal of containers, waste and trimmings before
leaving the area.
f. Require that vendors take sufficient measures to keep the city storm drain system free from contamination, and require that food vendors take
special precaution to keep grease and other waste products off all public streets, sidewalks, alleys and parking lots.
g. Provide on site personnel who can be contacted by appropriate city officials for immediate corrective action either for noncompliance with this
subsection or the permit conditions, for emergencies, or for actions deemed necessary by the city official. Such personnel shall be equipped with
appropriate means of communication to be made known to the city by the CCE sponsor prior to the CCE.
h. Distribute the rules and regulations to each person participating in the CCE.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 197/636
10. Cost Of CCE: The CCE sponsor will be responsible for the costs associated with the CCE, including, but not limited to, the cost of city services
related to the CCE, and the cost of repair of any damage caused to any public property and rights of way, including landscaping. The CCE sponsor
may apply to the city council for cooperation in presenting a CCE and request financial assistance for some or all of the costs of city services related
to the CCE.
11. Permit To Sell: No person shall sell or offer to sell any item at the CCE except under the authority of a valid permit approved by the CCE sponsor.
The CCE sponsor shall designate a person or persons responsible for issuing permits to sell. A seller's permit shall not be required for existing
businesses selling merchandise from their stores. Whenever the CCE sponsor in good faith believes that a vendor has violated the conditions of the
seller's permit, the CCE sponsor may immediately suspend the seller's permit. Vendors shall have an opportunity to appeal the denial or suspension
of a seller's permit as set forth in subsection E20 of this section. Permits to sell shall give a seller (including vendors, peddlers and other sellers) the
privilege of selling at the CCE only if the following conditions are met:
a. The seller properly files an application for a permit to sell at the CCE with the CCE sponsor.
b. The seller complies with all federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to the CCE, including the rules and regulations of the CCE
sponsor.
c. The seller obtains all required permits, licenses and certificates.
d. The seller pays all required fees to the appropriate authorities, including any fees due the sponsor.
e. The seller grants permission to the CCE sponsor, or an authorized representative, to enter the seller's premises for the reasonable inspection of
land, facilities, and records, in order to determine whether the seller is in compliance with the permit conditions, the rules and regulations of the
CCE sponsor, and the terms of this subsection.
12. Peddlers And Itinerant Vendors: All peddler and itinerant vendor permits and licenses issued by the city shall be deemed suspended for the
duration of any CCE. All permit and license holders shall be notified of this provision. No person holding a peddler or itinerant vendor permit or
license shall sell merchandise within the designated CCE area for the duration of any declared CCE unless the holder of the peddler or itinerant
vendor permit or license has a written agreement with the CCE sponsor to participate in the CCE, or otherwise has a seller's permit from the CCE
sponsor. The CCE sponsor shall allow peddler and itinerant vendor permit and license holders with suspended city permits and licenses under this
subsection the same opportunity to participate in a declared CCE as the CCE sponsor offers to other vendors.
13. Sidewalks: The city shall not approve vendor or sidewalk sales or other activities within the closure area for a CCE. The sponsoring entity may
allow such sales or events, however selling activity during a parade must take place in conformity with subsection G of this section.
14. Parades: Any person or organization desiring to have a parade as a CCE or in connection with a CCE, and all vendors, peddlers, solicitors, or
merchants not located inside a commercial location, shall comply with subsection G of this section in addition to the provisions of this subsection.
15. Interference: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, disrupt or impede a permitted CCE. It shall also be unlawful for a person to put up
any booth, table, chair, stool, structure, vehicle or piece of equipment in any public area located within a designated CCE area for which a CCE
sponsor has been issued a permit without consent of the CCE sponsor. This subsection E15 shall not apply to persons acting under the direction or
control of the city.
16. Business License Fees: Any individual, company, firm, concessionaire, fair operator, carnival operator, etc., who engages in, conducts, organizes,
or promotes business for profit shall pay a business license fee of one dollar ($1.00) per day per amusement, entertainment, exhibit, ride or per
booth, space, stall, stand or other unenclosed location used for the purpose of advertising, promoting, or sale of, or taking orders for, goods or
services; except that no individual, company, firm concessionaire, fair operator, carnival operator, etc., who possesses a valid city business license
shall be subject to separate licensing pursuant to this subsection E16.
The nonprofit sponsor shall collect said fee and remit the fee to the city within five (5) working days following the CCE. Said remittance shall be
accompanied by a complete list of participants and consecutively numbered receipts written in triplicate, containing the name, address and telephone
number of the licensee, and the licensee's California seller's permit number. Said receipts shall be furnished by the city. One copy of the receipt shall
be furnished to the licensee, one copy filed with the finance department of the city, and one copy retained by the CCE sponsor for a period of three
(3) years for audit purposes.
17. Charges And Exhibit Fees: The sponsoring entity may impose a reasonable charge or exhibit fee on each participating seller or exhibitor and shall
be responsible for enforcing all requirements of this subsection and regulations imposed by the sponsoring entity. Any net profit received by the
sponsoring organization shall be utilized for the civic, artistic, cultural, charitable, educational, veteran or benevolent activities of the organization
within the city of Porterville.
18. Insurance: The council shall condition the granting of a CCE permit upon the sponsoring entity's filing with the council a policy of public liability
insurance in which the city has been named as insured or coinsured with the permittee. The policy of insurance shall insure the city, its officers, and
its employees against all claims arising out of, or in connection with, the issuance of the CCE permit or the operation of the permittee or its agents or
representatives, pursuant to the permit. The policy of insurance shall provide coverage of no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence of bodily injury and property damage, combined single limit.
19. Violations: Any person who violates the provisions of this subsection E shall be deemed guilty of either a misdemeanor or an infraction, in
accordance with section 15-21 of this article. In addition, civil penalties of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation and up to one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00) for subsequent violations may be imposed. Every day that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In
addition, the CCE sponsor is authorized to take civil action to enforce the requirements of this subsection, and the rules and regulations established
by the CCE sponsor. The remedies provided herein shall not be exclusive, and the violation of any provision of this subsection E shall be subject to
other remedies as may be provided by law.
20. Appeal Of The Denial Or Suspension Of A Seller Permit: After the denial or suspension of a seller's permit, the CCE sponsor shall allow the vendor
an opportunity for an appeal hearing before the CCE sponsor's governing board, or if no governing board, the person with the highest decision
making authority, to determine if the permit shall be issued, further suspended, reinstated, or revoked for repeated violations. The hearing shall be
held within a reasonable time, depending on the date and duration of the CCE, no later than thirty five (35) days. The CCE sponsor shall establish
procedures for the conduct of the hearing.
21. Other Rules And Regulations; Applicability: The CCE sponsor shall comply with all other applicable city ordinances, resolutions, policies, rules and
regulations.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 198/636
22. Compatibility With State And Federal Laws And Constitutions: It is the intention of the city council and the people of the city of Porterville that these
subsections shall be interpreted in a manner compatible with the state of California constitution and the United States constitution and the laws of the
state of California and the United States.
23. Severability: If any paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this subsection are for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, that holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed these subsections,
irrespective of the fact any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases might be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
F. Fortune Telling:
1. Purposes And Findings:
a. The practice of "fortune telling", as defined in this subsection, has historically been subject to abuse by certain unscrupulous practitioners using
the practice to commit fraud and larceny upon clients.
b. It is the purpose of this subsection to regulate the practice of fortune telling in such a manner as to reduce the risk of fraud and larceny to clients
while allowing fortune tellers to provide their services to clients with only minimal restrictions.
c. The provisions of this subsection requiring a permit, posting of fees, providing receipts and allowing client recordation of the consultation, will make
it more difficult for an unscrupulous fortune teller to commit fraud or larceny, and yet, as informational regulations, will not affect the nature of the
information conveyed by the fortune teller nor the manner in which it is conveyed. These regulations require only minimal expense and effort on
the part of the fortune teller and will not, therefore, impose any undue burden on their practices.
d. "Fortune telling" for entertainment purposes, as defined in this subsection, does not create the same risk of fraud and larceny by an unscrupulous
practitioner as would the practice with an individual client because it is done with a group at a public place for the purpose of entertaining and not
to deal with the private concerns of an individual.
e. For these and other reasons, the provisions of this subsection are necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
2. Permit Required: No person shall conduct, engage in, carry on, participate in, or practice fortune telling or cause the same to be done for pay without
having first obtained a permit therefor.
3. Definitions: As used in this subsection:
FOR PAY: For a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value.
FORTUNE TELLING: Shall mean and include telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable
by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to, clairvoyance,
clairaudience, cartomancy, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry,
divination, soothsaying, mantic, necromancy, mind reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized
article or substance, crystal gazing, or magic, of any kind or nature.
4. Permit Application: Every natural person who, for pay, conducts, engages in, carries on, or practices fortune telling shall file a separate verified
application or a permit with the business license officer. The application shall contain:
a. The name, home and business address, and home and business telephone number of the applicant.
b. The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations.
c. The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the police department.
d. The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction
with others.
e. A nonrefundable application fee in an amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover cost incurred by the city in staff time, and other expenses
involved in investigation and processing of permit.
5. Investigation: Upon the filing of the application, it shall be referred to the police department for investigation, report and recommendation. The
investigation shall be conducted to verify the facts contained in the application and any supporting data. The investigation shall be completed and a
report and recommendation made in writing to the business license officer within twenty one (21) days after the filing of the application, unless the
applicant requests or consents to an extension of the time period. If the report recommends denial of the permit to the applicant, the grounds for the
recommended denial shall be set forth therein.
6. Hearing And Decision By Business License Officer: The business license officer shall consider the application and the police department report and
recommendation at a hearing held not less than seven (7) nor more than fourteen (14) days following receipt of the police department report
described in subsection F5 of this section. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and a copy of the police department report shall be given to the
applicant personally or by certified mail by the business license officer at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Any interested parties shall be heard
at the hearing. City shall have the burden of proof to show the permit should be denied. The decision of the business license officer to approve, deny
or conditionally approve the permit shall be in writing, and if adverse to the applicant, shall contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues
presented. Unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time, the business license officer shall make his or her decision approving,
denying, or conditionally approving the permit within twenty four (24) hours after completion of the hearing on the application for a permit and shall
notify the applicant of his or her action by personal service or certified mail.
7. Approval Of Permit: The business license officer shall approve or conditionally approve the permit if he or she makes all of the following findings:
a. All the information contained in the application and supporting data is true;
b. The applicant has not, within one year from the date of the application, been convicted of any violation of this subsection or crimes involving
prediction of future events by the occult arts, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud, or crimes involving moral turpitude;
c. The applicant has paid the required business license fee; and
d. The applicant agrees to abide by and comply with all conditions of the permit and applicable laws.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 199/636
8. Term Of Permit: The term of the permit and the term of the business license shall be for one year from the date of issuance. A renewal application
shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit and shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.
9. Posting Of Fees:
a. Each person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this subsection shall post on his or her business premises a sign containing the following
information:
(1) The true name of the fortune telling practitioner;
(2) Each service provided by the fortune telling practitioner;
(3) The fees charged for each service provided by the fortune telling practitioner;
(4) The statement, "By law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration beyond these established
rates".
b. The sign required by this subsection F9 shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a point near the entry and shall be
conspicuously visible to every person seeking the services of the fortune teller. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter at least
one-half inch (1/2") in height.
c. If the fortune telling service is provided at a location other than the fortune teller's permanent place of business, the fortune teller shall provide the
information required by this subsection on eight and one-half by eleven inch (81/2 x 11") paper and legibly printed or typewritten. The paper shall
also include the name and permanent address of the person providing the fortune telling services. A true, correct and complete copy of such paper
shall be given to each client prior to providing any fortune telling services.
d. No person shall charge any fee, payment, remuneration, or item of value for fortune telling services in excess of the fees set forth on the sign or
paper required by this subsection F9.
10. Receipts: Prior to the acceptance of any money or item of value from a client, other than the acceptance of a gratuitous tip given voluntarily by the
client, which is in addition to the fee, the fortune teller shall issue a written receipt to the client, clearly showing:
a. Date;
b. Name of client;
c. Amount of money received or specific description of item of value received; and
d. Purpose for which the money or item of value was received.
11. Client's Record Of Consultation: No person engaging in fortune telling services shall prohibit a client from making an audio recording or taking
written notes of the information conveyed by the fortune teller.
12. Exception Entertainment: The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any person engaged solely in the business of entertaining the public
by demonstrations of fortune telling at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of all other persons in attendance, and at which no
questions are answered as part of such entertainment except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.
13. Exception; Religious Practice: The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable to any person conducting or participating in any religious
ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer, clairvoyant, or similar position
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "minister") from any bona fide church or religious association having a creed or set of religious principles that is
recognized by all churches of like faith which provides for fortune telling; provided, that:
a. Except as provided in subsection F13c of this section, the minister's fees, gratuities, emoluments, and profits shall be regularly accounted for and
paid solely to or for the benefit of the bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this subsection.
b. The minister holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this subsection, shall file with the
business license officer a certified copy of the minister's certificate of ordination and the minister's name, age, street address, and telephone
number in this city where the activity set forth in this subsection is to be conducted.
c. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this subsection, may pay to its ministers a salary or compensation based upon a
percentage basis, pursuant to an agreement between the church or religious association and the minister which is embodied in a resolution and
transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association.
G. Parades:
1. Application And Approval: Parades will only be allowed in conjunction with a community civic event referenced in subsection E of this section.
2. Selling Activity During A Parade: In order to maintain public safety and promote the good order of a parade, no vendor, peddler, solicitor, or merchant
shall be permitted in the parade route once the parade begins. No vendor, peddler, solicitor, or merchant shall be permitted to conduct business on
sidewalks or walkways or other areas that may impede pedestrian traffic. Any vendor, peddler, solicitor, or merchant not located inside a commercial
location shall be limited to side streets once the parade begins. No vendor, peddler, solicitor, or merchant shall impede the view of any spectator
during the event. All vendors, peddlers, solicitors, and merchants shall be prohibited from selling products at or near the event that are deemed to be
a nuisance or contrary to the good order of the parade. These items include, but are not limited to:
a. Silly string;
b. Snap caps;
c. Party poppers;
d. Any projectile and/or launcher.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 200/636
3. Movement Of Public Safety Equipment: The conduct of such parade shall not interfere with the movement of firefighting or police equipment. (Ord.
1324, 12-18-1984; Ord. 1326, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1346, 3-18-1986; Ord. 1384 § 2, 8-4-1987; Ord. 1584, 10-19-1999; Ord. 1586, 5-16-2000; Ord. 1612,
8-20-2002; Ord. 1613 §§ 1, 2, 3, 9-17-2002; Ord. 1625, 11-19-2002; Ord. 1718 § 1, 3-20-2007)
15-21: VIOLATION:
Any person violating this chapter or any provisions thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day
that any provision of this chapter is violated is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as a separate and distinct offense. Notwithstanding
the classification of a violation of this article as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce provisions of this article, the trial court, upon
recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction
under this article shall be punished by:
A. A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;
B. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this article within one year; and
C. A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this article within one year. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984; Ord. 1531
§ A3, 6-18-1996)
Chapter Article II
LICENSE TAXES
15-22: HOW AND WHEN PAYABLE:
All license fees shall be payable in advance and shall be refundable only as allowed in this chapter.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be due and payable in advance on July 1 of
each year.
Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be due and payable as follows:
A. Semiannual license taxes, on January 1 and July 1 of each year.
B. Quarterly license taxes, on the first day of July, October, January and April of each year.
C. Monthly license taxes, on the first day of each and every month.
D. Weekly license taxes on Monday of each week in advance.
E. Daily license taxes each day in advance. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-23: GROSS RECEIPTS, SEMIANNUAL:
A. Classification A:
Gross Receipts License Tax
$ 0.00 to $ 25,000.00 $ 25.00
25,001.00 to 50,000.00 50.00
50,001.00 to 75,000.00 75.00
75,001.00 to 100,000.00 100.00
100,001.00 to 150,000.00 125.00
150,001.00 to 200,000.00 150.00
200,001.00 to 300,000.00 200.00
300,001.00 to 400,000.00 300.00
400,001.00 to 600,000.00 400.00
600,001.00 to 800,000.00 500.00
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 201/636
800,001.00 to 1,000,000.00 600.00
1,000,001.00 and over 700.00 plus, per each additional
$200,000.00 $100.00
Acupuncture.
Appraiser.
Architect.
Assayer.
Attorney at law.
Auctioneer.
Auditor or accountant.
Bacteriologist.
Chemists or chemical laboratory.
Chiropractor.
Civil engineer.
Collection agency.
Dental laboratory.
Dentists.
Electrical engineer.
Financial planner.
Geologist.
Hydraulic or mining engineer.
Insurance adjuster.
Insurance broker.
Investment counselor.
Mechanical engineer.
Medical laboratory.
Optician.
Optometrist.
Osteopath.
Personal loans/supplier of financing.
Physician.
Podiatrist.
Psychiatrist.
Psychoanalyst.
Psychologist.
Real estate broker.
Stock salesperson.
Stockbroker.
Structural engineer.
Surgeon.
Surveyor.
Veterinarian.
All other professions not hereinabove specifically set forth, and other businesses not specifically set forth in this chapter, operating on a net profit of ten
and one-hundredth percent (10.01%) or more will be classified in the above category.
B. Classification B:
Gross Receipts License Tax
$ 0.00 to $ 25,000.00 $ 25.00
25,001.00 to 50,000.00 47.50
50,001.00 to 75,000.00 65.00
75,001.00 to 100,000.00 80.00
100,001.00 to 150,000.00 95.00
150,001.00 to 200,000.00 110.00
200,001.00 to 300,000.00 135.00
300,001.00 to 400,000.00 160.00
400,001.00 to 600,000.00 185.00
600,001.00 to 800,000.00 210.00
800,001.00 to 1,000,000.00 235.00
1,000,001.00 and over 260.00 plus, per each additional
$200,000.00 $25.00
Auction sales.
Bakeries.
Barbershops.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 202/636
Bedsprings and mattress manufacturers.
Book publishing and printing.
Builders.
Bus lines.
Confectioners.
Contractors.
Dairy product manufacturers.
Dry cleaning plants and agencies.
Foundries.
Fruit and vegetable canneries.
Gardening.
Handymen.
Hospitals.
Hotels, motels, auto courts, etc.
Iron and steel fabricators.
Junk dealer/collector.
Laundry.
Linen supply.
Machine shops.
Maintenance service - building, janitorial, yard, etc.
Manufacture of agricultural or industrial chemicals.
Manufacture of bodies for automobiles, buses, or trucks.
Manufacture of concrete, gypsum, and plaster products.
Manufacture of paints, varnishes, and lacquers.
Maternity homes.
Meat and provisions packers.
Mortuaries.
Newspapers, other than daily, with offices inside city.
Petroleum refineries.
Photographer (itinerant photographers, see subsection 15-24A29 of this article).
Printers.
Private patrol, private patrol service.
Recyclable waste hauler.
Renting of automobiles, trucks and trailers.
Rest homes.
Sanatorium.
Secondhand dealers.
Soft drink bottles.
Stamp redemption.
Trade schools.
Transient vehicles and recreation vehicle parks.
Tree trimming.
Water companies not under city franchise.
Manufacturers and other businesses not specifically set forth in this chapter, operating on a net profit of ten percent (10%) to four and one-hundredth
percent (4.01%) will be classified in the above category.
C. Classification C:
Gross Receipts License Tax
$ 0.00 to $ 25,000.00 $ 25.00
25,001.00 to 50,000.00 45.00
50,001.00 to 75,000.00 60.00
75,001.00 to 100,000.00 75.00
100,001.00 to 150,000.00 90.00
150,001.00 to 200,000.00 105.00
200,001.00 to 300,000.00 120.00
300,001.00 to 400,000.00 135.00
400,001.00 to 600,000.00 150.00
600,001.00 to 800,000.00 165.00
800,001.00 to 1,000,000.00 180.00
1,000,001.00 and over 195.00 plus, per each additional
$200,000.00 $15.00
Bowling alleys.
Gasoline service stations.
Ice depot and production.
Restaurants.
Retail milk trucks.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 203/636
Rock, sand, gravel, dirt, mixed concrete, etc.
Skating rinks.
Theaters and movie houses.
Retailers and other businesses not specifically set forth in this chapter, operating on a net profit of four percent (4%) to two and one-hundredth percent
(2.01%) will be classified in the above category.
D. Classification D:
Gross Receipts License Tax
$ 0.00 to $ 25,000.00 $ 25.00
25,001.00 to 50,000.00 40.00
50,001.00 to 75,000.00 50.00
75,001.00 to 100,000.00 60.00
100,001.00 to 150,000.00 75.00
150,001.00 to 200,000.00 90.00
200,001.00 to 300,000.00 100.00
300,001.00 to 400,000.00 110.00
400,001.00 to 600,000.00 125.00
600,001.00 to 800,000.00 140.00
800,001.00 to 1,000,000.00 155.00
1,000,001.00 and over 170.00 plus, per each
additional $200,000.00 $15.00
Automobile dealers.
Automobile wrecking.
Drays, motor trucks, etc., for transportation of freight.
Gasoline and oil distributors.
Trucking or delivery, with offices within city.
Wholesale and other businesses not specifically set forth in this chapter, operating on a net profit of two percent (2%) or under will be classified in the
above category.
E. Classification; Procedure For Review: In any case where a business license holder or an applicant for a business license believes that his individual
business is not assigned to the proper classification under this section because of circumstances peculiar to it, as distinguished from other businesses
of the same kind, he may apply to the collector for reclassification. Such application shall contain such relevant information as the collector may deem
necessary and required in order to determine whether the applicant's individual business is properly classified. The collector shall then conduct an
investigation, following which he shall assign the applicant's individual business to the classification shown to be proper on the basis of such
investigation. The proper classification is that classification which, in the opinion of the collector, most nearly fits the applicant's individual business. The
reclassification shall not be retroactive but shall apply at the time of the next regularly ensuing calculation of the applicant's tax. No business shall be
classified more than once in one year.
F. Reclassification; Notice Of Action; Procedure For Hearing: The collector shall notify the applicant of the action taken on the application for
reclassification. Such notice shall be given by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Porterville, California, postage
prepaid, addressed to the applicant at his last known address. Such applicant may, within fifteen (15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice,
make written request to the collector for a hearing on his application for reclassification. If such request is made within the time prescribed, the collector
shall cause the matter to be set for hearing. The collector shall give the applicant at least ten (10) days' notice of the time and place of the hearing in
the manner prescribed above for serving notice of the action taken on the application for reclassification. The collector shall consider all evidence
adduced and render his decision. Written notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant in the manner prescribed above for service of
notice of the action taken on the application for reclassification. The decision of the collector may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-
1984; Ord. 1358 § 2, 7-15-1986)
15-24: OTHER THAN GROSS RECEIPTS:
A. Every person who engages in a business within the city as specified below shall pay a license tax of the amount and frequency indicated:
1. Advertising solicitor, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually for each person so employed.
2. "Amusements, amusement rides", as defined in section 15-1 of this chapter, wherein they are held in conjunction with and on premises owned or
leased by commercial houses for commercial purposes, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per period not to exceed four (4) days per calendar
month; wherein amusement rides are not conducted as a promotion for a commercial house, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day per unit
or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year per unit.
3. "Arcade", as defined in section 15-1 of this chapter, of five (5) or more amusement machines, games of chance or skill, at one location, shall pay five
dollars ($5.00) per machine semiannually.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 204/636
4. Auctioneers shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification A, of this article except that those auctioneers who are duly
licensed by the state of California and whose permanent place of business is not within the city limits shall pay no license tax.
5. Auctions sales. Reserved.
6. Barbershops shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
7. Boxing and wrestling matches. Every person conducting, carrying on or managing boxing or wrestling matches in the city shall pay the following
license: Fifty dollars ($50.00) per day or one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) semiannually.
8. Bus lines, who transport passengers from or to a terminus within the city, shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of
this article, except that common carriers shall be exempt.
9. Card rooms, the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per calendar quarter per table, except that tables where the players or participants at said
table play solely for merchandise or so called "garbage" games, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per calendar quarter per table.
10. Carnival, including each separate show, game, amusement, exhibition, vaudeville or dramatic performance, game of chance or skill, food and drink
stands, the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per day. "Amusements, amusement rides" as defined in section 15-1 of this chapter shall be
licensed as provided in subsection A12 of this section.
11. Circuses. For the purpose of this section, a "circus" is defined to be an exhibition or entertainment at which feats of horsemanship, acrobatic feats,
and trained or wild animals are exhibited or displayed, to which exhibition or entertainment an admission fee is charged. For any person conducting,
carrying on or managing a circus, or other similar exhibition, side show, or other show or concert to a circus, the sum of two hundred dollars
($200.00) per day.
12. Coin operated machines. For each machine operated by depositing therein coin(s) or operated by other consideration of value, the sum of five
dollars ($5.00) per machine semiannually. Machines owned and operated by a person in conjunction with his established business shall be licensed
under the gross receipts of the established business. Newspaper vending machines, money changing machines and coin operated laundries are
exempt from this subsection A12.
13. Contractors, and every person who is required to have a state contractor's license and who is conducting, carrying on or managing the business of
a contractor, shall be required to have a city contractor's business license. Contractor's license fee shall be paid semiannually under the gross
receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
14. Demonstrators and hawkers. For every person who advertises or calls attention to the business, profession, trade or calling of any person by giving
demonstration on foot, or from any wagon, automobile or vehicle, or from any stand, box or platform, on any street, alley, sidewalk or place, or in any
doorway of any room or building, unenclosed or vacant lot, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, or fraction thereof; provided, that
nothing in this subsection A14 shall be deemed to authorize licensing of any act now prohibited by law or ordinance. The provisions of this
subsection A14 shall not apply to newsboys selling newspapers.
15. Detective agency or private detective, the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) semiannually.
16. Flea market or swap meet operator, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually, plus one dollar ($1.00) per day per single space or area
of contiguous spaces rented by the vendor, except that if a vendor possesses and exhibits a current and valid business license issued by the city
then the operator need not remit the one dollar ($1.00) per day for any such vendor. Said fee shall be collected by the operator from the vendor and
remitted to the city on a weekly basis, along with a complete list of the name and address of all vendors who were exempt from paying the tax
pursuant to this subsection A16. Said remittance shall be accompanied by consecutively numbered receipts written in triplicate, containing the name
and address of the vendor, the make and license number of a vehicle owned by the vendor, and the vendor's California seller's permit number. Said
receipt shall be furnished by the city. One copy of the receipt shall be furnished to the vendor, one copy filed with the finance department of the city
on a weekly basis, and one copy to be retained by the swap meet operator for a period of three (3) years for audit purposes.
16.1. Fortune teller. The business license fee for "fortune telling" for pay, as defined in subsection 15-20F of this chapter, shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) per year.
17. Handyman shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
18. Hotels, motels, auto courts, etc., shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
19. Insurance broker shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
20. Itinerant vendor, itinerant merchant, the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day per person for each person so employed, with a minimum fee of
twenty five dollars ($25.00).
21. Junk dealer and/or collector shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
22. Maintenance service: building, janitorial, yard, etc., shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
23. Newspapers, daily, with offices within the city, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) semiannually.
24. Newspapers, other than daily, with offices within the city, shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
25. Newspaper agents and/or distributors, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually.
26. Paid promoters, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) semiannually.
27. Pawnbrokers. For any person conducting, carrying on or managing a pawnshop or acting as pawnbrokers, the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00) semiannually.
28. Peddler, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) per day per person so employed, with a minimum fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
29. Photographer, itinerant, the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) semiannually for each person so employed.
30. Private police, private patrol service shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 205/636
31. Real estate broker, who maintains an office or place of business within the city and who engages in the activities of acting as a real estate broker in
the sale or lease of any property within the city, the license fee shall be under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification A, of this article. Said
gross receipts shall include gross commissions of the broker and gross commissions of all salespersons acting as agents of the broker.
32. Real estate broker, out of city, who does not maintain an office or place of business within the city but who engages in the activities of acting as a
real estate broker in the sale or lease of any property within the city, the license fee shall be under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification A,
of this article. Said gross receipts shall include gross commissions of the broker and gross commissions of all salespersons acting as agents of the
broker.
33. Reserved.
34. Shoeshine parlors or persons engaged in the business of shining shoes, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the initial application fee
inclusive of license fee for first semiannual license period. Thereafter the renewal license fee shall be the sum of seven dollars fifty cents ($7.50)
semiannually.
35. Solicitor, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day per person so employed.
36. Solicitor, by means of telephone, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually per person so employed.
37. Stamp redemption shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
38. Stockbroker shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification A, of this article.
39. Stock salesman, shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification A, of this article.
39.1. Street vendors/peddlers, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually for each vehicle, cart, or any other type of conveyance.
40. Taxicabs or vehicles for hire, the sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) semiannually for each vehicle.
41. Trade school. Every person engaged in conducting or operating a trade school shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23,
classification B, of this article.
42. Transient trailer and recreation vehicle parks shall be licensed under the gross receipts section 15-23, classification B, of this article.
43. Trucking or delivering, with offices within the city, but not subject to public utilities commission regulations, shall be licensed under the gross
receipts section 15-23, classification D, of this article.
44. Trucking or delivering, with offices outside the city, but not subject to the public utilities commission regulations, shall pay the sum of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) semiannually for each vehicle with one ton or less load capacity, and the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) semiannually for each
vehicle with load capacity of over one ton.
B. Any business not designated under this section or in any other section of this chapter or in any other ordinance or code of the city of Porterville shall be
licensed under section 15-23 of this article.
All licenses shall be paid in advance, in the legal currency of the United States, at the office of the city.
No greater or less amount of money shall be charged or received for any license than is provided in this chapter, and no license shall be sold or issued
for any period of time other than is provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984; Ord. 1358 § 1, 7-15-1986; Ord. 1384 § 3, 8-4-1987; Ord. 1494, 3-
15-1994; Ord. 1531 § A4, 6-18-1996)
Chapter Article III
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE OR REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE
15-25.1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A license shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by means to be a "going out of
business sale" or a "removal of business sale", as defined under section 15-1 of this chapter. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect
persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction or persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.2: SURRENDER OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
A. Upon being issued a permit pursuant to this article for a going out of business sale or removal of business sale, the permittee shall surrender
concurrently to the finance director each business license the permittee may hold at that time applicable to the business location covered by the
application for a permit under this article, if the sale is advertised or conducted in a manner calculated to convey to the public the belief that the
business will cease to be conducted at that location upon the disposal of the goods to be placed on sale.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a closeout sale permit is issued to engage in a business of similar nature at the same location for a period of
one year following the closing date of the sale. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 206/636
A. Any person desiring to conduct a "going out of business sale" or a "removal of business sale", as defined in this chapter, shall make a written
application to the collector setting forth and containing the following information:
1. The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be subject of the sale;
2. The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of
such acquisition;
3. A description of the place where such sale is to be held;
4. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy;
5. The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted;
6. A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the
manner in which the sale will be conducted;
7. The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with the proposed context of any advertising;
8. A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records; said inventory shall be attached to
and become a part of the required application;
9. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders, without cancellation privileges, and
shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment.
Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a going out of business sale or a removal of business sale. Any
unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby effected within sixty (60) days before the filing of an application
hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character.
B. In the event of delay of construction of a new facility or remodeling of a facility into which the business is to be relocated, which delay is not the fault of
the licensee, new merchandise ordered after the application for removal of business sale may be offered for sale and excluded from this restriction.
(Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.4: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The collector shall issue a license for a going out of business sale or a removal of business sale after all requirements of this article have been met. The
license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than forty five (45) consecutive days, following the issuance thereof for
a going out of business sale and for a period of not more than ninety (90) consecutive days following the issuance thereof for a removal of business sale.
(Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.5: LICENSE RENEWAL:
The collector shall renew a license for one period of time only, such period to be in addition to the time permitted in the original license and not to exceed
forty five (45) consecutive days, when he ascertains:
A. The facts existing justify the renewal;
B. That the licensee has filed an application for renewal;
C. That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items on the original inventory remaining unsold and
not listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.6: PENALTIES:
Any person who shall hold, conduct or carry on a "going out of business sale" or a "removal of business sale" as defined in this chapter, without securing a
license as herein provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.7: REVOCABILITY OF LICENSE:
The collector may revoke any going out of business sale or removal of business sale license when any regulations set forth in this article are violated. Said
revocation may be appealed to the city council as set forth in subsection 15-13A of this chapter. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.8: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue such license may appeal to the council by filing a
notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give
notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Porterville, California,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal.
No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this article. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 207/636
15-25.9: REGULATIONS:
A. Established Business Requisite: No license shall be granted to any person who has not been the bona fide owner of a business advertised or described
in the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least twelve (12) months prior to the date of the proposed sale.
B. Restricted Location: Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to
the one store or branch specified in the application; and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with or in any way
participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is
cooperating with or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
C. Operation At Other Than Fixed Premises: Any licensee transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city,
shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
15-25.10: LICENSE TAX:
A. Going Out Of Business Sale: The sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a period of not more than forty five (45) days; and a renewal fee of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for one additional forty five (45) day period.
B. Removal Of Business Sale: The sum of five dollars ($5.00) for a period of not more than ninety (90) days; and a renewal fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for
one additional forty five (45) day period. (Ord. 1324, 12-18-1984)
Chapter Article IV
RESERVED
(Rep. by Ord. 1702 § 2, 8-15-2006)
Chapter Article V
LICENSES AND REGULATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
15-40: PROHIBITED USES, CONDUCT AND ACTIVITIES:
A. One of the important purposes of the regulations set forth in this article is to discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. As such,
nothing in this article shall permit or be interpreted to permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which is specifically prohibited under the following
California Penal Code sections:
1. Receipt of money for placement of person for purposes of cohabitation (Penal Code § 266d).
2. Purchase of person for purposes of prostitution or placement of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code § 266e).
3. Sale of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code § 266f).
4. Pimping (Penal Code § 266h).
5. Pandering (Penal Code § 266i).
6. Lewd or obscene conduct (Penal Code § 314).
7. Houses of ill fame (Penal Code § 315).
8. Disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighborhood (Penal Code § 316).
9. Places of prostitution (Penal Code § 317).
10. Place of prostitution; place of lewdness; place used as bathhouse permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS (Penal Code § 11225).
B. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to permit or permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which violates any federal, state or local law or regulation.
C. A sexual encounter establishment is not a permitted use. For purposes of these regulations, a "sexual encounter establishment" means any business or
commercial establishment that as one of its important business purposes offers for any form of consideration a place where two (2) or more persons
may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities when one or more of the persons in the establishment is in a state
of nudity or where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of the exposure of specified anatomical areas where
one of the patrons of the establishment is in a state of nudity or state of seminudity. The definition of "sexual encounter establishment" shall not include
an establishment where a medical practitioner, physiologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-41: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 208/636
It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens
of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within
the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this article have neither
the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly,
it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the first amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-42: CLASSIFICATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
The following uses and/or activities shall be classified as "sexually oriented businesses":
A. Adult arcades.
B. Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, and adult video stores.
C. Adult cabarets.
D. Adult motels.
E. Adult motion picture theaters.
F. Adult theaters.
G. Adult model studios. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-43: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:
EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
B. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
article;
C. The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this article to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
D. The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or
E. The substantial enlargement of any such sexually oriented business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: a) The appearance or display of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the
female breast; or b) a state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or
nipple of the female breast.
OPERATOR: The owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR UNLICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or permit and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING REGULARLY FREQUENTED BY CHILDREN: Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the city,
any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used as a library,
community center, children's center, or any other use having special attraction to children, or which building is often visited by children for social activities
unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodians.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREAS: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, open space wilderness areas, or similar public land within the
city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities, as identified on the latest equalized tax assessment roll.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 209/636
SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, primary
schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special
education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used primarily for another
purpose and only incidentally as a school.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breasts, as well as portions of the
body covered by supporting straps and devices.
SENSITIVE USE: Any cemetery; religious institution; school; public building regularly frequented by children; public park; or boys' club, girls' club, or
similar youth organization.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES: Those businesses defined as follows:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines,
or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly available or used to show films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store Or Adult Video Store: A commercial establishment which: a) has a significant or substantial portion of its stock in
trade; or b) derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues; or c) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior floor or display space;
or d) devotes a significant or substantial part of its business activities or employees' time, or advertising, to the sale, rental or viewing for any form of
consideration, of any one or more of the following:
A. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual representatives
which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
B. Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
C. An establishment may have other significant or substantial business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials,
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or
adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult
novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its significant or substantial business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of
consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club", or similar commercial establishment, which regularly features: a) seminude persons or live
performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or by specified sexual activities; or b) films, motion pictures,
videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
Adult Model Studio: Any place where a person appears seminude or who displays specified anatomical areas or who engages in specified sexual
activities is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons. This term does not include a modeling class operated by a proprietary school, licensed by the state of California; a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; by a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits
are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure which has no sign visible from the exterior
of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class, and where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: a) offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides or makes available to patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which
advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right of way or by means of any off premises
advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or b) offers a sleeping room for rent for a period
of time less than ten (10) hours; or c) allows a tenant or occupant to rent or subrent the sleeping room for a time period of less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: Commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features seminude
persons or live performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Regularly Features Or Regularly Shown: With respect to an adult cabaret, adult theater, or adult motion picture theater means a regular and substantial
course of conduct. The fact that a live performance or film which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities is exhibited on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more occasions within a sixty (60)
day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one hundred eighty (180) day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and
substantial course of conduct.
Significant Or Substantial Portion: Such a percentage of its activities, space allocation, revenues, advertising targeting, stock in trade, floor or display
space, business receipts, revenues, or other business undertakings as to indicate to a reasonable person that the sexually oriented portion of the business
is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or even primary activity; for this purpose, evidence that twenty five percent (25%) or more
of its revenue is derived from such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that twenty five percent (25%) or more of its interior floor space or display
space is devoted to such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that twenty five percent (25%) or more of its actual stock in trade regularly displayed
and immediately available for use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of such sexually oriented materials, all as defined in this section 15-
43, shall be evidence that a "significant or substantial portion" of the business is devoted to such uses.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this article, means and includes any of the following:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae; or
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this article, means and includes any of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 210/636
A. The fondling or other intentional touching of buttocks for purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, anus, or female breasts;
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
E. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections A through D of this definition.
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An increase in the floor areas occupied by the business as the floor areas
existed on the effective date of this article.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and includes any of the following:
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
B. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-
2001)
15-44: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain, manage or conduct a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city for
the particular type of sexually oriented business. Any sexually oriented business in operation on the effective date hereof shall have thirty (30) days from
the effective date to apply to the city of Porterville for a sexually oriented business license under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-45: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. The city's designee is responsible for granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending, and canceling sexually oriented business permits for proposed
or existing sexually oriented businesses.
B. The city's designee shall be the city manager, or any other officer or employee designated in writing by the city manager to deal with the provisions of
this article.
C. A completed application shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
1. If the applicant is:
a. An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name, any aliases, and date of birth;
b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and the names of all general partners;
c. A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and the name and address of the
registered corporate agent for service of process.
2. If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that on the application, he/she must state the sexually
oriented business's fictitious name.
3. A statement as to whether the applicant or any other individuals identified in the application, excluding any agent for service of process who is not
also listed as a director or officer, has had a previous permit under this article, or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinance of the city,
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation.
4. A statement as to whether the applicant or any other individuals identified in the application, excluding any agent for service of process who is not
also listed as a director or officer, has been a sole proprietor, general partner, officer, a director of a sexually oriented business that has had a
previous permit under this article, or any other similar sexually oriented business ordinance of the city denied, suspended or revoked by the city,
including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well.
5. The name(s) of the responsible person(s) who will be on the premises to act as manager during the times that the business is open, or a statement
that the applicant has not yet selected the manager(s).
6. The classification, as defined in this article, of sexually oriented business for which the applicant is seeking a permit.
7. The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s)
currently in service.
8. The applicant's address.
9. A recent photograph of the applicant.
10. The applicant's driver's license number or permit number or identification number and social security number and/or the applicant's state or
federally issued tax identification number.
11. A clearly legible sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises and all improvements to the site including, parking, landscaping, sign
configuration and location and outdoor lighting, including a statement of total floor space and its purpose, occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 211/636
12. A radius map prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the sexually
oriented business, and: a) the property lines of any other sexually oriented business within six hundred feet (600') of the property line of the sexually
oriented businesses for which a permit is requested; and b) the property lines of any sensitive use within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property
line of the sexually oriented business for which a permit is requested.
13. A diagram of the off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required
pursuant to this article.
14. Each individual listed on the application pursuant to subsection C1 of this section, excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed
as a director or officer, shall sign the application. If the applicant is a corporation, its authorized representative may sign the application on behalf of
the corporation upon submission of proof of such authorization.
15. The applicant's fingerprint on a form approved by the city's police department.
D. The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application fee as set forth by resolution at the time of filing an application pursuant to this
article. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-46: CONTINUING PERMIT OBLIGATIONS:
A. The fact that a person possesses other types of state or city permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of obtaining a
sexually oriented business permit.
B. By applying for a permit under this article, the applicant shall be deemed to have consented to the provisions of this article and to the exercise by the
city or its designee, the police chief's office, and all other city departments charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances and codes applicable in the city,
of their respective responsibilities under this article.
C. An operator shall promptly update, correct or supplement the information contained in the application for a sexually oriented business permit on file with
the city as necessary to keep the information contained therein accurate. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-47: FILING OF COMPLETED APPLICATION:
A. Upon receipt of an application properly filed with the city and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the city or its designee shall
immediately stamp the application as received on that date.
B. If the city designee determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, or otherwise deems the application to be incomplete, the
city designee shall, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the original application, notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant
the applicant an extension of time, twenty (20) days or less, to submit a complete application. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not
to exceed fifteen (15) days, of the time for the city designee to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed
during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-48: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Within thirty (30) business days of receipt of a completed application, the city shall issue a sexually oriented business permit, which will be deemed to have
been approved as of the date the application was filed for the purpose of determining the proper location of the business, upon verification of the following
facts:
A. The location of the business complies with all applicable zoning laws.
B. The configuration of the premises, as set out in the sketch or plan submitted with the application, does not reveal any violation of applicable health,
zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city of Porterville applicable thereto, including those set out in this article.
C. The applicants or individuals identified therein, excluding any agent for service of process who is not also listed as a director or officer, are not otherwise
disqualified from lawful operation of a sexually oriented business pursuant to any state, county, federal or local law, including those set out in this
article.
D. The applicant is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
E. The applicant has provided all information required by this article, none of which is known to the city to be incorrect.
F. The application or permit fees required by this article have been paid.
G. Applicant has no prior conviction of sexually related convictions listed in subsection 15-40A of this article. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-49: PROCESSING COMPLETED APPLICATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 212/636
The city, or its designee, shall grant or deny a completed application for a permit within thirty (30) business days from the date of receipt by the city of a
complete application. Upon the expiration of the thirtieth day, unless the city or its designee has given written notice to the applicant, the application shall
be deemed granted and the operator shall be excused from the requirement that a duly issued permit be posted at the premises until such time as said
permit is issued pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-50: NOTIFICATION OF PERMIT DENIAL; SUBSEQUENT APPLICATION:
If the city or its designee denies the application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the reason(s) for the denial. Any subsequent
application which has been supplemented to cure the grounds for prior denial shall be treated as a new application. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-51: ANNUAL PERMIT FEE:
A. The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is set forth by resolution, to partially offset the costs of monitoring and policing the operation of
the business entities involved.
B. The city council hereby determines that the actual cost of monitoring and policing each such business is at least that amount.
C. Said fee shall be due yearly on the anniversary of the issuance of the permit and shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days thereafter. (Ord. 1600 § 1,
5-1-2001)
15-52: INSPECTION:
Every operator shall permit representatives of the city and/or police, fire or health departments to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-53: ADMINISTRATIVE AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OR PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. Administrative Appeal To City Council: After denial of an application or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt
review of such administrative action through the city council by filing a written appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the action. The council shall
promptly set an administrative hearing in accordance with the provisions of section 15-13 of this chapter.
B. Expedited Review Of Free Speech Claims: An administrative appeal shall be heard and decided at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting
when the written request for an administrative appeal alleges that the administrative action constitutes a violation of the applicant or permittee's state or
federal constitutional rights to free speech, press or expression. If affirmed by the city council, the administrative action is subject to prompt review by
the superior court for the state of California, in and for the county of Tulare, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.8. Additionally,
the applicant or permittee may seek a temporary or preliminary injunction, stay of the administrative action pending judicial review and/or a permanent
injunction or declaratory relief. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-54: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
A. A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address designated in the
application for permit.
B. A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another person unless and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
1. Obtains an amendment to the permit from the city or its designee, which provides that he/she is now the permittee, which amendment may be
obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an application with the city or its designee, setting forth the information called for under
subsection 15-45C of this article in the application; and
2. Pays a transfer fee of fifty percent (50%) of the annual permit fee set by resolution.
C. No permit may be transferred during the pendency of administrative procedures following notice by the city or its designee to the permittee that
suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against the permittee, until such proceedings have been completed, withdrawn or
otherwise canceled.
D. Permittee shall not transfer a permit whether directly or indirectly in violation of this section. Such a transfer is hereby declared void, and the permit shall
be considered abandoned and shall automatically revert to the city. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-55: REGISTRATION OF NEW EMPLOYEES/INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS:
A. As a further condition of approval of every sexually oriented business permit issued pursuant to this article, every owner or operator shall register every
employee or independent contractor working on its premises with the police department within five (5) business days of the commencement of the
employee's period of employment at the sexually oriented business.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 213/636
B. Each employee/independent contractor shall be required to provide two (2) recent color passport quality photographs and shall allow himself or herself
to be fingerprinted by the police department for purposes of identification. In addition, each new employee/independent contractor shall provide the
following information on a form provided by the police department:
1. Name, current resident address, telephone number.
2. Date of birth.
3. Social security number.
4. Height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
5. Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the previous two (2) years.
C. The information provided for purposes of this section shall be maintained by the police department as confidential information and shall not be disclosed
as public records unless pursuant to an order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
D. Each owner or operator of a sexually oriented business shall maintain a current register of names of all employees and independent contractors
currently employed by or working at the sexually oriented business, and shall disclose such registration for inspection by any designated city
representative for purposes of determining compliance with this section.
E. Failure to register each new employee/independent contractor within five (5) days of commencement of employment, or to maintain a current register of
the names of all employees, shall be deemed a violation of the conditions of the permit and may be considered grounds for suspension or revocation of
the permit. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-56: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
In addition to any licenses or permits required by this article, sexually oriented businesses shall secure a semiannual business license as prescribed by
section 15-23 of this chapter. Such licenses shall be calculated based on gross receipts. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-57: BUSINESS OPERATIONS:
A. Visibility:
1. The entire interior of an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult cabaret, adult video arcade, adult model studio, and any
nonconforming sexual encounter establishment and the entire concession area of an adult motion picture theater or adult theater, the entire common
areas of an adult motel, and the entire exhibition area of an adult motion picture theater or adult theater, shall be visible upon entrance to such areas.
2. Visibility from the entrance shall not be obstructed by any curtain, door, wall, merchandise rack, or any other thing.
3. No partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths shall be maintained within the sexually oriented business.
4. No patrons shall be permitted access to any area of the premises not visible from the entrance.
5. Customers, patrons or visitors of adult arcades shall be prohibited from standing idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in
the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on
display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.
6. All areas of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly
distributed at ground level:
Area Foot-Candles
Arcades 10
Bookstores and other retail establishments 20
Theaters and cabarets 5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)
7. All off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a
lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The
required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
8. The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18)
years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall consist of letters no less than one inch (1") in height. No person under the
age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.
9. The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that no alcoholic beverages are
permitted on the premises.
B. Exceptions To Visibility Requirements:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 214/636
1. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to those areas of a sexually oriented business to which only employees are permitted access and
patrons are excluded and which cannot be viewed from any area accessible to patrons.
2. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to a restroom; however, no restroom shall contain any merchandise, materials, product, or service
referenced in section 15-43 of this article.
C. Private Viewing Booths Or Rooms:
1. No viewing room or booth of an adult arcade or adult video arcade may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
2. The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two (2) such
rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two
(2) such booths or rooms.
3. The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily
secretions.
D. Business Hours: A sexually oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on any particular day to two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. the next morning.
E. Posting Permit: A valid sexually oriented business permit duly issued pursuant to this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the
entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it can be easily read at all times.
F. Manager On Duty:
1. There shall be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open.
2. At all times that any patron is present inside the premises, at least one manager shall be situated at a location within the premises so as to allow
her/him an unobstructed view of the entire area accessible to patrons. Within those sexually oriented businesses lawfully configured to include more
than one open room accessible to patrons, such as an adult theater with both a concession area and an exhibition area, or various common areas of
an adult motel, sufficient additional managers shall be present as necessary to allow management personnel to maintain an unobstructed view of all
areas accessible to patrons, at all times.
3. Every permittee shall ensure that all employees are familiar with the provisions of this article as amended from time to time and with all other
regulations adopted by the city related to sexually oriented businesses.
G. Required Physical Modification To Premises:
1. An operator of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted a reasonable period of time to make modifications to the business premises if such
modifications are made necessary by the implementation of the provisions of this article.
2. The reasonable period of time shall normally be thirty (30) days from the effective date hereof to file the appropriate plans and designs with the city,
and up to ninety (90) days thereafter for completion of the modifications.
3. Should modifications be so extensive as to reasonably require a longer period of time, the city or its designee may grant a longer period of time for
completion of such modifications, in consultation with the city's building officials.
H. Separate Restrooms: The sexually oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and
female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and
employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom
facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this
subsection shall not apply to a sexually oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed
on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.
I. No Alcohol: No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed on the premises of any sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-58: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
It shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued for said business under this article, and knowingly, or with the reasonable cause to know, permits, suffers, or allows:
A. Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the business premises;
B. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business premises;
C. A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or services at the business premises; or
D. A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the business premises in any capacity. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-59: DISPLAY REGULATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 215/636
A. No display or exhibit depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be placed in, on, or at the site of the subject
premises in such a manner as to be visible from the exterior of the premises.
B. The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years
of age are precluded from entering the premises. Said notice shall consist of letters no less than one inch (1") in height.
C. The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicting that no alcoholic beverages are to be
served or consumed on the premises. Said notice shall consist of letters no less than one inch (1") in height.
D. The building entrance to a sexually oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating business's hours of operation.
E. The view of the entrance to any sexually oriented business from outside of the business shall be designed in a manner that obscures the view of the
interior of the premises from individuals outside the premises so as to prohibit minors from viewing or seeing any material, conduct or activities which
depict, describe or display specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-60: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The following additional requirements shall pertain to sexually oriented businesses providing live entertainment depicting seminude persons, specified
anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities:
A. No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented business except upon a stage at least eighteen inches (18") above the
level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet (10') from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted
within ten feet (10') of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. "Entertainer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent
contractor of the sexually oriented business, or any person who with or without any compensation or other form of consideration performs live
entertainment for patrons of a sexually oriented business.
B. The sexually oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use.
C. The sexually oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.
D. The sexually oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and dressing rooms which is completely separated from the
patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the sexually oriented business shall provide a minimum three foot (3') wide walk aisle for
entertainers, between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier, separating the patrons and the entertainers, capable
of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.
E. No entertainer, either before, during or after performance, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with
any entertainer either before, during or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of
the sexually oriented business.
F. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches (30") in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this
subsection.
G. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.
H. No owner or other person with managerial control over a sexually oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on the
premises of the sexually oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a
fully opaque coverage and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the areola.
I. Sexually oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the
occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty five (35) persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. Additional security guards may be
required if the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than seventy (70) persons. Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing the violations of
law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be
readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required pursuant to this subsection and shall not
act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard.
J. The foregoing applicable requirements of this section shall be deemed conditions of sexually oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and failure
to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations.
K. Every permittee of a sexually oriented business which provides live entertainment pursuant to this article must maintain a register of all persons so
performing on the premises. Such register shall be available for inspection during the regular business hours by any designee of the city of Porterville.
(Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-61: EXEMPTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 216/636
A. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this article that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and not other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class, and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
B. It is a defense to prosecution of a violation of this article that an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is permitted
under this article, exposed any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee's bona fide use of
a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-62: CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, EQUITABLE, AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
A. If any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or violates any of the provisions of this article, such person, upon conviction of such offense, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60)
days in the jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Further,
each day of continued violation or noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or
noncompliance.
Such other lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, a nuisance abatement proceeding pursuant to chapter 21, section 614.03 of this
code, a civil nuisance abatement of equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages in any court of competent jurisdiction.
C. All remedies and penalties provided for in this article shall be cumulative and independently available to the city, and the city shall be authorized to
pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full extent allowed by law.
D. The city shall be entitled to recover all attorney fees and costs incurred in the filing or prosecution of any action or administrative proceeding brought to
enforce any provision(s) of this article. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-63: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A. After an investigation, notice and hearing, the city manager or his designee shall suspend or revoke an existing permit, or impose such conditions upon
the retention of the permit as shall be found to be necessary to assure the preservation of the public health and safety, if the evidence presented
established that one of the following conditions exist:
1. The building, structure, equipment, location, or manner of operation of such business does not comply with the requirements of, or fails to meet the
standards of, the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state of California and ordinances of the city of Porterville applicable to such business
operations.
2. The permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of material fact in the application for a sexually oriented business permit, or in any report or record to be filed with the city pertaining to
the permit for the sexually oriented business, or has violated any rule or regulation duly adopted by the city relating to sexually oriented businesses,
including those set out in this article.
3. A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager, or stockholder has knowingly
engaged in or allowed or permitted to be committed any unlawful act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or distribution of
obscenity, on or in the subject premises.
4. A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager, or stockholder has knowingly
engaged in or permitted or allowed to occur unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or distribution of
obscenity, on or in the subject premises.
5. A court of competent jurisdiction has found that the permittee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, manager, or stockholder has knowingly
engaged in or permitted or allowed, in or on the premises, the unlawful possession, use or sale of a controlled substance, as defined by the
California uniform controlled substances act, California Health and Safety Code section 11000 et seq., as amended from time to time.
6. More than thirty (30) days have elapsed since a tax, fee, fine, any form of regulatory assessment or judgment for monetary damages, irrespective of
any other form of relief set out in the judgment, which is to be paid to the city has been imposed against a sexually oriented business, and said sum
remains owing.
B. In the event that a permit for a sexually oriented business is revoked pursuant to any applicable law, the premises shall be closed and shall not be used
as a sexually oriented business of any classification for a period of one year commencing on the date of revocation. Further, the operators of the
sexually oriented business closed due to suspension or revocation of a permit shall be disqualified from operating any other sexually oriented business
established thereafter within the city during the entire period of any such suspension, or for one year if the license was revoked. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-
2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 217/636
15-64: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION:
The city and its designee, the chief of police's office and all other departments and agencies, and all other city officers, agents and employees charged
with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually
oriented business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this article. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
15-65: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this article or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of effectiveness of the remaining
portions of this article or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence,
clause, or phrase in this article or any part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses,
or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1600 § 1, 5-1-2001)
Chapter Article VI
CHARITABLE CAR WASH PERMIT PROCEDURE
15-70: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
APPLICANT: A member of a charitable organization who applies for a car wash permit on behalf of the charitable organization.
CHARITABLE: Benevolent, civil, religious, educational, fraternal, patriotic, political, philanthropic or other similar purposes.
CHARITABLE CAR WASH: A temporary vehicle washing operation conducted by members of a charitable organization for organization fundraising
purposes. It shall not be deemed to include the operation of an authorized permanent vehicle washing business or service station authorized to wash
vehicles on its premises, although a car wash, as defined above, may be conducted on such premises.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Means and includes an organization which is a duly organized governmental or not for profit charitable, religious, civic,
patriotic or community service organization; and the organization must have a tax exempt identification number assigned to it.
PERMIT HOLDER: The charitable organization who has been granted a permit pursuant to this article for the purpose of conducting a charitable car wash.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, society, organization, church, congregation, assembly or league, and
includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
RELIGIOUS OR RELIGION: Has the meaning established by the supreme court of the state or the supreme court of the United States.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A building designed for or occupied by one or more families as a residence including single-family residences, duplexes and
apartments. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-71: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CHARITABLE CAR WASH:
A. It is unlawful for any person to engage, directly or indirectly, in a charitable car wash without first obtaining a valid charitable car wash permit pursuant to
the provisions of this article.
B. The permit application shall include a written application to sponsor the charitable car wash by the owner or lessee of the property upon which the car
wash is to be held.
C. The car wash permit issued under this article to a charitable organization must be prominently displayed at the location where the car wash is
conducted and shall be removed at the completion of the car wash. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-72: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A. Applications for charitable car wash permits shall be made to the finance department upon forms prescribed by the city. The application shall be
declared under penalty of perjury and filed with the finance department not less than five (5) consecutive business days prior to the time at which the
applicant wishes to conduct said car wash.
B. A nonrefundable application fee an amount to be set by resolution shall be paid by the applicant. The application fee shall be based solely upon the
administrative costs in processing the application and issuing the permits.
C. Such applications shall contain the following information and documentation:
1. The full name, mailing address, principal business and telephone number of the charitable organization or institution, the names and addresses of
the organization's or institution's principal officers and executives, and the address of the national, state and local headquarters, if any.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 218/636
2. The name and address of the sponsor, with a statement by the sponsor that he/she is the owner or lessee of the property where the car wash is to
be held or is an employee or agent of the owner or lessee who has been delegated control of the premises by the owner or lessee, and that the
sponsor assumes all liability regarding the car wash.
3. The full name and address of the person or persons who will be in charge of conducting the car wash. The names and addresses of each individual
who will actually be engaged in the car wash shall be on file at the agency/organization conducting the car wash and shall be made available to the
city police department upon request at any time.
4. The time when such car wash will be held, including preferred date and hours of the day for commencement and termination of the car wash.
5. A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement of the charitable organization by
the city or any department or officer thereof.
6. Proof evidencing that the permit holder is a bona fide charitable organization.
7. The number of car washes that have been held by the charitable organization in that particular calendar year, and the number of car washes that
have been held at that particular location in that particular calendar year.
8. Such supplemental information requested by the finance department as the finance department may require. The finance department may require
that such information be updated during the time the permit is in force if changes occur subsequent to filing of the application in the planned dates
and locations for the charitable car wash.
D. If, while the application is pending or during the term of any permit granted, there is a change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information to
be given on the application, the applicant shall notify the finance director in writing thereof prior to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. the day before such change.
E. The application documents shall be available for public inspection. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-73: ISSUANCE AND FORM OF PERMIT:
A. The finance department shall issue the permit, unless it finds that:
1. Any statement made in the application is factually incorrect, and the applicant fails to correct the application after being requested to do so.
2. The applicant has not provided the information required by this article and fails to provide the missing information after being requested to do so.
3. The application indicates that the proposed car wash will violate any of the requirements of this article and the applicant fails to amend the
application to indicate compliance with said section after being requested to do so.
4. The number of charitable car washes by the charitable organization applying for said permit exceeds four (4) in a calendar year, or the number of
charitable car washes held at a particular location exceeds four (4) per calendar year. The location requirement shall not pertain to licensed
commercial car washes.
5. The applicant has violated any of the provisions of this article within one year of the date the application is submitted, resulting in the imposition of a
fine or the revocation of a prior permit.
B. Nothing set forth in this article shall be construed as granting to the finance department or any other person the authority to grant, deny, suspend,
revoke or renew any permit by reason of disapproval or agreement with the philosophy, opinion or belief of the applicant, permit holder or person
soliciting therefor, or for any other reason not specifically provided for in this article.
C. The finance department shall either issue or deny the requested permit within two (2) consecutive business days after the date the application is made.
In the event of denial, the finance department shall give the applicant a written notice which states with specificity the reasons therefor. In the event the
finance department fails to act within the time prescribed, the permit shall be deemed issued.
D. The permit, if issued, shall include the following information:
1. The name and address of the permit holder;
2. The date for which the permit is valid;
3. A statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or any of its departments, officers or employees, of the purpose of the
car wash;
4. A permit number; and
5. The signature of the finance director or his/her designee. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-74: TERM OF PERMIT:
Permits issued under this article shall be valid only for the date specified in the application for the car wash and as stated on the permit. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-
21-2005)
15-75: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 219/636
No permit issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned, and any attempt at assignment or transfer shall be void. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-76: MANNER OF CAR WASH:
A. Car washes held pursuant to permits under this article:
1. Shall take place between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
2. Shall be conducted for a one day period only.
3. Shall not be conducted by any person under the age of sixteen (16) years, unless supervised by an adult.
4. Shall not be conducted at any house, apartment or other dwelling nor an area zoned for residential use only.
5. Shall be conducted in an area zoned for commercial uses; and such location shall have a means of collecting the wash water and shall discharge
the water to the city sewer collection system.
6. Shall use biodegradable soaps or detergents, and shall not violate any of the provisions of chapter 25 of this code, concerning wastewater discharge
requirements.
7. Shall have a means in place to limit wastewater or runoff such as pistol grip nozzle or similar apparatus affixed to each garden hose or water source.
8. Shall not allow any person to solicit cars or other contributions from a position in or on any public right of way, including, but not limited to, sidewalks,
traffic islands, driveways or the like as to endanger that individual or others.
9. Shall not be conducted at any commercial property which has held four (4) prior car washes in the calendar year (excluding licensed commercial car
wash locations).
10. Shall take place at a distance of more than twenty five feet (25') from the street curb, or from the near edge of the travel lane or lanes of any
uncurbed street or road.
11. Shall utilize temporary signs, if any signs are utilized, in compliance with the city's applicable regulations concerning temporary signs.
12. Shall not be conducted by a charitable organization which has held four (4) prior car washes in the calendar year. Four (4) applications per tax
exempt identification number, and four (4) permits per tax exempt identification number, will be allowed in the calendar year.
B. It is unlawful for a "permit holder", as defined herein, to:
1. Refuse to provide their name and a copy of the permit issued under this article, if requested by city representatives.
2. Misrepresent their identity or the identity of the charitable organization conducting the charitable car wash for which he or she is an agent.
3. Misrepresent that the charitable car wash permit issued under this article is an endorsement by the city, or any department or employee thereof, of
the charitable car wash. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-77: FUNDRAISING AS A BUSINESS:
An organization in the business of fundraising (seeking a profit and paying its solicitors), even if engaged by a nonprofit organization, must comply with this
article. If such an organization is soliciting on behalf of a nonprofit organization, the nonprofit organization shall obtain a permit pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-78: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any violation of this article by applicant or permit holder shall be cause for revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this article. Upon determination by an
authorized representative of the city that a car wash is being conducted without a valid permit or in violation of the requirements of this article, said
unlawful activity shall cease immediately, and all persons associated with said car wash shall be dispersed within one hour after the giving of said notice.
Failure or refusal by the charitable organization and/or the owner/sponsor to cause a car wash in violation of these regulations to cease operations, after
receiving such notification from the city official, shall constitute a separate violation of this article. Furthermore, any organization that violates this article
shall be ineligible for the issuance of a permit for a period of one year. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
15-79: VIOLATIONS:
Every person who, for himself or herself, or as the agent of another, commences, engages in or conducts a car wash as provided in this article without
procuring the permit as required under this article or who fails to comply with the conditions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by:
A. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation;
B. A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year; and
C. A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 1669 § 1, 6-21-2005)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 220/636
15-80: CAR WASHING AS A BUSINESS:
This article is expressly limited to charitable car washes. Any person, corporation, business or other entity who wishes to hold impromptu or temporary car
washes on a for profit basis must comply with all city, county and state licensing or permitting requirements and does not fall within this article. (Ord. 1669
§ 1, 6-21-2005)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1853 - CANNABIS DISPENSARIES. Go to new ordinance.
Chapter Article VII
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES1
Chapter Article VIII
ROTATIONAL TOW SERVICES
15-110: PURPOSE:
The city council hereby finds that it is in the public interest to establish a rotation list for towing services to provide the police department with an expedient
means of moving damaged and disabled vehicles, illegally parked vehicles, vehicles that must be moved for safekeeping and evidentiary purposes, and
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles constituting a nuisance. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-111: DEFINITIONS:
CHIEF: The chief of police of the city. For purposes of this article, "chief" also includes any appropriate designee of the chief of police.
DEPARTMENT: The city police department.
ELIGIBILITY LIST: The city's list of towing operators who have filed an application to participate in the rotation list and who the chief has determined to be
qualified to participate in the rotation list.
PATROL DIVISION COMMANDER: The person commanding the patrol division of the department.
ROTATION LIST: The city's list of towing operators who have been selected from the eligibility list to be used by the department for the purpose of
providing tow truck services in accordance with the provisions of this article.
RULES AND SPECIFICATIONS: The city's rules and specifications for towing services, drivers and vehicle storage facilities, which shall be promulgated
by the patrol division commander pursuant to section 15-112 of this article.
TOW OR TOWING: The act of moving damaged or disabled vehicles, illegally parked vehicles, vehicles that must be moved for safekeeping and
evidentiary purposes, and abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles constituting a nuisance.
TOW TRUCK: A motor vehicle that has been altered or designed and equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing vehicles by means of a
crane, towbar, towline, dolly or rollback carrier or is otherwise used to render emergency assistance to disabled and other vehicles.
TOWING OPERATOR: Any person, firm or corporation with a valid business license from the city and engaged in the business of towing and storing
vehicles in the city. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-112: RULES AND SPECIFICATIONS:
A. The patrol division commander shall promulgate written rules and specifications governing the provision of towing services, the qualifications and
conduct of drivers, and the requirements for vehicle storage facilities. The rules and specifications may be modified from time to time as deemed
appropriate by the chief. All towing services provided pursuant to the rotation list shall be subject to the requirements set forth in the rules and
specifications.
B. The rules and specifications shall include, but not be limited to, provisions requiring that all towing operators participating in the rotation list do the
following:
1. Obtain a city business license;
2. Enter into a tow service agreement (TSA) with the city;
3. Pass a background check as determined by the patrol division commander; and
4. Abide by the provisions of this article and the rules and specifications promulgated by the patrol division commander and the tow service agreement.
(Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-113: NUMBER OF TOWING OPERATORS DETERMINED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 221/636
A. The patrol division commander shall determine the number of towing operators needed to provide towing services to the police department. On or
before July 1 of each calendar year, the patrol division commander shall make a determination as to the appropriate number of towing operators to be
placed on the rotation list for the following year. The patrol division commander's determination shall be based upon the number of towing service
providers that may be required for the public convenience and necessity and for the efficient operation of the department. In determining the required
number of towing operators, the patrol division commander shall consider the following factors:
1. The operational needs of the police department;
2. The population growth in the city;
3. The additional land area annexed into the city;
4. The number of currently authorized towing operators and their average response times;
5. The administrative burdens imposed by the number of towing operators to be included on the rotation list; and
6. Other relevant, objective factors to be determined by the patrol division commander.
B. The patrol division commander's determination shall be made in writing and shall include the number of towing operators to be included on the rotation
list. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-114: APPLICATION FOR ROTATION TOW LIST:
A. Any person requesting to be on the PPD rotation tow listing shall submit a letter of interest to the patrol division commander between July 1 and July 15
of each calendar year. This letter of interest shall be accompanied by:
1. A signed Porterville police department tow service agreement;
2. A completed rotation tow listing application (CHP 234A);
a. Under CHP area on the form, mark N/A;
3. A completed tow operator/driver information form (CHP 234F) for each person who will be driving for the business; and
4. All documentation required by the Porterville police department tow service agreement, including documentation of a satisfactory level one
inspection and local tow truck inspection. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-115: REFERRAL TO THE PATROL DIVISION COMMANDER:
A. During July of each calendar year, an open enrollment meeting shall be conducted to discuss any changes in the new TSA as well as any issues
concerning the rotation tow program. Upon receiving an application, the patrol division commander shall cause an investigation to be conducted to
determine the applicant's qualifications to comply with the provisions of this article. Within thirty (30) days after the filing of the application, the patrol
division commander shall determine whether the towing operator is eligible for the rotation list. The patrol division commander shall determine eligibility
pursuant to guidelines set forth in the rules and specifications. If the patrol division commander determines that a towing operator is qualified, the
towing operator's name shall be placed on the eligibility list. Qualified towing operators shall be placed on the eligibility list in the order in which their
complete applications were received. If the patrol division commander determines that a towing operator is not qualified, the towing operator shall
receive a written statement of the reasons for the patrol division commander's decision.
1. In response to the department's duty to protect the public, and upon completion of a background check, the patrol division commander may
disqualify an operator or driver for various reasons. These reasons include, but are not limited to:
a. Prior felony conviction.
b. Pattern of thefts.
c. Crimes of moral turpitude. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-116: TOWING ROTATION LIST:
A. Towing operators selected to provide towing services to the city and to participate in the rotation list shall abide by the rules and specifications set forth
in this article and the tow service agreement.
B. Based on the number of towing operators needed, as determined by the patrol division commander pursuant to section 15-113 of this article, the patrol
division commander shall select from the eligibility list the appropriate number of towing operators to be placed on the rotation list and participate in the
towing rotation program for the following year. The patrol division commander shall select towing operators from the eligibility list in the order in which
their complete applications were received. If a towing operator is currently on the rotation list and is deemed to be in good standing, that operator shall
be granted a place on the next rotation list providing they meet the terms and conditions set forth in the TSA for that year.
C. When the patrol division commander or chief of police determines that an emergency exists, nothing shall prohibit a city employee from requesting
services from a towing operator who is not on the list.
D. The rotation list may be amended from time to time as part of the chief's promulgation or modification of the rules and specifications. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-
2008)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 222/636
15-117: APPEAL:
Any applicant deemed ineligible by the patrol division commander shall have the right to appeal the decision to the chief of police. Appeals must be made
by filing a notice of appeal with the chief of police within ten (10) days of receipt of a notice of the patrol division commander's decision. The chief of police
shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days after the appeal is filed. The chief of police shall notify the applicant of the decision within ten (10) days after
the decision is made. The chief of police may affirm or overrule the patrol division commander's decision. The chief of police's decision shall be final. (Ord.
1743, 7-1-2008)
15-118: ANNUAL RENEWAL APPLICATION:
To continue to participate in the rotation program, each towing operator on the rotation list must file with the patrol division commander a renewal
application for the following year. The renewal application must be filed during the annual enrollment period in the year prior to the year for which the
renewal is sought. The application must describe any changes regarding the information in the original application. If there are no material changes and if
the patrol division commander determines that the towing operator has performed well during the preceding year, the patrol division commander may place
the towing operator on the rotation list for the following year. If there are material changes or if the patrol division commander determines that the towing
operator has not performed well, the renewal application will be treated as if it were an original application and will be subject to the procedures for
reviewing new applications, as set forth in this article and in the rules and specifications. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-119: REMOVAL FROM THE ROTATION LIST:
A. The patrol division commander may remove a towing operator from the rotation list on any of the following grounds:
1. A finding that a towing operator falsified any portion of its application or failed to include required or important information on the application;
2. A finding that the towing operator has failed to comply with or violated any of the terms or conditions of either this article, the towing service
agreement or the rules and specifications;
3. A finding that the towing operator has engaged in misconduct or a pattern of behavior, by or through its agents or otherwise, that is either
inconsistent with the goals of providing quality service to the community or not in the best interests of the city or its residents.
B. If the towing operator does not agree with the patrol division commander's decision to remove the towing operator from the rotation list, it may file an
appeal with the chief of police, following the procedures set forth in section 15-117 of this article. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-120: EXECUTION OF AGREEMENTS:
All towing operators selected to participate in the rotation list shall enter into a towing service agreement with the city. The written agreement shall be in a
form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-121: EXCEPTIONS:
Nothing in this article shall prohibit or otherwise restrict owners or operators of a vehicle from selecting and calling a towing vehicle of their own choice.
(Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-122: AUTHORITY FOR CITY TO MAINTAIN ITS OWN TOWING OPERATIONS AND TOWING STORAGE YARD:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the city from conducting its own towing operations or maintaining its own towing storage yard,
either in lieu of or in addition to the towing services provided by and the towing storage yards maintained by any towing operator participating in the
rotation list. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
15-123: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any towing operator or officer, official, employee or agent thereof who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to
any other penalties, any towing operator violating any provision of this article shall be subject to removal from the rotation list. (Ord. 1743, 7-1-2008)
Chapter Article IX
ARTICLE IX. MASSAGE BUSINESSES AND PRACTITIONERS
15-124: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
A. Except as otherwise provided, all of the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all massage businesses and all massage practitioners operating
within the city of Porterville. This article shall not be construed in a manner that is inconsistent with any state law governing the practice of massage.
B. Any massage business that is legally operating under a city of Porterville business license as of the date of adoption hereof may procure a registration
certificate pursuant to this article without having achieved CAMTC certification, so long as that business continues to operate without change in
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 223/636
ownership and in good standing with all applicable provisions of state, federal, and Porterville laws and regulations, and otherwise complies with this
article in its entirety. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-125: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
ANCILLARY MASSAGE SERVICES: Those services where less than twenty percent (20%) of the gross floor area of the business is devoted to massage.
CALIFORNIA MASSAGE THERAPY COUNCIL OR CAMTC: The massage therapy organization formed pursuant to chapter 10.5 of division 2 of the
Business And Professions Code sections 4600 et seq.
CERTIFIED MASSAGE PRACTITIONER OR THERAPIST: Any individual certified by the California massage therapy council (CAMTC) as a certified
massage therapist, certified massage practitioner, or conditionally certified massage practitioner pursuant to chapter 10.5 of division 2 of the California
Business And Professions Code sections 4600 et seq.
CITY: The city of Porterville, California.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of Porterville or designee.
CITY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE OR REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE OR REGISTRATION: A certificate issued by the city to a massage business to
practice massage for compensation pursuant to this article.
CLIENT: The customer or patron who pays for or receives massage services.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR: The community development director of the city of Porterville or designee.
COMPENSATION: The payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.
DAY: Calendar day, unless otherwise specifically expressed.
DISQUALIFYING CONDUCT: Any of the following:
A. Within five (5) years immediately preceding the date the city registration application was filed, or any time thereafter, the person has been convicted
in a court of competent jurisdiction of the commission of or any attempt to commit, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting the commission of,
or conspiring to commit:
1. A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code section 290;
2. Any violation of California Penal Code sections 266, 266a, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22, 653.23 or subsections
(a), (b) or (d) of section 647;
3. Any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude;
4. A violation of California Penal Code section 415, 602, or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the
crimes previously listed in subsections A1 through A3 of this definition;
5. Any crime committed while engaged in the management or ownership of a massage business or the practice of massage;
6. A violation of California Health And Safety Code sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058; or
7. Any offense in another state or territory of the United States which is the equivalent of any of the above offenses.
B. Within five (5) years of the date immediately preceding the date the application was filed, or any time thereafter, any applicant whose city registration
certificate, CAMTC certification, or trainee registration certificate or permit, which was issued by the state of California or any county or city has been
suspended or revoked for good cause;
C. Committing or maintaining a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code sections 11225 through 11235, and/or Health And Safety Code sections
11570 et seq., for which a permanent injunction was issued, or committing a violation of any similar provisions of law in another state or territory of
the United States; or
D. Committing a violation of any provision of this article provided that the applicant received timely notice of the violation.
EMPLOYEE: Any person hired by a massage business or owner who renders any service for the business/owner in exchange for any form of
compensation from the business.
FINANCE DIRECTOR OR DIRECTOR: The finance director of the city of Porterville or designee.
HEARING OFFICER: The administrative hearing officer appointed by the city manager to conduct an administrative hearing pursuant to this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 224/636
MANAGER: The person(s) designated by the massage business owner to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day to day
operations with corresponding responsibilities. The term "manager" may also include an owner.
MASSAGE BUSINESS OR BUSINESS: Any business that offers massage therapy in exchange for compensation. Any business that offers any
combination of massage therapy and bath facilities, including, but not limited to, showers, baths, wet and dry heat rooms, pools and hot tubs, shall be
deemed a massage business under this article. The term "massage business" includes a certified massage practitioner or therapist who is the sole owner,
operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship. For purposes of this article, "massage business" shall include, without
limitation, the advertising and soliciting of massages, and includes, but is not limited to, a certified massage practitioner or therapist who is the sole owner,
operator and employee of a massage business operating as a sole proprietorship, as well as a massage business which employs certified massage
practitioners or therapists.
MASSAGE BUSINESS OWNER OR OWNER: Any of the following persons:
A. Any person who is a general partner of a general or limited partnership that owns a massage business.
B. Any person who has a five percent (5%) or greater ownership interest in a corporation that owns a massage business.
C. Any person who is a member of a limited liability company that owns a massage business.
D. Any person who has a five percent (5%) or greater ownership interest in any other type of business association that owns a massage business.
MASSAGE OR MASSAGE THERAPY: The skillful application of touch, including, but not limited to, pressure, stroking, kneading, compression on or
movement of the external surfaces of the body to produce increased awareness, relaxation, pain relief, injury rehabilitation, or neuromuscular reeducation.
Examples of massage include, but are not limited to, Swedish massage, sports massage, shiatsu, polarity therapy, rolfing, hellerwork and reflexology.
RECEPTION AREA: An area immediately inside the front door of the massage business dedicated to the reception and waiting of clients of the massage
business and visitors, and which is not a massage therapy room or otherwise used for the provision of massage therapy services.
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE HOLDER: The applicant named on the application for a registration certificate and all massage business owners.
RENT-SPACE MASSAGE THERAPIST OR RENT-SPACE THERAPIST: A person who practices massage at a massage business but is not an employee
of the business.
SOLE PROPRIETORSHIP: Means and includes any legal form of business organization where the business owner (sometimes referred to as the "sole
proprietor") is the only person employed by that business to provide massage services.
VISITOR: Any person who enters a massage business and who is neither a client, owner, manager, nor employee of the business. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-126: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or businesses while engaged in the performance of their duties:
A. Complete Exemption: The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following individuals:
1. Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, nurses or any physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective professions in
the state of California and persons working directly under the supervision of or at the direction of the licensed persons, working at the same location
as the licensed person, and administering massage services subject to review or oversight by the licensed person.
2. Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of the state of California while engaging in practices within the scope of their licenses,
except that this exemption shall only apply if the massaging of the neck, face and/or scalp, hands or feet of the clients is ancillary to the primary
service being provided by the barber or beautician.
3. Hospitals, nursing homes, mental health facilities, or any other health facilities duly licensed by the state of California, and employees of these
licensed institutions, while acting within the scope of their employment.
4. Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.
5. Any other business or profession exempt from the provisions of this article by state law.
B. Limited Exemption: In addition to any other applicable provisions of this article, businesses that offer ancillary massage services shall only be required
to comply with the provisions set forth in this section for the massage portion of the business. The business shall comply with the following provisions:
1. Massage services must be performed by a certified massage practitioner or therapist;
2. Subsection 15-128F of this article related to facility requirements as they pertain to the portion of business that is utilized for massage;
3. Subsection 15-128G of this article related to operational requirements; and
4. Section 15-136 of this article related to inspections.
C. Furnish Evidence: Any person claiming exception under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the city manager upon request that he or she
is entitled to the exemption, including proof of bona fide employment, or, if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which that
person relies. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 225/636
15-127: REQUIREMENTS FOR INDIVIDUALS PRACTICING MASSAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any individual to practice massage therapy for compensation as a sole practitioner or therapist or employee of a massage business
or in any capacity within the city unless that individual is a certified massage practitioner or therapist. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-128: REQUIREMENTS FOR MASSAGE BUSINESSES:
A. Requirements: It shall be unlawful for any massage business to provide massage services unless all of the following requirements are met:
1. All of the individuals employed by the massage business to perform massage are certified massage practitioners or therapists;
2. The business has a valid city business license under this chapter; and
3. The business has a valid city registration certificate under this article.
B. Application For City Registration Certificate: The application for new and renewal city registration certificates shall include the following information,
without limitation, and an application fee in an amount established by city council resolution:
1. The legal name, address and telephone number of the massage business.
2. A floor plan indicating how the use is proposed to be conducted within the premises, a list of services to be provided, and a description of any other
business operated on the same premises.
3. Legal names of all owners of the massage business and the names of all managers.
4. Home address and telephone number and business address and telephone number of all owners of the massage business, and any previous home
addresses for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each.
5. For all owners, a valid and current driver's license and/or photo identification issued by a state or federal governmental agency, or other photographic
identification bearing a bona fide seal by a foreign government.
6. The form of business under which the massage business will be operating (i.e., corporation, general or limited partnership, limited liability company,
or other form).
7. For all owners, a signed statement that all of the information contained in the application is true and correct; that all owners shall be responsible for
the conduct of the business's employees or independent contractors providing massage services; and acknowledging that failure to comply with the
California Business And Professions Code section 4600 et seq., any local, state, or federal law, or the provisions of this article may result in
revocation of the business's city registration certificate.
8. The massage license and registration history of all of the owners, including whether the owner has operated any massage business or similar
business or occupation within any other county, city, or state; and whether or not the applicant, in previously operating a massage business, has had
the license or registration certificate revoked, suspended, or denied. In the case of revocation, suspension, or denial, the owner shall also include
within the form the reason(s) therefor, and any employment obtained subsequent to any revocation, suspension or denial.
9. The employment history of each owner for five (5) years preceding the date of the application, the inclusive dates of the employment history, and the
name and address of any massage business or similar business owned by the individual, whether inside or outside the city. Employment history shall
also include whether the owner, including a corporation or partnership, or a former employer of the applicant while so employed, was ever subjected
to an abatement proceeding under California Penal Code sections 11225 through 11235, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the
state.
10. For each owner of the massage business that is a certified massage practitioner, a copy of that person's current certification from the California
massage therapy council as a certified massage practitioner, certified massage therapist, or conditionally certified massage practitioner, and copy of
that person's CAMTC issued identification card.
11. For each owner that is not CAMTC certified, current fingerprints taken by the city of Porterville police department or a certified and approved
California live scan fingerprinting center for the purpose of conducting a background check on behalf of the city, to determine the criminal history of
the applicant, including whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor, infraction, or municipal code violation, or has been
held liable for any administrative or civil action, for an act that is substantially related to the practice of massage or disqualifying conduct.
12. The name of each person the massage business employs or retains to perform massage therapy for compensation. For each person the massage
business does or will employ or retain to perform massage therapy for compensation, a copy of that person's current certification from the California
massage therapy council as a certified massage practitioner, certified massage therapist, or conditionally certified massage practitioner and a copy of
that person's CAMTC issued identification card for each certified massage practitioner.
13. The name and address of the owner of the real property upon, in, or from which the massage business is to be operated. In the event the applicant
or owner is not the legal owner of the property, the application shall be accompanied by a copy of any written lease between the massage business
and the property owner authorizing use of the premises for a massage business, or, alternatively, if there is no written lease, then a written, notarized
acknowledgment from the property owner that the property owner has been advised that a massage business will be operated by the applicant upon,
in, or from the property owner's property.
14. Proof of current and valid workers' compensation insurance from an insurer authorized to do business in California, in an amount as required by
law.
15. Authorization for the city, its employees and agents to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the registration certificate.
16. The name of the individual to receive notices on behalf of the business.
17. Any other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be set in the application.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 226/636
C. Changes To Application Information: Any changes to the application information during the period the city is reviewing the application shall be
immediately reported to the city. Failure to report these changes shall result in denial of application.
D. Approval Or Denial Of City Registration Certificate And Massage Business Registration Certificate Renewals:
1. Within thirty (30) days following receipt of a completed application, the finance director shall either issue the registration certificate or mail a written
statement of the reasons for denial as set forth below. The director shall deny a registration certificate to the applicant where any of the following
conditions exist:
a. The applicant or any owner has procured or attempted to procure a registration certificate or other license by fraud, misrepresentation or material
misstatement;
b. The applicant or any owner is a person who, as established by clear and convincing evidence, has engaged in "disqualifying conduct" as defined
in this article within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application;
c. The massage business, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply or has not complied with all the applicable laws, including,
but not limited to, all the city's building, fire, zoning, and health regulations;
d. The applicant or any owner has violated any provision of this article, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency
which regulates the operation of massage businesses;
e. The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age;
f. The application is incomplete and the required supplementary documents were not submitted within twenty (20) days of a request for these
documents by the finance director;
g. The applicant or any owner has been denied for good cause a business registration certificate or license; has had their registration certificate or
registration revoked, suspended, or restricted for good cause; has been proven to have violated any ordinance related to the practice of massage;
or has had any other disciplinary action taken for good cause against them by another city, state, county or territory of the United States, or by any
other government agency; or
h. The applicant or any owner is indebted to the city for any unpaid fee or fine.
2. If prosecution is pending against the applicant or any owner for either conduct violating this article's provisions or conduct violating Business And
Professions Code section 4600 et seq., the director may postpone the decision on the application until the prosecution's final resolution. As used in
this subsection, "prosecution" means charges filed by the district attorney, administrative proceedings brought by a local government or agency, or a
civil or criminal action maintained by the Porterville city attorney or prosecution attorney.
E. Written Notice Of Denial: Upon determining that grounds for denial exist, the finance director shall furnish written notice of the denial to the applicant.
The notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the denial, shall state that the applicant may request an appeal pursuant to section 15-131 of this
article, and shall be delivered by mail to the applicant as that name and address appear on the application.
F. Facilities Prerequisite To Registration Certificate Issuance: A registration certificate shall not be issued pursuant to this article unless an inspection
reveals that the business complies with each of the following minimum requirements of this article and chapter 21 of this code:
1. Facility Requirements:
a. No massage or massage services shall be given in a business, or premises registered pursuant to this article, in any room or space enclosed or
divided by walls and fitted with a door capable of being locked from the inside. This section shall not apply to the business's external doors and
shall not operate to prohibit a massage business from locking its external doors if the business is a business entity owned by one individual with
one or no employees or independent contractors.
b. A list of services available and the cost of the services shall be posted in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises. The services
shall be described in English and any other languages that the business chooses. Only services on the posted list shall be performed.
c. Minimum lighting consisting of at least one artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided and shall be operating in each room or
enclosure where massage services are being performed on clients, and in all areas where clients are present.
d. Massage businesses shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary towels, coverings, and linens. Clean towels,
coverings, and linens shall be stored in enclosed cabinets. Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one client, unless they have first
been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one client. Soiled linens and paper towels shall
be deposited in separate, approved receptacles.
e. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities, shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition.
f. Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for clients. A minimum of one tub or shower; one dressing room containing
a separate locker for each client to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked; as well as a minimum of one toilet and washbasin,
shall be provided in every massage business; provided, however, that if male and female clients are to be served simultaneously at the business,
separate bathing, massage room(s), dressing room(s), and toilet facilities shall be provided for male and female clients. This requirement may be
modified upon approval of the city manager if the services provided or site plan do not necessitate some or all of these facilities.
g. A minimum of one washbasin for employees shall be provided at all times. The basin shall be located within, or as close as practicable, to the area
devoted to performing massage services. Sanitary towels shall also be provided at each basin. Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all
times.
h. In the reception area, in letters that are a minimum of one inch (1") in height, a notice in English (and any other language that the business
chooses) that provides information substantially as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 227/636
THIS MASSAGE BUSINESS AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION
BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE
i. No room or space enclosed or divided by walls and fitted with a door where massage or massage services are performed shall be equipped with
any electronic, mechanical, or artificial device used or capable of being used, for the recording or videotaping of visual images and/or sound.
j. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, shower and bath rooms, tanning booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall
be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as needed or required.
k. Standard or portable massage tables shall be used with a durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material as a covering. The tables shall be
sanitized after each use.
l. A massage business shall operate only under the name specified in its city registration certificate.
m. No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall
block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs, blurs,
or unreasonably darkens the view into the premises.
G. Operating Requirements:
1. Massage may be provided only between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. No massage business shall be open and
no massage services shall be provided between nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. A massage commenced prior to nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. shall nevertheless terminate at nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., and all clients shall exit the premises at that time. It is the obligation of the
massage business to inform clients of the requirement that services must cease at nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
2. The owner and manager of a massage business shall be responsible for displaying the city registration certificate and the CAMTC registration
certificate of each and every certified massage practitioner or therapist employed in the business in an open and conspicuous place on the premises.
Passport size photographs of the registration certificate holder shall be affixed to the respective registration certificate on display pursuant to this
section.
3. For each massage service provided, every massage business shall keep a complete and legible written record of the following information:
a. The date and hour that service was provided;
b. The service received;
c. The name or initials of the employee entering the information; and
d. The name of the employee administering the service.
The records shall be open to inspection and copying by the Porterville police department, or other city officials charged with enforcement of this
article. These records may not be used by any massage business owner or employee for any purpose other than as records of service provided
and may not be provided to other parties by any person unless otherwise required by law. The records shall be retained on the premises of the
massage business for a period of two (2) years.
4. All massage business owners and their employees shall wear clean outer garments. The garments shall not include any of the following:
a. Attire that is transparent or see through, or substantially exposes the employee's undergarments;
b. Swim attire, if not providing a water based massage modality accepted by the California massage therapy council;
c. Attire that exposes the employee's genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, or breasts;
d. Attire worn in a manner that constitutes a violation of California Penal Code section 314;
e. Attire worn in a manner that is otherwise deemed by the California massage therapy council to constitute unprofessional attire based on the
custom and practice of the profession in California.
5. At all times during the massage, the client's genitals shall be fully covered and contact shall not be made with the genitals.
6. The premises' exterior doors and the doors separating the waiting or reception area from the remainder of the premises shall remain unlocked during
the business hours (including electronic locking devices) or when clients are present. External doors may only be locked during business hours if the
massage business is a business entity owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors who are not employees of the
business and there is no staff available to assure security for clients and massage staff behind closed doors.
7. During hours of operation, no person other than the listed manager on duty, an employee, or a client shall be allowed beyond the reception area of
the massage business.
8. Clients and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage business during the hours of operation.
9. Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage business.
10. Clients shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage practitioner is on the premises.
11. The massage business shall be supervised, during all hours of operation, by a manager specified in the city's registration application. The name of
the manager on duty shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the reception area daily.
12. The owner and manager shall maintain a register of all employees or rent-space massage therapists. The employee register shall be maintained on
the premises for a minimum period of two (2) years following an employee's termination. The owner and manager shall make the employee register
immediately available for inspection upon demand by a representative of the Porterville police department or the city at all reasonable times. The
employee register shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
a. The name, nicknames and/or aliases used by an employee or rent-space massage therapist.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 228/636
b. A good quality color photocopy of a lawfully issued CAMTC certificate for each employee and rent-space therapist that provides massage
services.
c. The employee's or rent-space therapist's home address and relevant phone numbers (including, but not limited to, home and cellular numbers).
d. The employee or rent-space therapist's age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes.
e. The date of employment and termination, if applicable, or, in the case of a rent-space therapist, the start and end dates of the lease agreement, as
well as a copy of the agreement for all employees.
f. The duties of each employee.
13. While the city registration is in effect and at all times during operation, the massage business shall fully maintain current and valid workers'
compensation insurance as required by law. Proof of insurance shall be maintained on the premises at all times.
14. The massage business shall apply to the city for an amended city registration certificate within twenty (20) days after the occurrence of any
circumstance which changes the registration information initially provided to the city pursuant to this section, including, but not limited to, the
termination of certified massage practitioners or therapists. There shall be no charge for an amended registration certificate unless the director
determines that the changes are substantial and a new certificate is required.
H. City Registration Certificate: A city registration certificate issued pursuant to the terms of this article shall be valid for a term of one year from the date of
issuance and, unless suspended or revoked, may be renewed annually upon application by the massage business owner so long as the massage
business is operating within the city. No registration certificate shall confer any vested right to any person or business for more than the registration
period. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-129: VIOLATIONS:
A. In addition to any other remedy available under the law, violations of this article are subject to all applicable remedies within this code, including, but not
limited to, section 1-9 of this code and/or the administrative citations and penalties provisions in chapter 1 of this code.
B. Any massage business operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall constitute an unlawful business practice
pursuant to Business And Professions Code section 17200 et seq., and the city attorney or district attorney may, in the exercise of discretion, in
addition to or in lieu of taking any other action permitted by this article, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings in the superior court
of Tulare County, seeking an injunction prohibiting the unlawful business practice and/or any other remedy available at law, including, but not limited to,
fines, attorney fees and costs. All remedies provided for in this article are cumulative.
C. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for a massage business to be operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article.
The city may exercise its discretion, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, to commence proceedings for the abatement, removal, and
enjoinment of that business in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-130: CITY REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
A. In addition to any other remedy available to the city under this code or state law, any registration certificate may be suspended or revoked by the
director where it is found by substantial evidence that any of the following have occurred:
1. The registration certificate holder and/or agent has violated any provision of this article or the grounds for denial of the registration certificate exist;
2. The registration certificate holder and/or agent is a person who has engaged in "disqualifying conduct" as defined in this article;
3. The registration certificate holder and/or agent has failed to comply with one or more of the facilities and operations requirements of this article;
4. The registration certificate holder and/or agent has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement in conducting the massage business;
5. The registration certificate holder and/or agent has continued to operate the massage business after the city registration certificate or registration has
been suspended; or
6. The registration certificate holder and/or agent has failed to apply with the city for an amended city registration certificate within twenty (20) days
after the occurrence of any circumstance which substantially changes the registration information initially provided to the city pursuant to section 15-
128 of this article, including, but not limited to, the termination of certified massage practitioners or therapists; or
7. Massage treatments have been performed on the premises of the massage business, with or without the registration certificate holder's actual
knowledge, by any person who:
a. Does not have a valid CAMTC certification; or
b. As established by clear and convincing evidence, has engaged in conduct or has been convicted of the offenses described as disqualifying
conduct. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-131: DENIAL/APPEALS:
A. Notice of denial, suspension or revocation shall contain a statement of the violation(s) which constitute the basis for the suspension or revocation and
information about the right to appeal. Notice of the suspension or revocation shall be given by first class mail to the owner and real property owner at
the addresses shown on the registration certificate. Service shall be deemed complete when the notice is mailed by first class mail. The owner shall
have ten (10) calendar days from the date the notice is served to appeal to the finance director in writing and upon payment of a fee in an amount
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 229/636
established by city council resolution. Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation, the registration certificate shall be surrendered and no
massage activity may occur while any appeal proceeds.
B. Upon receipt of an appeal, the finance director shall appoint a hearing officer. A hearing shall be scheduled upon not less than ten (10) calendar days
and not more than thirty (30) days, unless extended by mutual agreement. Notice of the hearing shall be given by first class mail to the owner and real
property owner at the address shown on the registration certificate. Service shall be deemed complete when the notice is mailed.
C. The hearing officer's jurisdiction is limited to determining whether evidence exists to provide grounds for the registration certificate denial, suspension or
revocation.
D. The city shall provide proof of any violations by a preponderance of the evidence. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to the hearing.
E. The hearing officer shall:
1. Receive evidence regarding the proposed suspension, revocation or certificate denial.
2. Maintain a record of all evidence introduced.
3. Record the hearing.
4. Consider the nature, volume, severity, and frequency of any violations.
5. Decide whether grounds exist of the suspension or revocation or denial.
6. Issue a written decision within seven (7) days of the hearing that includes the factual and legal basis of the decision and a notice of the appeal rights
contained in this article.
F. The hearing officer's decision shall be final upon mailing by first class mail to the owner and real property owner at the address listed on the registration
certificate.
G. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review pursuant to California Code Of Civil Procedure section 1094.6. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-132: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
The director or hearing officer may condition any city registration certificate if they find that grounds for denial or revocation of a registration certificate
exist. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-133: HEARING FEES:
All hearings held as provided in this article may be subject to a filing fee in an amount established by the city council resolution. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-134: REAPPLICATION AFTER DENIAL OR REVOCATION:
A. An applicant for a city registration certificate under this article whose application for registration has been denied may not reapply for registration for a
period of two (2) years from the date of the denial. However, a reapplication prior to the termination of two (2) years may be made if accompanied by
evidence that the ground(s) for denial of the application no longer exist. Notwithstanding, if an application or renewal is denied due to criminal activity at
the business, no reapplication for a new massage business at the same location will be accepted within two (2) years after the effective date of the
denial.
B. A registration certificate holder under this article whose registration or renewal has been revoked or denied may not reapply for a registration certificate
for a period of two (2) years from the date of the revocation or denial.
C. If an application or renewal is denied due to criminal activity at the business, no reapplication for a new massage business at the same location will be
accepted within two (2) years after the effective date of the denial. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-135: NO REFUND OF FEE:
No refund or rebate of a registration certificate fee shall be allowed regardless of whether the city registration certificate has been suspended or revoked,
or because the registration certificate holder discontinues an activity for which a city registration certificate is required pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1831,
1-19-2016)
15-136: INSPECTION BY OFFICIALS:
The investigating and enforcing officials, including, but not limited to, the Porterville police department; Tulare County health department; or the city's
community development director, finance director, code enforcement, or building and safety officials, or their designees, shall have the right to enter the
premises from time to time during regular business hours for the purpose of making reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 230/636
building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to enforce compliance with applicable regulations, laws, and statutes, and with the provisions
of this article. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-137: NOTIFICATIONS:
A massage business shall immediately report to the city's business license department any of the following:
A. Arrests of any employees, owners, or managers of the registrant's massage business for an offense other than a misdemeanor traffic offense;
B. Resignations, terminations, or transfers of certified massage practitioners or therapists employed by the registrant's massage business;
C. The occurrence of any event involving the registrant's massage business or the massage practitioners or therapists employed there that constitutes a
violation of this article or state or federal law. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-138: BUSINESS LOCATION CHANGE:
Upon a change of location of a massage business, a new application shall be made to the director for a city registration certificate pursuant to the
requirements of section 15-128 of this article prior to commencing operation at the new location. The application shall be granted, provided all applicable
provisions of this article and chapter 21 of this code are complied with, and a change of location fee in an amount established by city council resolution to
defray the costs of investigation and report has been paid to the city. A new location shall be subject to an inspection under section 15-136 of this article
before a new registration will be issued. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
15-139: SALE OR TRANSFER OF MASSAGE BUSINESS INTEREST:
A sale or transfer of any interest in a massage business, which interest would be reported as required in this article upon application for a city registration
certificate, shall be reported to the finance director within ten (10) days of the sale or transfer. The finance director shall investigate any person receiving
any interest in a massage business as a result of the sale or transfer, and if the person satisfies the requirements relating to city registration certificate
applicants, the existing registration certificate shall be endorsed to include the person. A fee as set by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city
for the investigation by the finance director necessitated by each sale or transfer. (Ord. 1831, 1-19-2016)
Chapter 16
MINORS
Chapter
MINORS
16-1: CURFEW; GENERALLY:
Every person under the age of eighteen (18) years who loiters, wanders, strolls, loafs or plays about or upon the public streets, avenues, alleys, parks,
public parking grounds or public places, between the hour of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., and the time of sunrise the following day, when not accompanied by
his parent or legal guardian having legal custody and control of such person, or spouse of such person over the age of twenty one (21) years, is guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. Code § 6211)
16-2: CURFEW; RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS, GUARDIANS FOR VIOLATION:
Every parent, guardian or other person having the legal care, custody or control of any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who allows or permits
such person to violate any provision of section 16-1 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. Code § 6211.1)
16-3: ENTERING POOLROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES SERVED, ETC., PROHIBITED:
A. Minors Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to visit, enter, frequent or patronize any poolroom or billiard
hall in the city of Porterville where beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage is served, sold or consumed.
B. Owners Prohibited From Permitting Minors To Enter: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or for the owner, manager or other person in
charge of or in control of or otherwise conducting any poolroom or billiard hall in the city of Porterville where beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage
is served, sold or consumed to permit or allow any person under the age of twenty one (21) years to visit, enter, frequent or patronize said poolroom or
billiard hall.
C. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, a poolroom or billiard hall that adjoins a place where beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage is served,
sold or consumed and is connected by a common entryway, passageway, door, window or other opening of any kind whatsoever shall be considered
as a poolroom or billiard hall where beer, wine or any other alcoholic beverage is served, sold or consumed. (Ord. Code § 6221; Ord. 772 §§ 1_3, 9-17-
1963)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 231/636
16-4: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF SECTION 16-3:
Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation violating any of the provisions of section 16-3 of this chapter shall be liable to have his license to
do business in the city of Porterville summarily revoked by action of the city council, and in addition thereto, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city or county jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. Code
§ 6221.1; Ord. 772 § 4, 9-17-1963)
Chapter 17
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter Article I
DEFINITIONS
17-1: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES:
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this
section. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California and amendments
thereto, such definitions shall apply.
CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT: All streets and portions of streets within the area described as follows: All that area bounded by Morton Avenue, Third
Street, Olive and D Street.
COACH: Any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers.
COUNCIL: The council of the city of Porterville.
CURB: The lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb be marked by curbing construction, or not so marked; the word "curb", as herein used,
shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights of way of public utility
companies.
DIVISIONAL ISLAND: A raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.
HOLIDAYS: Within the meaning of this chapter, "holidays" are January 1, February 12, the third Monday in February, the last Monday in May, July 4, the
first Monday in September, November 11, December 25 and Thanksgiving Day. If January 1, February 12, July 4, November 11 or December 25 fall upon
a Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday.
LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the city.
PARKWAY: That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
PASSENGER LOADING ZONE: The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
STOP: When required, means complete cessation of movement.
VEHICLE CODE: The Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1537 § B53, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article II
TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
17-2: POLICE ADMINISTRATION:
There is hereby established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly
responsible to the chief of police. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-2.1: DUTY OF TRAFFIC DIVISION:
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate traffic
accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws, and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this chapter and the traffic ordinances of this city.
(Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 232/636
17-2.2: TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES:
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies
of such accidents and determining remedial measures. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-2.3: TRAFFIC ACCIDENT REPORTS:
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically
by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-2.4: TRAFFIC DIVISION TO SUBMIT ANNUAL TRAFFIC SAFETY REPORT:
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the city council. Such a report shall contain information on traffic matters
in this city as follows:
A. The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data.
B. The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police.
C. The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-2.5: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER:
The office of city traffic engineer is hereby established. The city engineer shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions and shall
exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this chapter. Whenever the city traffic engineer is required or authorized to place or
maintain official traffic control devices or signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-2.6: POWERS AND DUTIES OF CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER; DELEGATION:
It shall be the general duty of the city traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals,
to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions,
and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and
duties imposed by ordinances of this city. Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to the city traffic engineer or a duty imposed
upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article III
ENFORCEMENT OF AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
17-3: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS:
Officers of the police department and such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, audible
or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the police department or members of the fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions to the
contrary contained in this chapter or the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.1: PERSONS OTHER THAN OFFICIALS SHALL NOT DIRECT TRAFFIC:
No person other than an officer of the police department or members of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police, or a person
authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as herein provided,
any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the city traffic engineer. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.2: OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OR AUTHORIZED OFFICERS:
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with, or shall perform any act forbidden by, any lawful order, signal or direction of a traffic or police officer, or a
member of the fire department, or a person authorized by the chief of police or by law. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.3: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS:
Every person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway has all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 233/636
17-3.4: OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OR AUTHORIZED OFFICERS:
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of
this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter,
constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.5: PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, this state or any
county or city; and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or
by the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.6: EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN VEHICLES:
A. The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire
department, any public ambulance or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified
as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the state Vehicle Code in
response to an emergency call.
B. The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, relieve the operator of any such vehicle from obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the
consequences of his wilful disregard of the safety of others.
C. The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while
necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States postal service while in use for the collection,
transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.7: REPORT OF DAMAGE TO CERTAIN PROPERTY:
A. The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned
by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in
damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, shall within twenty four (24) hours after such
accident make a written report of such accident to the police department of this city.
B. Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person
operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, and the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such
accident.
C. The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time he is
physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in subsection A of this section within twenty four (24)
hours after regaining ability to make such report. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-3.8: WHEN VEHICLES MAY BE REMOVED FROM STREETS (TOW AWAY ZONES):
Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the police department of this city may remove or cause to be removed:
A. Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours.
B. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.,
when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution of this city and signs are posted giving notice of such removal.
C. Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the
cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or for the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any
portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is
necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such
use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the
removal. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article IV
TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
17-4: AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 234/636
A. The city traffic engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when
and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter.
B. Whenever the state Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic control devices be installed to give notice to the
public of the application of such law, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any
limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
C. The city traffic engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem
necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic; but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be
determined by ordinance or resolution of the council. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.1: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNS REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES:
No provision of the state Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate
legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions or the traffic laws. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this article unless otherwise
directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to emergency calls. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.3: INSTALLATION OF TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
A. The city traffic engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions
are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or
property from exceptional hazard.
B. The city traffic engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic
information as may be pertinent; and his determinations therefrom shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards and
instructions set forth by the state of California, department of transportation.
C. Whenever the city traffic engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at such
intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and
are maintained at any said intersection. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.4: LANE MARKING:
The city traffic engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles,
and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Ord.
1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.5: DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS:
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of
streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs
and markings. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.6: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE, RELOCATE AND DISCONTINUE TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the
state Vehicle Code or this chapter whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no
longer exist or remain. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.7: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES; HOURS OF OPERATION:
The city traffic engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-4.8: UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS:
No person, unless authorized by this city, shall paint any street or curb surface; however, this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 235/636
surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of this city pertaining thereto. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article V
TURNING MOVEMENTS
17-5: AUTHORITY TO PLACE TURNING MARKERS; INTERSECTIONS, MULTIPLE LANES:
The city traffic engineer is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections and indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and the city traffic engineer is authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of
vehicles may make right or left hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or
ordinance. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-5.1: AUTHORITY TO PLACE RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS:
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn, left turn or U-turn and
shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours,
in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-5.2: SIGNAL CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS; RIGHT TURNS:
A. No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop signal at any intersection which is sign posted giving notice of such restriction as
hereinafter provided in this section.
B. The city traffic engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to this section where he determines that the making of right turns against a traffic
signal "stop" indication would seriously interfere with the safe and orderly flow of traffic. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article VI
ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
17-6: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO SIGN ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof; and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be
placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article VII
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
17-7: CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT STOP SIGNS:
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which
vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the city traffic
engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows:
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated, and at those entrances to other
intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated; however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any
entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as
provided in, the state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-7.1: STOP AT THROUGH STREET OR STOP SIGN:
A. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this article.
B. The provisions of this article shall also apply at one or more entrances to the intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by
resolution of the council.
C. The provisions of this article shall apply at those highway railway grade crossings as established by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1537 § B54, 8-6-
1996)
17-7.2: EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 236/636
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk
area extending across any alleyway or driveway. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article VIII
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
17-8: DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION:
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade if such vehicles are conspicuously so designated.
The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the
police department. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.1: CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLE:
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on, or hold on with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.2: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS:
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the
consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited.
For the purpose of this section a commercial vehicle shall mean a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half (1/2) ton. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-
1978)
17-8.3: RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALK:
No person shall ride, drive, propel or cause to be propelled any vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed
driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk; but said sidewalk area must be
substantially protected by wooden planks two inches (2") thick and written permission must be previously obtained from the city traffic engineer. Such
wooden planks shall not be permitted to remain upon such sidewalk area during the hours from six o'clock (6:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1162
§ 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.4: NEW PAVEMENT AND MARKINGS:
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier
sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is
in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.5: OBEDIENCE TO BARRIERS AND SIGNS:
No person, public utility or department in the city shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the city traffic engineer
or disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any person, public utility or by any
department of this city. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.6: NO ENTRANCE INTO INTERSECTION THAT WOULD OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC:
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.7: LIMITED ACCESS:
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-
5-1978)
17-8.8: RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF FREEWAYS:
No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor driven cycle or any vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a
freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along any such street so designated and described except in space set aside for
the use of pedestrians, provided official signs are in place giving notice of such restrictions. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 237/636
17-8.9: DRIVING ACROSS FIRE HOSE:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven over or across any unprotected fire hose in use by the Porterville fire department or any other governmental
agency within the city of Porterville unless directed to do so by a member of the Porterville fire department, a member of the police department, or by a
member of any other city, county or state law enforcement or fire agency. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-8.10: OPERATION OF OFF HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLES:
A. Definition: For the purpose of this section, an "off highway motor vehicle" is any of the following:
Any motor vehicle subject to the provisions of subdivision (a) of section 38010 of the California Vehicle Code (CVC) subparagraph (b), including, but
not limited to, the following:
1. Any motorcycle or motor driven cycle.
2. Any motor vehicle commonly referred to as a sand buggy, dune buggy or all terrain vehicle.
3. Any motor vehicle commonly referred to as a jeep.
B. Operation Within One-Half Mile Of Any Residence: It shall be unlawful for any off highway motor vehicle described in subsection A of this section to be
operated within one-half (1/2) mile of any residence. (Ord. 1170 § A, 6-19-1979)
Chapter Article IX
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
17-9: TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ESTABLISH MARKED CROSSWALKS:
A. The city traffic engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway as follows:
Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at all intersections and at other places where the city traffic engineer determines that there is particular
hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway, subject to the limitation contained in subsection B of this section.
B. Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred feet (400') in length, and such
crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid block.
C. The city traffic engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the
crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-9.1: WHEN PEDESTRIANS MUST USE CROSSWALKS:
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article X
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES OR IN CERTAIN
PLACES
17-10: APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS:
A. The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except
when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device.
B. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the state Vehicle Code or the ordinances of this city prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places
or at specified times. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.1: STOPPING OR STANDING IN PARKWAYS PROHIBITED:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.2: TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO MAINTAIN NO STOPPING ZONES AND NO PARKING AREAS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 238/636
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas
and restricted parking areas as defined and described in this chapter.
When said curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking
or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.3: NO PARKING AREAS:
No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
A. Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings.
B. On either side of any street between the projected property lines of any public walk, public steps, street or thoroughfare terminating at such street when
such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
C. In any area where the city traffic engineer determines that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or
property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
D. In any area established by resolution of the council as a no parking area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb
surface.
E. Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay or obstruct the movement of any car traveling upon such track.
F. In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property.
G. On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street
or highway or the installation of underground utilities; or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other
than the normal flow of traffic; or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or
structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of
such prohibited parking are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the effective time of such no parking.
H. At any place within twenty feet (20') of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid block end of a safety zone when such place is indicated by
appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
I. At any place within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an intersection (in the central traffic district) or in any business district when such place is indicated
by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop.
J. Within twenty feet (20') of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard, stop sign or official electric flashing device. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.4: USE OF STREETS FOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive
period of seventy two (72) hours. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.5: PARKING FOR DEMONSTRATION:
No operator of any vehicle shall park said vehicle upon any street in this city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale unless
authorized by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.6: REPAIRING OR GREASING VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS:
No person shall construct or cause to be constructed, repair or cause to be repaired, grease or cause to be greased, dismantle or cause to be dismantled
any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city. Temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public street. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-
1978)
17-10.7: WASHING OR POLISHING VEHICLES:
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or cause to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street in this city when a
charge is made for such service. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.8: PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 239/636
A. The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such
parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
B. When official signs are erected prohibiting parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such
designated place. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.9: PARKING PROHIBITED ON NARROW STREETS:
A. The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not
exceed twenty feet (20') or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet
(30').
B. When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such
street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.10: PARKING ON GRADES:
No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three percent (3%) (within any business or
residence district) without blocking the wheels of said vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.11: EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS:
A. Whenever the city traffic engineer or chief of police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or
private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the city traffic engineer or chief of police shall have power and authority to order
temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the city
traffic engineer or chief of police shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the
existence of such emergency and the city traffic engineer or chief of police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
B. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to
the directions and provisions of such signs. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.12: PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE ON STREET PROHIBITED; SALE OF MERCHANDISE FROM PARKED VEHICLE
PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the same upon any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale or to park any vehicle upon any
street in any business district from which such vehicle merchandise is being sold. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-10.12.1: PROHIBITED ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER; APPLICABILITY OF SECTION TO
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY:
A. No person shall park or operate a vehicle upon a private driveway or upon private property within the city without the actual or implied consent of the
owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or said persons, agents, or employees; nor shall a person continue to park or operate a vehicle
upon such driveway or property, once said consent has been withdrawn.
B. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall be effective on commercial property only if there is displayed a sign prohibiting parking or driving
without the consent of the owner or person in possession of said property. For purposes of this section "commercial property" is property used for or in
connection with a business for profit. (Ord. 1233 § A, 3-17-1981)
17-10.12.2: RESTRICTIONS ON VEHICLE VENDORS; PUSHCARTS ON PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise,
fruits, vegetables or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating cart or vehicle,
on any portion of any street, parking lot, or public right of way within this city except that such vehicles, wagons, or pushcarts may stand or park only at
the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place.
B. No person shall vend at any location for more than ten (10) minutes without moving to a new location at least three hundred feet (300') removed
therefrom and may not return to a location where the vendor has stopped to vend within the previous two (2) hours.
C. Routes of vendors shall be restricted to minor residential streets:
1. Pushcarts (walking type) shall be restricted to walkways, sidewalks and other areas appropriate to accommodate pedestrian traffic.
2. Pushcarts (riding type) shall be restricted to vehicular travel areas and shall be prohibited from utilizing pedestrian walkways.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 240/636
D. Hours of operation shall be restricted to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
E. Sounds produced in association with vending shall be restricted as follows:
1. Pushcarts of any type shall be limited to bells only.
2. Vehicles shall be in compliance with chapter 3, article III of this code.
F. Vending in connection with any special event as permitted by the city council shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1531 § C1, 6-18-
1996)
17-10.12.3: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person violating section 17-10.12.2 of this article or any provisions thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that any provision of this article is violated is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as a separate and distinct
offense. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this article as a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of
this article, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any
person convicted of an infraction under this article shall be punished by:
A. A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;
B. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this article within one year; and
C. A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this article within one year. (Ord. 1531 § C2, 6-18-1996)
17-10.13: PARKING IN CITY PARKS:
A. Regulated: No person shall operate, drive, stop, park or leave standing any motor vehicle, other than on paved roadways or paved parking areas, in any
city park, except when in possession of a permit issued by the director of parks and leisure services permitting that person to operate, drive, stop, park
or leave standing said motor vehicle, and further, except any motor vehicle being operated, driven, stopped, parked or left standing by a city employee
in the course and scope of his or her duties.
B. Permit: A permit may be obtained from the city to park on other than paved roadways or paved parking areas at the aforementioned city parks. The
party requesting such permit shall apply to the director of parks and leisure services for such permit, on a form specified by that department, for any
person or group activity, no less than five (5) working days prior to the requested date. (Ord. 1559 § 1, 6-23-1998)
Chapter Article XI
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS AND PUBLIC PARKING LOTS
17-11: TWENTY MINUTE PARKING:
Green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time between eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day, except Sundays and holidays.
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation
thereof. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-11.1: ONE HOUR PARKING:
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any
day, except Sundays and holidays, for a period of time longer than one hour. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-11.2: TWO HOUR PARKING:
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by the city traffic engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day,
except Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays, for a period of time longer than two (2) hours. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1411, 4-18-1989)
17-11.3: PARKING PARALLEL ON ONE-WAY STREETS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 241/636
A. Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches (18") of the left hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.
B. In the event a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways, and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
C. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left hand side of any one-way street or when
standing or parking may be permitted upon the left hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more separate roadways and
shall erect signs giving notice thereof.
D. The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of
loading or unloading freight or goods, in which case such vehicle may be backed up to the curb, provided that such vehicle does not extend beyond the
centerline of the street and does not block traffic thereby. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-11.4: DIAGONAL PARKING:
On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in
place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except:
A. At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space;
B. Any vehicle utilizing diagonal parking spaces shall park so that no part of the rear of the vehicle shall protrude past an imaginary line that runs parallel
with the curb and even with the end of the painted stripes of the diagonal parking spaces.
The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in
which event the provisions applicable in subsection 17-11.3D of this article shall be complied with. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1264, 7-6-1982; Ord.
1537 § B55, 8-6-1996)
17-11.5: PARKING SPACE MARKINGS:
The city traffic engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where authorized
parking is permitted.
When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing
or parked other than within a single space, unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-11.6: NO STOPPING ZONES:
The city traffic engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is
prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is prohibited.
During the hours and on the days designated on the signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or
parts of streets established by resolution of the council as no stopping zones. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-11.7: PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Prohibited; Violation: Except as noted below, no person shall park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten
thousand (10,000) pounds or more, in whole or in part, on any roadway adjacent to any property zoned RS-1, RS-2, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3, PK, or PO in
the city of Porterville. Such violation shall be an infraction.
B. Exceptions:
1. While loading or unloading property. This exception shall apply only while such work is actually in progress and those in control of the vehicle are on
the scene.
2. While parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked. This
exemption shall apply only while such work is actually in progress and those in control of the vehicle are on the scene.
3. When the vehicle has experienced mechanical failure along an authorized route of travel for such vehicles and only while repair or towing services
are actually en route to, or repairing/towing said vehicle. This exemption shall apply only while the person in control of the vehicle is on the scene.
(Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1390, 11-3-1987; Ord. 1663 § A, 3-1-2005; Ord. 1833, 6-21-2016)
17-11.8: PARKING TRUCK TRAILERS PROHIBITED ON CITY STREETS:
The operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four (4) tons shall not disconnect the trailer or trailers from said vehicle and park
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 242/636
the trailer or trailers on a city street, unless parked under a permit issued by the chief of police. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1263, 5-4-1982; Ord. 1271,
12-7-1982; Ord. 1289, 11-1-1983; Ord. 1411, 4-18-1989; Ord. 1513 § A, 6-6-1995; Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1632, 4-15-2003)
17-11.9: PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES ALONG WESTWOOD STREET:
A. Prohibition: Except as noted below, no person shall park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand
(10,000) pounds or more, in whole or in part, on any roadway adjacent to any property zoned commercial along Westwood Street from Pioneer Avenue
to the Tule River, in the city of Porterville.
B. Exceptions:
1. While loading or unloading property. This exception shall apply only while such work is actually in progress and those in control of the vehicle are on
the scene.
2. While parked in connection with, and in the aid of, the performance of a service to or on a property in the block in which such vehicle is parked. This
exemption shall apply only while such work is actually in progress and those in control of the vehicle are on the scene.
3. When the vehicle has experienced mechanical failure along an authorized route of travel for such vehicles and only while repair or towing services
are actually en route to, or repairing/towing said vehicle. This exemption shall apply only while the person in control of the vehicle is on the scene.
(Ord. 1698, 6-20-2006)
17-11.10: ON STREET PARKING:
The city traffic engineer shall designate special "blue curb" parking spaces for the purpose of providing on street parking for exclusive use by physically
disabled persons in accordance with section 22511.7 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1513 § B, 6-6-1995)
17-11.11: OFF STREET/PUBLICLY OWNED FACILITIES:
A. The city traffic engineer shall designate parking stalls or spaces in publicly owned, leased, or controlled off street parking facilities for exclusive use by
physically disabled persons.
B. The city traffic engineer shall designate eleven (11) parking spaces for transit users within the publicly owned parking lot located at the southeast corner
of Hockett Street and Oak Avenue. The city traffic engineer shall issue rules and regulations needed for the administration and enforcement of transit
users parking within transit user designated parking spaces including, but not limited to, criteria and procedures for issuance and revocation of a
parking permit.
C. When signs authorizing the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to
the directions and provisions of such signs.
D. Citation fees shall be set by resolutions of the city council if deemed to warrant fees. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1513 § B, 6-6-1995; Ord. 1746, 8-
19-2008)
17-11.12: PARKING SPACES FOR DISABLED PERSONS:
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in a stall or space which has been designated to be used exclusively by disabled persons who display on
their vehicle a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 22511.5 or to be used by a disabled veteran as
specified in Vehicle Code section 22511.9. The designation for such stalls or spaces shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from,
each stall or space a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background, or by outlining the stall or space in blue
markings and outlining on the ground, in the stall or space, a similar profile view depicting a wheelchair with occupant.
The owner or person in lawful possession of an off street parking facility, after notifying the police or department, may cause the removal, from a stall or
space designated for physically disabled persons, in the parking facility to the nearest public garage, of any vehicle not displaying one of the distinguishing
placards or license plates specified in this section, if there is posted immediately adjacent to, and visible from, the stall or space, or if there is posted in a
conspicuous place at the entrance to the off street parking facility, not less than seventeen by twenty two inches (17 x 22") in size with letters not less than
one inch (1") in height, a sign which clearly and conspicuously states the following:
Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing placards or license plates issued for physically disabled persons will be towed away at owner's
expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed by telephoning the Porterville Police Department, (209) 782-7426.
(Ord. 1275, 2-15-1983; Ord. 1513 § B, 6-6-1995)
Chapter Article XII
STOPPING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY
17-12: AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH LOADING ZONES:
A. The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and to mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 243/636
1. In any business district.
2. Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
B. In no event shall more than one-half (1/2) of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
C. Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.
D. Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-12.1: CURB MARKINGS TO INDICATE PROHIBITED STOPPING AND PARKING REGULATIONS:
The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein shall place, the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth.
A. Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the state Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red
zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
B. Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day except
Sunday(s) and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of
passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes.
C. White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail
in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three (3) minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. of any day except Sunday(s) and holidays and except as follows:
1. When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times.
2. When such zone is in front of a theater the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed.
D. When the city traffic engineer, as authorized under this chapter, has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-12.2: EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD:
A. Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall
not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.
B. The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, also the delivery or pick up of express and parcel post packages and
United States mail.
C. Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage
but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.
D. Within the total time limits above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or
unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-12.3: STANDING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such
time as is permitted in section 17-12.2 of this article. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-12.4: STANDING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONE:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such
time as is specified in section 17-12.2 of this article. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-12.5: STANDING IN ANY ALLEY:
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-
1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 244/636
17-12.6: COACH ZONES TO BE ESTABLISHED:
A. The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of
passengers and to determine the location thereof.
B. Coach zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article XIII
RESTRICTED USE OF CERTAIN STREETS
17-13: CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED IN CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT:
A. No person shall operate any of the following vehicles in the central traffic district between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. of any day:
1. Any freight vehicle more than eight and one-half feet (81/2') in width, with load, or any freight vehicle so loaded that any part of its load extends more
than three feet (3') to the front or ten feet (10') to the rear of said vehicle.
2. Any vehicle carrying building material that has not been loaded, or is not to be unloaded, at some point within the central traffic district.
B. The city traffic engineer may by written permit authorize the operation of any such vehicle for the purposes of making necessary emergency deliveries
to or from points within the central traffic district. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-13.1: TRUCK ROUTES:
A. Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by any vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four (4) tons, the city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate
signs as truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four (4) tons.
B. When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicles exceeding a maximum gross
weight limit of four (4) tons shall drive on such route or routes, and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of four (4) tons coming from a "truck route" having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted
streets when necessary for the purpose of making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located
on such restricted streets, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction
of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or
2. Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.
D. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of four (4) tons. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-13.2: DESIGNATION OF INTERSTATE TRUCK ACCESS ROUTES:
A. Legislative Authority: This section is adopted, in accordance with the federal surface transportation assistance act (STAA), pursuant to the authority set
forth in sections 35100, 35401, and 35401.5 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California.
B. Purpose:
1. It is the purpose of this section to protect the health, safety, and welfare of residents of this city by setting minimum standards for the use of city
streets by certain interstate trucks. To that end, this section and the provisions thereunder shall be liberally construed.
2. It is additionally the intention of the city council to minimize the wear and tear on city streets with increased usage by certain interstate trucks while
still providing the fullest possible access for city residents and businesses utilizing the benefits and services of such traffic.
C. Not Exclusive Regulation: This section is not the exclusive regulation of city streets. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulating
statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereinafter enacted by the state, county, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
D. Administration And Enforcement: Except as otherwise provided, this section shall be administered by the city traffic engineer and enforced by the city
police chief.
E. Application Of Section: This section applies to all city controlled and maintained streets and any truck traffic, local or interstate, using such streets.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 245/636
F. Definitions: Except where the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern the construction of this section:
CALTRANS: The state of California department of transportation.
CITY: The city council of the city of Porterville, California.
CITY TRAFFIC ENGINEER: The city traffic engineer or his duly authorized agents.
INTERSTATE TRUCK: A combination of vehicles consisting of a truck tractor and semitrailer, with or without an additional trailer, which conforms to the
conditions of section 35401.5 of the Vehicle Code of California. Any licensed carrier of household goods when directly en route to or from a point of
loading or unloading of household goods, whose travel on highways other than those designated through this section is necessary and incidental to the
shipment of the household goods, is specifically excluded from this definition.
POINT OF DECISION: Any intersection, junction or other point on a street where a driver must decide to proceed straight, turn, exit or enter (driveway
entrances are excluded).
TERMINAL: A facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped, where shipments may be loaded or unloaded, or at which truck and trailer
combinations are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured.
TRAFFIC ENGINEER: The city traffic engineer or his duly authorized agents.
G. Declaration Of Prohibition: The city hereby prohibits the use of any interstate truck upon the streets under its jurisdiction except on specifically
designated interstate truck terminal access routes as hereinafter provided. City designation of an interstate truck terminal access route which is
available for use shall be evidenced by specific signs posted at all points of decision on the interstate truck terminal access route.
H. Procedure For Terminal Access Route Designation:
1. STAA Truck Route Map:
a. STAA truck routes shall be adopted by resolution of the city council with a copy of the official STAA truck route map attached.
b. The official STAA truck route map may be amended, from time to time, by resolution of the city council.
2. Application:
a. Any terminal owner or authorized agent wishing to have an interstate truck terminal access route designated to a particular terminal, which route is
wholly or partly made up of city streets, shall submit an application and supply all information and documents requested to the city traffic engineer.
The application shall be on a form provided by the traffic engineer and available in the engineering division of the city during hours when the city is
regularly open for business days. The application shall be accompanied by the applicable fee set by resolution of the city council.
b. Additional information may be required upon request by the traffic engineer. Written notification of any changes in any information supplied during
the application process must be submitted to the traffic engineer. If such additional or changed information is not provided within five (5) working
days or is inaccurate, the traffic engineer may deny the application.
3. Investigation:
a. The traffic engineer shall investigate all applications for interstate truck terminal access route designations.
b. Following the investigation, the traffic engineer shall compile a report describing the proposed route and any alternative routes. The report shall
further identify any deficiencies or problems within the proposed route or alternate routes which must be corrected before such routes can be
finally approved for designation as interstate truck access routes.
4. Approval:
a. The traffic engineer shall take one of the following actions on an application:
(1) Approve the application route as proposed.
(2) Approve the application route on the condition that the applicant correct any or all identified deficiencies to the satisfaction of the traffic
engineer prior to any use of the route.
(3) Deny the application.
b. If the application route is approved on the condition that any deficiencies be corrected, such correction must be commenced within three (3)
months of conditional approval and shall comply with all normal city procedures, standards and permit requirements. Adequacy of correction of the
deficiencies shall be subject to the approval of the traffic engineer. The traffic engineer may deny final approval of any route upon the applicant's
failure to comply with any of these provisions.
c. The applicant may appeal any conditional approval or any denial in accordance with subsection I of this section.
5. CALTRANS And Other Local Agency Approval:
a. Once the traffic engineer has approved a proposed or alternate route, the traffic engineer shall submit the proposed route to CALTRANS for
approval. The traffic engineer shall also notify the applicant if approval by an affected local agency or county is necessary. Final approval by the
city shall be contingent upon compliance by the applicant with all requirements set out by CALTRANS and approval by any other affected local
agency or county.
b. If the applicant fails to meet any requirements by CALTRANS or is denied approval by any other affected local agency, the traffic engineer shall
deny the application, which denial shall be final and not appealable to the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 246/636
6. Posting Of Signs: Following final approval, the traffic engineer shall post signs which mark the course of the interstate truck terminal access route.
Such signs shall be posted in accordance with standards adopted by the traffic engineer.
7. Availability For Use: After the city council adopts a resolution amending the official STAA truck route map, the traffic engineer, after posting all
necessary signs, shall notify the applicant and the California highway patrol, that a route has been designated and marked and is available for use.
8. Suspension; Revocation: The traffic engineer may, at any time and in his sole discretion, revoke his approval of any route if the route becomes
unsafe. The designation of any route may be temporarily suspended to allow for repairs or other construction. A permanent revocation or temporary
suspension may be appealed in accordance with subsection I of this section.
I. Appeal:
1. Generally: To appeal a conditional approval or a denial of designation by the traffic engineer, the applicant shall provide written notice of appeal to
the traffic engineer within ten (10) days of notification of the conditional approval or denial. Such written notice shall set out all reasons why the
applicant believes such conditions or denial are inappropriate.
2. Initial Review: Upon receipt of a written notice of appeal, the traffic engineer shall reconsider the conditions or denial and notify the applicant of the
results of his review in writing within forty five (45) days. If the applicant is not satisfied by the traffic engineer's decision after review, the applicant
may appeal directly to the city council. If the applicant is satisfied, the procedures in subsections H3 and H4 of this section as to correction of
deficiencies, approval by other agencies, and posting of signs shall be followed.
3. Appeal To City Council:
a. If the applicant wishes to appeal to the city council the traffic engineer's decision on reconsideration rendered under subsection I2 of this section,
appeal shall be made by letter to the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed within ten (10) days of the traffic engineer's decision on
reconsideration.
b. If the city council orders approval or conditional approval of a requested route, then the procedures set out in subsections H3 and H4 of this
section as to correction of deficiencies, approval by other agencies and posting of signs shall be followed. The city council's decision on the
applicant's appeal shall be final. Judicial review of such decision shall be in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure section 1094.5.
4. Renewal Of Application: The denial of a route application shall be final as to that route unless there is a material change of circumstances between
the date of denial and the date of filing a renewed application. A material change of circumstances may include construction and improvement of the
proposed route for a different purpose or a decision by CALTRANS to withdraw a previous rejection of the route. The traffic engineer may reject a
renewed application for a previously rejected route without investigation or report unless the applicant when making the renewed application provides
written evidence of such a material change of circumstances. Denial by the traffic engineer of a renewed application shall be final for all appeal
purposes. (Ord. 1391 § B, 11-17-1987; Ord. 1513 § C, 6-6-1995; Ord. 1537 § B56, 8-6-1996)
17-13.3: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM USING CERTAIN STREETS:
A. Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial
vehicle, the city traffic engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such resolution.
B. Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are hereby declared to be streets the use of which is prohibited by any
commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. (Ord.
1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1391 § A, 11-17-1987)
Chapter Article XIV
TRAINS
17-14: RAILWAY GATES:
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or
is being opened or closed. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-14.1: TRAINS NOT TO BLOCK CROSSINGS:
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten (10) minutes; except that this provision shall not apply to railway
trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or
similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article XV
SPECIAL SPEED ZONES
17-15: PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS DETERMINED ON CERTAIN STREETS:
It is hereby determined and found that the prima facie speed limit as set forth below is most appropriate and will facilitate the orderly movement of traffic
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 247/636
and is reasonable and safe. Said prima facie speed limits are as follows:
Conner Street:
Morton Avenue to Olive Avenue 35 mph
Date Avenue:
Howard Street to east city limits 35 mph
Gibbons Avenue:
Indiana to Jaye 45 mph
Henderson Avenue:
Elderwood to Westwood 40 mph
West city limits to east city limits 35 mph
Howard Street:
Orange Avenue to Date Avenue 35 mph
Indiana Street:
Henderson Avenue to Westfield Avenue 30 mph
Morton Avenue to Westfield Avenue 35 mph
Scranton to Poplar 40 mph
Jaye Street:
Olive Avenue to State Route 190 35 mph
Leggett Street:
Isham to Putnam 35 mph
Main Street:
Date Avenue to south city limits 40 mph
Date to Olive 30 mph
Morton Avenue to Henderson Avenue 35 mph
Morton Avenue to Date Avenue 25 mph
Reid Avenue to Henderson 45 mph
Westfield to Linda Vista 50 mph
Mathew Street:
Heritage to Olive 30 mph
Tule River to Olive Avenue 35 mph, except within the school zone per SVC section 22358.4
Morton Avenue:
Leggett to Conner 40 mph
Plano to Leggett 40 mph
Westwood Street to Hillcrest Street 35 mph
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 248/636
Newcomb Street:
Olive Avenue to north city limits 35 mph
River Springs to Olive 35 mph
Tule River to Olive Avenue 25 mph
North Grand Avenue:
West city limits to Main Street 35 mph
Olive Avenue:
Newcomb Street to Villa Street 35 mph
Villa Street to Plano Street 35 mph
West city limits to Salisbury Street 40 mph
Orange Avenue:
Jaye Street to Main Street 30 mph
Main Street to Howard Street 35 mph
Plano Street:
Henderson to Morton Avenue 40 mph
Morton to State Route 190 35 mph
North city limits to Henderson 35 mph
State Route 190 to south city limits 40 mph
Poplar Avenue:
Jaye Street to west city limits 45 mph
Porter Road:
Olive Avenue to Henderson Avenue 35 mph
Prospect:
Morton Avenue to Westfield 35 mph
Putnam Avenue:
Porter Road to Villa Street 30 mph
Third Street to Crestview Street 30 mph
Villa Street to Third Street 25 mph
Springville Avenue:
Indiana to Jaye 40 mph
Jaye to E 35 mph
Tomah Avenue:
Westwood Street to Newcomb Street 25 mph
Villa Street:
Olive Avenue to Henderson Avenue 30 mph
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 249/636
Westfield Avenue:
Newcomb to Prospect 35 mph
Prospect Street to Main Street 35 mph
Westwood Street to Lombardi Street 25 mph
Westwood Street:
Olive to Tule River 45 mph
Tule River to north city limits 35 mph
The above prima facie speed limits are hereby set and established in the locations set forth above. (Ord. 1537 § B57, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1583 § A, 9-21-1999;
Ord. 1595 § A, 3-20-2001; Ord. 1604 § A, 6-5-2001; Ord. 1628 § A, 4-1-2003; Ord. 1637 § A, 7-15-2003; Ord. 1643 § A, 12-16-2003; Ord. 1725, 8-21-
2007; Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1811, 6-3-2014)
17-15.1: DRIVING IN EXCESS OF PRIMA FACIE SPEED LIMITS PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful to drive, operate, or propel a vehicle of any type over the prima facie speed set forth in section 17-15 of this article at
the locations set forth in section 17-15 of this article; and any person found guilty of violating the terms of the speeds at the locations set forth in section
17-15 of this article shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the manner set forth in the state Vehicle Code. (Ord.
1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-15.2: REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS:
The city traffic engineer is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at
speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article XVI
OBSTRUCTION TO VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
17-16: SHRUBBERY OBSTRUCTING VISIBILITY OF INTERSECTIONS:
Whenever the traffic engineer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing in a parkway obstructs the view of any intersection, or any traffic upon the
streets approaching such intersection, he shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be immediately removed or reduced in height. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-
1978)
Chapter Article XVII
ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VEHICLES
17-17: PARKING AND STORING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any
licensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not
including highways within the city for a period in excess of ten (10) days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a
lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with a business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.1: MISDEMEANOR:
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof
or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this article or state law where such state law is
applicable. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.2: PUBLIC NUISANCE; DEFINITIONS:
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state of California under section 22660 of the Vehicle Code
to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city hereby makes the following findings and
declarations:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 250/636
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including
highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property; to promote blight and deterioration; to invite plundering; to
create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for rodents and insects;
and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part
thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance
which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. As used in this article, the following terms shall mean:
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: This term does not include "highway".
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.3: EXCEPTIONS:
This article shall not apply to:
A. A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private
property, or located behind a solid fence six feet (6') in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway.
B. A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked by a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is
necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than chapter 10
(commencing with section 22650) of division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this article. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.4: SUPPLEMENT TO OTHER CODES, REGULATIONS:
This article is not exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to
the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.5: ENFORCEMENT:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or his duly appointed agent. In
the enforcement of this article, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain
information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.6: FRANCHISE:
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon
private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. (Ord.
1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.7: ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS:
The city council has determined that the administrative costs shall be fixed by resolution. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord. 1167 § 1, 2-20-1979)
17-17.8: NOTICE OF ABATEMENT OR REMOVAL:
A. A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner
of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS
THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of owner of the land)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to
Chapter 17, Section 17-17.2 of the Porterville City Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to , license number , which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17, Section
17-17.2 of the Porterville City Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 251/636
this notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Porterville and the costs thereof, together with
administrative costs, assessed to you as the owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located.
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such 10-day period, the
locally designated officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the
costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the
presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for
hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu
thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.
Notice Mailed
/s/
City Manager or duly appointed
agent
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS
THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle - Notice should be given to both if different)
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle - Make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned,
pursuant to Chapter 17, Section 17-17.2 of the Porterville City Code, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 17-17.2 of the Porterville City Code.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of
this notice.
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the
mailing of the notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a request is not received by the City Manager within such 10-day period, the
locally designated officer shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice Mailed
/s/
City Manager Or duly appointed
agent
B. Notice shall be given to the department of motor vehicles within five (5) days after the date of removal identifying the vehicle or part thereof and any
evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the registration card, certificates of ownership or license plates. (Ord. 1537 § B58, 8-6-
1996)
17-17.9: REQUEST FOR HEARING:
Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the city manager within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notice of intention
to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof against the property on which it is located.
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10) day period,
said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail,
at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification
numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing of the notice of intention
to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public
hearing. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-17.10: PROCEDURE FOR HEARING:
All hearings under this article shall be held before the chief of police, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Said facts and testimony
may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public
property.
The chief of police shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn
written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such
denial.
The chief of police may impose such conditions and take such action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this
article. He may delay the time for the removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing,
the chief of police may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and
order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the
cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the
correct identification number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the chief of police shall not assess the cost of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 252/636
If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested
party makes a written presentation to the chief of police but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978; Ord.
1167 § 3, 2-20-1979)
17-17.11: APPEALS:
In the case of any contested hearing, the owner of the land contesting said hearing shall have the right to appear before the city council and present
evidence relevant to the matters being contested. Said appeal shall be conducted in the written communications portion of the council meeting and thus
must be preceded by written notification from the owner of the land to the council. The findings of the council shall be final. (Ord. 1167 § 4, 2-20-1979)
Chapter Article XVIII
PENALTIES AND CONSTITUTIONALITY
17-18: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
17-18.1: CONSTITUTIONALITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity
of the remaining portions of this chapter. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional.
(Ord. 1162 § 1, 12-5-1978)
Chapter Article XIX -- LXI
RESERVED
Chapter Article LXII
PARKING UPON AND REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY
17-62: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1320, 8-21-1984)
17-62.1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1320, 8-21-1984)
17-62.2: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1320, 8-21-1984)
17-62.3: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REGULATED:
No person shall park or operate a vehicle upon a private driveway or upon private property within the city of Porterville without the actual or implied
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or said person's agents or employees; nor shall a person continue to park or operate
a vehicle upon such driveway or property, once said consent has been withdrawn. (Ord. 1320 § A, 8-21-1984)
17-62.4: PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REGULATED; SIGN:
The sign to be posted, pursuant to California Vehicle Code section 22658(a)(1), by the owner or person in lawful possession of any private property,
desiring to prohibit public parking and further desiring to have vehicles towed away at the vehicle owner's expense, shall comply with the provisions of
Vehicle Code section 22658(a)(1) and shall further display, in plain view, at all entrances to the property, a sign at least seventeen inches (17") in height
and twenty two inches (22") in width, with letters not less than one inch (1") in height of a "C-stroke" width. The content of the sign shall be in compliance
with the requirements of Vehicle Code section 22658(a)(1). (Ord. 1537 § B59, 8-6-1996)
Chapter 18
OFFENSES, MISCELLANEOUS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 253/636
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1855 - CANNABIS ACTIVITIES AND USE (NON-COMMERCIAL). Go to new ordinance.
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
18-0: ATTACHMENT OF WIRES, CABLES, DEVICES OR EQUIPMENT TO CABLE ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM:
A. The attachment of any wires, cables, devices or equipment to any cable antenna television system within the city of Porterville for the purpose of
receiving television signals thereby without the knowledge of the owner and with intent to evade payment therefor is hereby prohibited.
B. Any person who, with intent to injure or defraud, attaches any wires, cables, devices or equipment to any community antenna television system for the
purpose of receiving television signals thereby without the knowledge of the owner and with intent to evade payment therefor, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the
county jail, or city jail, not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1011 §§ 1, 2, 12-7-1971)
18-1: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1706 § 1, 10-3-2006)
18-2: PUBLIC NUDITY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a public place in a state of nudity. "Nudity or state of nudity" means: a) the
appearance or display of the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or b) a state of dress
which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the female breast. "Public place"
means any location frequented by the public, or where the public is likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected to be observed by
members of the public. Public places include, but are not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, business and commercial establishments (whether for profit
or not for profit, whether open to the public at large, or whether entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership requirement), hotels, motels,
restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets, and/or meeting facilities. Premises, or portions thereof, such as hotel rooms, used solely as a private
residence, whether permanent or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed to be a public place. This section shall not apply to children under ten (10)
years of age. Furthermore, this section shall not apply to a person appearing in a state of nudity in a modeling class operated pursuant to section 15-61 of
this code. (Ord. 1597 § 1, 5-1-2001)
18-2.1: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1384 § 1, 8-4-1987)
18-3: GAMBLING; MECHANICAL MACHINES AND DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, lessee, manager, employee, agent or servant, to conduct, manage, carry on, maintain or operate, or for
any person to engage in, operate or play, any mechanical machine, contrivance, appliance or device, in any manner contrary to applicable provisions of
the state Penal Code, section 330 et seq. (Ord. Code § 6141; Ord. 655 § 2; Ord. 1226, 1-20-1981; Ord. 1484, 1-5-1993)
18-4: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1484, 1-5-1993)
18-5: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT1:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with any operation or work of the fire department while the fire department is engaged in
extinguishing a fire. (Ord. Code § 9523)
18-6: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-6.1: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION, CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
A. Possession In Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any person within the city of Porterville to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place, or
transport any alcoholic beverage upon any public street, sidewalk, pedestrian mall, alleyway, or thoroughfare where such alcoholic beverage is in a
receptacle which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 254/636
B. Possession Of Opened Container On Parking Lot: It shall be unlawful for any person within the city of Porterville to possess any alcoholic beverage
where such alcoholic beverage is in a receptacle which has been opened, or the seal of which has been broken, or the contents of which have been
partially removed, on any parking lot within the city of Porterville associated with or under the control of any business or other premises open to the
public during the ordinary course of business of such business or premises where such parking lot has immediate access to a public street.
C. Alcoholic Beverages Within Vehicle: It shall be unlawful for the registered owner of any vehicle, or the driver, if the registered owner is not then present
in the vehicle, to keep in a motor vehicle when such motor vehicle is located in any area enumerated in subsections A and B of this section, any bottle,
can, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially
removed, unless such container is kept in the trunk of such vehicle, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or
passengers, if such vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by
the driver and passengers. This subsection shall, however, not apply to living quarters of a house car or camper.
D. Definition Of Alcoholic Beverage: The definition of "alcoholic beverage" as used herein shall include alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid
or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume, and which is fit for
beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.
E. Effect Of Provisions: Subsections A through D of this section shall not be deemed to make punishable any act or acts which are prohibited by any
statute of the state of California.
F. Severability: Should any portion of this section be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise legally invalid, such determination shall not affect the validity
of the remainder hereof, which shall remain in full force and effect.
G. Public Place; Parks Excluded: For the purposes of this section, the definition of "public place" shall not include Murry park, Veterans' park, or Zalud park
within the city limits of the city of Porterville.
H. Violation An Infraction: Any violation of this section is specifically deemed to be an infraction.
I. Permit Procedure:
1. The provisions of subsection A of this section may be waived upon the issuance of a permit issued by the chief of police.
2. Permits shall only be issued to organized groups such as service clubs, or other organized, well established groups.
3. Application shall be made through the chief of police twenty (20) days in advance of the date for which the permit is desired. The application for such
permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the chief of police. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing
of the event, the application shall contain the following information:
a. Name, address and telephone number of the person representing the organization for which the permit is requested.
b. The name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization.
c. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of the event and be responsible for enforcing the provisions of the
permit.
d. The purpose of the event for which the permit is requested.
e. The date and time when the event is to be conducted and the expected number of persons to be in attendance.
4. The chief of police may impose any reasonable restrictions or conditions to granting said permit, as well as denying said permit. Said permits are to
be granted only if the benefit to the general community in granting the permit is not outweighed by the resulting endangerment to the public health,
safety or welfare. The granting of said permit is a privilege and not a right, inasmuch as this activity is generally prohibited. (Ord. 1152 §§ A_H, 8-15-
1978; Ord. 1261, 4-20-1982; Ord. 1329 § A, 5-7-1985; Ord. 1537 § B60, 8-6-1996)
18-7: MEETINGS, ASSEMBLIES, AND PARADES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall conduct a meeting, assembly or parade in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, highways or parks of the city of Porterville, or participate
in any such meeting, assembly or parade unless and until a permit to conduct such meeting, assembly, or parade has been obtained from the chief of
police, or, as hereinafter provided, from the council of said city of Porterville. (Ord. Code § 6161.1; Ord. 927 § 1, 11-5-1968)
18-7.1: PARADES; APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Any person desirous of conducting a parade shall apply to the chief of police for a permit at least twenty (20) days in advance of the proposed parade. The
application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the chief of police. In order that adequate arrangements may be made for the
proper policing of the parade, the application shall contain the following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized head of such organization.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and will be responsible for its conduct.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 255/636
C. The purpose of the parade.
D. The date when the parade is to be conducted.
E. The hours when the parade will start and terminate.
F. The route of the parade.
G. The approximate number of persons who, and the number and kind of vehicles and animals which will constitute the parade.
H. The location of the assembly area of the parade.
I. The location of the dispersal area of the parade.
J. The plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including the times thereof.
K. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed.
L. If the dispersal area of the parade is located in another jurisdiction, the location of such dispersal area, and if a parade permit is required but has not
been issued by such other jurisdiction, an alternate route and alternate dispersal area in the city of Porterville.
M. Such other information as the chief of police may reasonably require.
If there shall be no prior application for a parade at said time and place, the chief of police shall issue a permit granting the said application, subject to the
provisions of section 18-7.3 of this article. In the event that there shall be a prior application for a parade to be held at said time, the chief of police may
deny the permit therefor. The applicant for the parade permit shall be notified in writing of the action of the chief of police in granting or denying the permit
at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the proposed parade. In the event the application is denied, the written notice of such denial shall set forth the
reasons therefor. (Ord. 927 § 1, 11-5-1968)
18-7.2: MEETING OR ASSEMBLY; APPLICATION AND PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Applications may be made by any person to hold a meeting or assembly, and the application for such meeting or assembly must be filed with the chief of
police at least four (4) days in advance of the date of the proposed meeting or assembly, specifying the time and place thereof, the name of the person or
organization desiring the permit and such other information as may be required by the chief of police in order to enable him to make adequate
arrangements, as circumstances may require, for the proper policing of the proposed meeting or assembly.
The chief of police shall forthwith issue a permit granting the said application unless a prior application for the said time and place shall have been made,
in which event another time and place may be selected, and upon the selection of said alternative time and place by the applicant, the chief of police shall
forthwith grant a permit therefor, subject to the provisions of section 18-7.3 of this article. (Ord. 927 § 1, 11-5-1968)
18-7.3: MEETING, ASSEMBLY OR PARADE CONSIDERATIONS OF POLICE CHIEF:
The said chief of police may refuse a permit for either a meeting, assembly or parade when in his judgment the conditions of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic or the effect upon stores, offices and other places of business, or upon residents or hospitals, churches, institutions reserved for the sick, schools or
educational institutions in the vicinity, all considered in relation to the safety, comfort and convenience of the public generally, shall so warrant. In making
his determination the chief of police shall confer with the city manager and is authorized to suggest or require alternative routes, locations or times for any
meeting, assembly or parade if in his judgment the provisions of this section so require. (Ord. 927 § 1, 11-5-1968)
18-7.4: PROCEDURE FOR APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS:
Upon a denial by the chief of police of an application made in pursuance of section 18-7.1 or 18-7.2 of this article, the applicant may appeal from the
determination of the chief of police within two (2) days thereafter to the city council of the city of Porterville by filing his said application with the clerk of
said city who shall set said appeal for hearing by the council at its next meeting. Upon such appeal the said council may reverse, affirm or modify in any
regard the determination of the chief of police. To carry out the judgment of said council upon appeal, the chief of police shall be directed to act in
conformity with the judgment of the council. (Ord. 927 § 1, 11-5-1968)
18-7.5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF SECTIONS 18-7 THROUGH 18-7.3:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with sections 18-7, 18-7.1, 18-7.2 and 18-7.3 of this article.
Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any provision of said sections is guilty of a misdemeanor.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 256/636
Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violating any provisions or failing to comply with said sections shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county or city jail not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 927
§ 2, 11-5-1968)
18-8: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1316, 8-21-1984)
18-8.1: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1316, 8-21-1984)
18-8.2: SALE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY FROM RESIDENTIAL PREMISES:
A. Residential Sales Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sale of personal property to the general
public by means of a "garage" sale, "patio" sale, "yard" sale, or other sale similarly conducted on any residentially zoned premises, except as permitted
in this section or authorized by chapter 21 of this code, or other law.
B. Time And Place Of Sale: Only two (2) such sales may be conducted at a particular place in any six (6) month period. No sale shall continue more than
three (3) days. Sales shall be conducted between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. only.
C. Court Sales: This section shall not apply to sales conducted pursuant to process or order of any court of competent jurisdiction.
D. Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1147 §§ 1_4, 7-
18-1978; Ord. 1820, 12-16-2014)
18-9: RADIOS, RECORD PLAYERS DISTURBING PEACE IN NEIGHBORHOOD:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to use or operate or cause to be operated or to play any radio, phonograph, jukebox, record player,
loudspeaker, musical instrument, mechanical device, machine, apparatus, or instrument for intensification or amplification of the human voice or any sound
or noise in a manner so loud as to be calculated to disturb the peace and good order of the neighborhood or sleep of ordinary persons in nearby
residences or so loud as to unreasonably disturb and interfere with the peace and comfort of the occupants of nearby residences.
The operation of any such instrument, phonograph, jukebox, machine or device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of one hundred feet
(100') from the building, structure, vehicle, or place in which, or on which it is situated or located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
(Ord. Code § 6311)
18-10: RADIOS, RECORD PLAYERS DISTURBING PEACE IN NEIGHBORHOOD; INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO RECEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate in the city any device, appliance, equipment or apparatus, the operation of which will cause interference with
radio or other wireless receiving apparatus; provided, that a person duly licensed to practice medicine, osteopathy, chiropractic or dentistry by the state
may, in the course of and when required in the practice of his profession, operate or cause to be operated under his own direct supervision any such
device, appliance, equipment or apparatus when and only when necessary for the giving of treatments or performing other necessary functions in the due
course of his profession; provided further, that all reasonable methods for the prevention of interference with radio or other wireless receiving apparatus is
attached or applied to such device, appliance, equipment, or apparatus, including the complete screening of the room in which the offending apparatus is
operated, when such screening is required in order to avoid such interference. (Ord. Code § 6321.1)
18-11: RADIOS, RECORD PLAYERS DISTURBING PEACE IN NEIGHBORHOOD; INTERFERENCE WITH RADIO RECEPTION;
NOT APPLICABLE TO STATIONS AND PUBLIC UTILITIES:
The provisions of the preceding section shall not apply to radio stations, either broadcasting, commercial or amateur, licensed by the federal government,
or which are engaged in interstate communications, nor to public utilities under the supervision of the state railway commission. (Ord. Code § 6321.2)
18-12: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-13: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-14: LOUDSPEAKERS, OUTSIDE AMPLIFIERS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 257/636
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, connect, or suffer or permit to be maintained, operated, or connected any loudspeaker or sound
amplifier in such a manner as to cause any sound to be projected outside of any building or out of doors in any part of the city, except as may be
necessary to amplify sound for the proper presentation of moving picture shows, or exhibiting for the convenient hearing of patrons within the building or
enclosure in which the show or exhibition is given, without having first procured a permit from the chief of police, which permit shall be granted at the will of
the chief of police upon application in writing therefor, but which permit, when granted, shall be revocable by the city council whenever any such
loudspeaker or sound amplifier shall by the council be deemed objectionable, and any such permit may be so revoked with or without notice, or with or
without a formal hearing, at the option of the council, and in the event of the revocation of any such permit, the same shall not be renewed, except upon
application as the first instance. (Ord. Code § 6312)
18-15: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-16: WATERWAYS; OBSTRUCTION GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful to deposit, erect or maintain in any natural watercourse, or creek or in any waterway, within the city, anything which may obstruct the
free flow of water therein. (Ord. Code § 3221.1)
18-17: WATERWAYS; OBSTRUCTIONS OF GUTTERS:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct any gutter so as to prevent the free flow of water therein. Driveways from the street to private premises shall be so
constructed as not to prevent the free flow of water in the gutters of the street. (Ord. Code § 3221.2)
18-17.1: WATERWAYS; PORTER SLOUGH DECLARED NUISANCE UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS; ABATEMENT:
At those times when the Porter Slough is not in a clean, debris free and weed free condition, said slough constitutes a menace and hazard to the persons
and property of the citizens of the city of Porterville. When said slough is not in a clean, debris free and weed free condition, the condition of said slough
constitutes a nuisance, and the city of Porterville, acting through its duly authorized representatives, is hereby authorized to abate said nuisance. (Ord.
783, 2-18-1964)
18-18: WATERWAYS; OPEN WATER DITCHES; PROHIBITED GENERALLY; PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT:
The existence, maintenance or use of any open water ditch or water ditches on any alley, street or public place within the city by any person is dangerous
to the public of the city, and an obstruction to the alleys, streets and public places on which such water ditch or ditches exist, is unlawful and a
misdemeanor and is hereby declared a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city in a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction, or by a criminal
action for a violation of this section against such person owning, using and maintaining such open water ditch or water ditches within the city. When a civil
action is brought in such case it shall be to compel such person owning, using or maintaining such open water ditch or water ditches within the city to
change the manner or mode of the use of water or the distribution thereof, by requiring such person to abolish such water ditch or water ditches upon any
street, alley or public place where the same exists, and instead thereof to require such person to pipe such water underground, on such alleys, streets or
public places within the city, or by the construction of any other suitable or reasonable conduit to be placed under the ground on such alleys, streets or
public places for the use and distribution of such water, after written notice of fifteen (15) days served upon such person to change the manner or mode of
the use of such water. (Ord. Code § 3231)
18-19: WATERWAYS; OPEN WATER DITCHES; VIOLATION OF PRECEDING SECTION:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of section 18-18 of this article or who shall after written notice by the city or its duly authorized officers
thereto fail or neglect to comply with the provisions or requirements of such section within fifteen (15) days after a written notice has been served upon him
to change the manner of the use of water or mode of distribution thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. Code § 3231.1)
18-20: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-21: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-22: DISCHARGING OF FIREARMS; EXCEPTION:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to shoot, fire or discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, firearm, deadly weapon, air gun, air rifle, air
pistol, pellet gun, pellet pistol or pellet revolver, paintball gun or marker, or any other form of deadly weapon in the city; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to any police officer in the performance of his official duties. (Ord. Code § 5313; Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996; Ord.
1561 § 1, 7-21-1998; Ord. 1609, 4-2-2002)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 258/636
18-23: ALARM SYSTEMS:
A. Purpose: The city hereby finds and determines that the regulation of alarm systems and the control of false alarms is necessary to promote the health,
welfare and safety of the people in that some users have alarm systems which either mechanically malfunction or are not operated properly by their
users, causing an increase in false alarm reports, thereby resulting in unnecessary costs and expense to the city and constituting a hazard to the safety
of police officers and the public in general.
B. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring attention and to which police are
"called upon" to respond.
CITY: The city of Porterville.
FALSE ALARM: An alarm signal, either silent or audible, necessitating response by the police department where an emergency situation for which the
alarm system was designed or used does not exist.
1. The activation of an audible alarm system for one second or less shall not be deemed a false alarm.
2. In those situations where an alarm is reported, then canceled prior to the arrival of the police department by the alarm company operator or the
person(s) responsible for the premises, shall not be considered a false alarm.
PERSON: Shall mean and include any natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, or other business entity.
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND POLICE CHIEF: The police department and police chief, respectively, of the city.
PREMISES: Any building or structure identified by a numerical or lettered address where an alarm system is installed, or group of units within one
building or structure with one alarm system.
C. Registration Of Alarm Company Operators: It shall be unlawful for any person required to be registered as an alarm company operator by the California
alarm company act to engage in the business of alarm company operator within the city without first filing copy of such state license with the police
department.
D. Registration Of Alarm Agents: It shall be unlawful for any person required to be registered as an alarm agent by the California alarm company act to act
as an alarm agent within the city without first registering his name and filing a copy of his state identification card with the police department.
E. Alarm System Regulations:
1. Automatic Deactivation: Every audible alarm system shall be equipped with a device which will automatically deactivate the alarm system not more
than thirty (30) minutes after the alarm system is activated.
2. Prohibited Sound: No alarm system shall be installed or used which emits a sound outside the premises which is similar to that of an emergency
vehicle siren or a civil defense warning system.
3. Notification: An alarm system operator shall cause the police department to be notified prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, alteration, or
installation of an alarm system which might produce a false alarm.
4. Repairs: After any false alarm caused by a malfunction of an alarm system, the person operating such system shall cause the alarm system to be
repaired to eliminate the malfunction before the reactivation of the alarm system.
5. Power Supply: Alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal utility
electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least four (4) hours of operation.
6. Prohibited Systems: No person shall have installed any system which, when activated, automatically dials the police department with a prerecorded
message of any type.
F. Confidentiality: Information as to the presence or absence or type or operation of any alarm system coming into the possession of the chief of police,
any of his subordinates, or any other city employee in the course of their official duties shall be held in strictest confidence and shall not be disclosed
other than to such public officials who might require such information in the performance of their official duties.
G. False Alarm Service Fee: Any person who maintains or has an alarm which has caused any signal, message, or alarm to be transmitted to the police
department, either by direct telephone or other direct communication, or by communication from an alarm agent, or an alarm business, or by a person
responding to an audible alarm, and which is a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm service fee to the city as established by resolution of the city council;
provided that the false alarm was the third or subsequent such alarm in the immediately preceding six (6) calendar months.
1. Late Payment Of False Alarm Service Fee: In the event a false alarm service fee is levied and such fee is not paid within thirty (30) calendar days,
an additional charge shall be applied to the fee provided under this subsection.
2. City Fees Not Related To Any Private Alarm Service Fees: False alarm service fees are levied to deter incidences of false alarms. They have no
relationship to any fees which may or may not be charged by any alarm company operators for services they may perform.
H. Forgiveness Of False Alarm Service Fee: When a person comes under the provisions of subsection G of this section due to "acts of God" or
mechanical malfunction of the alarm system and repair service was not immediately available to correct the malfunction and the alarm system has
subsequently been repaired, the chief of police may forgive the false alarm service fee upon presentation of adequate documentation of those facts
from a licensed repair organization.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 259/636
I. Nonresponse By Police Department: When any person maintains, or has an alarm system, or operates an alarm system in such a manner which causes
any signal, message, or alarm to be transmitted to the police department, either by direct telephone or other direct communication, or by
communication from an alarm agent, or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and which is a false alarm twelve (12) or
more times in any three (3) consecutive calendar months, that premises may be placed on a nonresponse list by the chief of police. Failure to pay any
false alarm service fee for a period of over thirty (30) days may result in the premises being placed on a nonresponse list by the chief of police. The
person responsible for the premises shall be notified by the chief of police via United States mail that the premises has been placed on the
nonresponse list. While a premises is listed on that nonresponse list, officers of the police department will not respond to alarm calls at the premises.
1. Removal From Nonresponse List: The chief of police shall remove any premises from the nonresponse list upon adequate documentation of proper
repairs to the alarm system or training of the persons operating the alarm system so that the high incidence of false alarms will not occur.
2. Payment Of Fees: The chief of police shall remove any premises from the nonresponse list which was placed there for nonpayment of fees upon
proof that such fees and appropriate penalty fees have been paid.
J. Limitation On Liability: The city or its police department, or any employee thereof, is under no obligation or duty to any person or premises by reason of
any provision of this section, or the exercise of any privilege by any person or premises hereunder, including, but not limited to, any delay in
transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit, or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any city officer, employee, or
agent.
K. Criminal Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment. (Ord. 1023 § A, 6-20-1972; Ord. 1291 § A, 12-20-1983; Ord. 1317, 8-7-1984; Ord. 1403 §§ A_K, 7-5-1988)
18-24: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PARKS2:
A. Regulated: It shall be unlawful for any person at Murry park, Veterans' park, Olivewood park, Noon Lion's park, North park, Zalud park or Hayes field to
possess or consume any alcoholic beverages unless the person has a valid permit and is in the immediate vicinity of the event for which the permit was
issued.
B. Permit: A permit may be obtained from the city to consume alcoholic beverages at the aforementioned city parks. The party requesting such permit shall
apply to the director of parks and leisure services for such permit, on a form specified by that department, for any person or group activity, no less than
five (5) working days prior to the requested date.
C. Sales At City Facilities: Except as provided in subsection D of this section, no person shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages at any city facilities for
consumption on such city facilities, except as provided herein:
1. Any person seeking to sell alcoholic beverages must first obtain:
a. An on-sale license issued by the California department of alcoholic beverage control, and
b. A civic event permit approved by the city council pursuant to section 15-20 of this code.
2. Sales of alcoholic beverages shall only be permitted at the following city facilities:
a. Municipal ballpark;
b. Porterville municipal airport.
D. Exceptions; Licensed And Leased Facilities: Notwithstanding subsection C of this section, nothing herein shall be construed or interpreted to impair any
contract, license or lease for the use of city facilities, whether or not such contract, license or lease expressly permits the on site sale of alcoholic
beverages now in place, or hereinafter entered into, with the city.
E. Penalty For Violation Of Section: Any person violating any provision or failing to comply with any provisions of the above subsections is guilty of an
infraction.
F. Definition: The definition of "alcoholic beverage" as used herein shall include alcohol, spirits, wine, beer, and liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits,
wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent (0.5%) or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes whether alone or
when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. (Ord. 1079 § A, 9-2-1975; Ord. 1217 §§ A_D, 10-28-1980; Ord. 1453 § A, 9-17-1991)
18-25: PARKING OR STORING OF VEHICLES ON LAWNS:
A. Purpose/Findings: The parking or storing of vehicles on residential area lawns is unsightly, poses a potential threat to ground water quality, and
constitutes a public nuisance.
B. Definitions: As used in this section:
DRIVEWAY: A passageway composed of concrete or asphalt that connects to a public street or legal right of way, controlled by the city of Porterville,
allowing vehicles to access a garage, carport, or other legal parking space.
IMPROVED AREA: A section of the lot that has been altered and defined by concrete, asphalt, or gravel, with a positive boundary, for the means of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 260/636
providing a parking space for a vehicle. The improved area must be entered via a driveway or curb cut, except where adjacent to a paved street where
there is no curb.
PARK OR STORE: The parking or storing of a vehicle for any period of time.
C. Prohibition:
1. The parking of vehicles is prohibited on any front yard setback within a residentially zoned area, except in an area defined as a "driveway" or
"improved area". This prohibition shall not apply to properties that do not have a "driveway" or "improved area" as defined in this section.
2. The parking or storing of vehicles on blocks, jacks, or stands, regardless of whether said vehicle is on a nondriveway area or a driveway or improved
area, is prohibited. To the extent said vehicles are abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or in an inoperative condition, chapter 17, article XVII, of this
code shall apply. (Ord. 1741, 7-1-2008)
18-26: NEGLECT OF REAL PROPERTY:
A. Purpose: The city hereby finds and determines that the regulation of all real property, which is neglected, is necessary to promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the people in that neglected real properties can have a detrimental effect upon surrounding property values and upon the attitude,
mentality, and productivity of the general public.
B. Definitions: For purposes of this section only, the following definitions shall apply:
NEGLECTED: The maintenance (or lack thereof) of any real property in such a manner as to cause or allow the real property to become defective,
unsightly, or in such other condition of deterioration or disrepair. This includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. Any improvement on the real property, including, but not limited to, buildings, garages, carports, or roofs or gutters when the condition of the patio,
curtilage, stucco, siding, or other exterior coating has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, weathered appearance, peeling paint, excessive
inspection, cracking, broken windows, or warping, rendering the building unsightly and in a state of disrepair.
2. Buildings or structures, which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or left in a state of partial construction or repair for an unreasonable
time; a period of ninety (90) days shall serve as the standard in determining whether an unreasonable time has elapsed.
3. Abandoned or broken equipment or machinery, visible from a public street or sidewalk, or from adjoining property unless separated by a fence at
the height otherwise required pursuant to city regulations and standards.
4. Property with excessive trash and debris, visible from a public street or sidewalk, or from adjoining property unless separated by a fence at the
height otherwise required pursuant to city regulations and standards.
5. Storage of household items customarily used inside a dwelling area including, but not limited to, appliances and furniture in any front yard setback
or driveway area.
6. Storage or placement of equipment, construction materials or machinery upon public property or public right of way except during necessary work
or repair.
7. The maintenance of real property so out of harmony or conformity with the adjacent or surrounding properties as to cause diminution of the
enjoyment, use, or value of such properties.
REAL PROPERTY: All land and accompanying structures, whether attached to the land or mobile, for commercial or residential use.
C. Failure To Properly Maintain Property: Neglect of "real property", as defined by this section, shall result in a detailed notice from the city requiring
conformity to this section within ninety (90) days. Failure to conform to the requirements of this section within ninety (90) days may result in a
declaration by council of the real property as a public nuisance and summary abatement as provided in section 1-10 of this code, civil injunction, and/or
any other remedies permitted by law. To the extent permitted by law, the city shall be entitled to recover all costs for abatement of the nuisance, any
costs incurred by the city in remedying any violation of this section, and any and all litigation and enforcement costs, including reasonable attorney fees
and costs related to any civil enforcement action. (Ord. 1682 § 1, 11-1-2005)
18-27: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
18-28: KEEPING OF BEES:
A. Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to bring, have, keep or maintain, within the city, at any time from sunrise to sunset in
any year, any swarm or swarms, colony or colonies of honeybees.
B. Public Nuisance: Any swarm or swarms, colony or colonies of honeybees so brought, had, kept or maintained within the city shall be and constitute a
public nuisance; and it is hereby made the duty of the police officers of the city to abate any such nuisance by destroying any such bees, or by
removing or causing the same to be removed from the city.
C. Exemption: Placement of bees on property that has crops dependent upon bee pollination for crop production shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section. Only the number of bees reasonably necessary to pollinate the crops located on the subject property during the time pollination is required
shall be so exempt. (Ord. 1351 §§ 1, 3, 4, 6-17-1986)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 261/636
Chapter Article II
GRAFFITI
18-31: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The city council hereby finds and determines that the writing, spraying, scratching, etching or otherwise affixing graffiti or other inscribed materials on
public or privately owned real or personal property without the consent or permission of the owner thereof is a public nuisance and obnoxious, as well
as injurious to the public health, safety and welfare, for the following reasons:
1. Such markings are often placed on said structures by gangs to indicate illicit control over certain locations or areas for purposes of criminal activity.
2. Such markings directly and indirectly encourage gang warfare, including drive-by shootings, and other acts of violence which result in injuries and
fatalities to gang members and innocent bystanders, alike.
3. Such markings are destructive to publicly and privately owned property and cause depreciation in the value of said property and depreciation in the
value of adjacent and surrounding properties as well.
4. Such markings result in blight and deterioration of property and business values in the community and lead to economic loss and the destruction of
property in general.
B. The purpose and intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, are to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and
defacement. It is the further intent of the city council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide notice to all those who disregard the property
rights of others, that the law enforcement agencies of the city will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute and hold accountable those persons
engaging in violations of this article. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-32: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
CITY: The city of Porterville.
GRAFFITI: Is defined as, but not limited to, an unauthorized inscription, word, figure, design, writing, or picture which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn,
painted, pasted or otherwise affixed upon any public property or upon any structure, wall, fence, sidewalk, sign, public utility box, or any structural
component of any building, bridge, structure or any facility in public view to any person utilizing any public street in the city, including, but not limited to, any
roadway, parkway, sidewalk, or alley, to the extent the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or despite advance authorization is
otherwise deemed by the city council to be a public nuisance.
PERSON: A domestic or foreign corporation, an association, a syndicate, a joint stock corporation, a partnership of any kind, a club, business or common
law trust, a society or an individual.
REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI: Includes the painting over of graffiti or the physical removal of graffiti by other means.
RESPONSIBLE ADULT: A parent, legal guardian, or person having legal responsibility for an unemancipated individual under the age of eighteen (18).
SALE: The transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for consideration or the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a
consideration of any property. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-33: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
A. Writings Prohibited: No person shall place graffiti or other writings upon any public or privately owned tree, rock, or structure including, but not limited to,
buildings, walls, fences, poles and signs, flood control channels, concrete, paving, etc., located within the city.
B. Allowing Graffiti To Remain On Property: No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the city shall permit or allow any graffiti to
be placed upon or remain on any structure located on such property.
C. Declaration Of Nuisance: The city council declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures
herein contained and as authorized by California Government Code section 38773 et seq.
D. Right Of City To Remove:
1. Property Owner Responsible: Property owners or persons in control of the property are required to remove or paint over graffiti within twenty four
(24) hours of the application of the graffiti. The city may, at its expense, remove or paint over graffiti twenty four (24) hours after posting notice on the
property to remove or paint over the graffiti with regard to public structures or areas, or structures or areas that are visible from major city arterials.
The city may, at its expense, remove or paint over graffiti in all other areas forty eight (48) hours after posting notice on the property to remove or
paint over the graffiti. The city shall post a consent form, as described below, along with said notice and will make reasonable efforts to notify the
owner or person in control of the property and obtain consent prior to or at the time of removal. City funds may be used to remove graffiti and other
similar inscribed material from publicly or privately owned permanent structures located on publicly or privately owned real property within the city.
2. Use Of City Funds For Removal: Within the limits set forth in this section, use of city funds as authorized in this section is limited to the following
cases:
a. Sufficient funds have been budgeted and remain unencumbered for such purpose.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 262/636
b. The city manager or the designee of the city manager approves each proposed use of city funds for such purpose.
c. The written consent of the owner of or person responsible for the affected structures, public or private, is obtained in each instance, except when
the owner or person responsible for the property refuses to consent or fails to consent pursuant to subsection D3 of this section. The consent shall
be a form approved by the city attorney and shall:
(1) Authorize entry of city employees and contractors on the affected property to accomplish the removal of the material;
(2) Assign to the city any cause or causes of action which the owner may have against any person or persons who defaced the property with
graffiti; and
(3) Hold the city, its officers, employees and contractors harmless from all liability arising out of the entry on the property or the work of removing
the material.
d. City funds shall be used only to remove the inscribed material itself and may not be used for painting or repairing of any more extensive area.
e. In any instance where the owner or person in control of the affected property ("responsible party") caused, materially contributed to, or voluntarily
consented to the inscription, or in any case where the responsible party refuses to permit the city onto the premises in order to remove the material
or fails to give consent within the time periods specified, which results in action by the city under section 18-39 of this article, the responsible party
may be held financially responsible pursuant to subsection D3 of this section.
3. Right Of Entry On Private Property; Failure To Obtain Owner/Person In Control's Consent: If a responsible party fails to remove graffiti within the time
herein specified and fails to respond to the city's notice and request for consent, the city may immediately commence abatement of the graffiti and
may recover its costs for the abatement from the person or persons responsible for applying the graffiti, and if that person or persons are minors,
from the responsible adult or adults, under authority granted by these regulations and California law which authority includes the recovery of all costs
incurred by the city in abating graffiti, including attorney fees, and recordation of a lien as to property. If the city shall have requested consent to
remove or paint over graffiti and the owner or person responsible for the property shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the city
consistent with the terms of this section, the city may proceed with nuisance abatement proceedings as against the owner pursuant to section 18-39
of this article.
E. Ease Of Removal Provisions:
1. Conditions Of Encroachment Permits: Encroachment permits issued by the city may, among other items, be conditioned on: a) the permittee
applying an antigraffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and nature which is acceptable to the city manager, or his or her
designee; b) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; c) the right of the city to immediately remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching
object or structure; d) the permittee providing the city with sufficient matching paint and/or antigraffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the
encroaching object or structure containing the graffiti.
2. Conditions On Discretionary Approvals: In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits where discretionary
approvals are permitted, or other similar land use entitlements or development or design applications, the city may impose graffiti removal
requirements or any or all of the following conditions, or other similar or related conditions:
a. Use Of Antigraffiti Material: Applicant may be required to apply an antigraffiti material and provide a landscape design of a type and nature which
is acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee, to such of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the site deemed by the city
manager, or designee, to be likely to attract graffiti ("graffiti attracting surfaces");
b. Right Of Access To Remove Graffiti: Applicant shall grant, in writing, the right of entry over and access to such parcels, upon twenty four (24)
hours' posted notice concerning public structures/areas or structures/areas visible from major city arterials, or upon forty eight (48) hours' posted
notice for all other structures/areas, by authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of removing or painting over graffiti on graffiti
attracting surfaces previously designated by the city manager, or designee. Such grant shall be made an express condition of approval and shall
be deemed to run with the land.
c. Supply City With Graffiti Removal Material: Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a specified period of years after approval,
provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or antigraffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of designated graffiti
attracting surfaces;
d. Owner To Immediately Remove Graffiti: Persons applying for subdivision maps shall, as a part of any conditions, covenants and restrictions,
covenant, which covenant shall run with the land, in a form satisfactory to the city, that the owners of the lots immediately remove any graffiti
placed on publicly viewable trees, rocks and structures thereon to the city's satisfaction. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-34: RECOVERY OF COSTS AND OBLIGATION FOR EXPENSE:
A. When the city removes graffiti pursuant to this article, the expense of abatement and related administrative costs shall be, to the fullest extent permitted
by law, an expense of the minor or other person creating, causing, or committing the graffiti, and the expense of abating the graffiti shall be a lien
against the property of the minor, responsible adult or other person and a personal obligation against the minor, responsible adult or other person.
B. Notwithstanding the terms of subsection A of this section, the responsible adult shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor who has created,
caused or committed a graffiti nuisance. As such, the city may recover the costs incurred by the city in abating the nuisance, resulting from the
defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material, by placing a lien against the property of the responsible
adult, and by making the expense a personal obligation of the responsible adult.
C. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the names and addresses of the responsible adult, if known, shall be reported by the probation officer to the
chief of police for the purpose of enforcement of this section.
D. As used in this section, the following terms have the following meanings:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 263/636
1. "Expense of abatement and related administrative costs" includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or
other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant
and his or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and
apprehending the minor or other person.
2. For the purposes of this section and the following sections, "minor" or "other person" means a minor or other person who has confessed to, admitted
to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of section 594, 594.3, 640.3, 640.6, or 640.7 of the California Penal Code, or a minor convicted by
final judgment of a violation of section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, 640.7 of the Penal Code, or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to
section 602 of the California Welfare and Institutions code by reason on the commission of an act prohibited by above sections of the Penal Code.
(Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-35: RECOVERY OF SUMMARY ABATEMENT COSTS; LIEN:
A. The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure to collect abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary abatement of any
nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor or other person of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material.
B. Notice shall be given to the minor or other person, prior to the recordation of a lien on the parcel of land owned by the minor or other person. Such
notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to California law.
C. Notice shall be given to the responsible adult prior to the recordation of a lien on the parcel of land owned by the responsible adult as described above.
D. If the minor or other person, or responsible adult, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon
the property owned by the minor or other person, or responsible adult in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten (10) days. The notice shall also be
published pursuant to Government Code section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in the county in which the property is
located.
E. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the county recorder's office in the county in which the parcel of land is located. From the date of
recording, the lien shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.
F. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the amount of the lien; the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is
imposed; the date of the abatement order; the street address, legal description, and the assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is
imposed; and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.
G. If the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in this
section shall be recorded by the city. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.
H. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien may be satisfied through foreclosure in an action brought by the city.
I. The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property
owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
J. Costs that are subject to a lien under this section include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorney fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other
inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of a defendant and his
or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the
minor or other person. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-36: RECOVERY OF COSTS; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
A. The purpose of this section is to establish, as an alternative to the procedure established in section 18-35 of this article, a procedure to collect
abatement and related administrative costs incurred in the summary abatement of any nuisance resulting from the defacement by a minor or other
person of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material by making the abatement and related administrative costs a special
assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or other person or owned by the responsible adult.
B. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same
penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.
C. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment.
D. If any real property to which the abatement and related administrative costs relate has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value,
or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes
would become delinquent, then the abatement and related administrative costs shall not result in a lien against the real property but shall instead be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
E. Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 264/636
F. Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two (2) year period finding that an owner of property or a minor or other person
is responsible for a graffiti related nuisance or crime, the court may order that person to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-
2003)
18-37: CIVIL LIABILITY:
In addition to all other remedies specified in this article, the city is entitled to bring a civil action against the minor or other person and each responsible
adult. To the fullest extent permitted by law, the minor or other person and each responsible adult shall be personally liable for any and all costs to the city,
any person or business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by the minor or other person, and for all law enforcement costs, city staff
costs, attorney fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or reimbursement. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-
2003)
18-38: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
A. Violation A Misdemeanor: Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, and by the performance of community service to the maximum extent permitted by law.
B. Charge May Be Reduced: Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this article or any section thereof as a misdemeanor, at the time an action
is commenced to enforce the provisions of this article, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, may reduce the charged
offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction.
C. Additional Penalties Available: Subsection A of this section does not preclude the availability of all additional penalties available permitted by law,
including, but not limited to, those acts of graffiti vandalism punishable as felonies under state law. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-39: NUISANCE:
A. In addition to the remedies in this article, a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city
through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner provided by law or this code for the
abatement of such nuisance. Should the city abate said nuisance in this manner, the city shall be entitled to recover such costs, including to the fullest
extent permitted by law, attorney fees and court costs, from the owner of the property upon which said nuisance exists.
B. A notice of public nuisance may be served upon the owner of the affected property, requiring such nuisance to be abated. The property owner shall
remove said nuisance within thirty (30) days of the service of the notice. The notice to the property owner will serve as notification of the location and
description of the graffiti and the property owner's obligation to remove said graffiti. The notice may be served by personal service on the owner or by
certified mail addressed to the owner's last known address, and shall additionally be posted on the property.
C. In the event the owner fails to abate the nuisance, the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to enter upon the premises for such purposes.
The city may direct the removal of graffiti from the property with the cost of work performed billed to the property owner who may select the option of
direct payment of such costs. If the owner fails to make direct payment, the abatement costs may be made a lien or treated as a special assessment as
described in this article.
D. A property owner shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of mailing by the city of the bill for the cost of removal of graffiti from the owner's property in
which to appeal any charge or assessment for graffiti removal. Said appeal must be submitted in writing to the city clerk. Upon receipt of the written
appeal, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the city council. The city manager or his or her designee shall submit a written report to the city
council, with a copy to the appealing party, setting forth justifications for the description of the work done and the cost thereof. The city clerk shall notify
the party appealing of the date and time of the hearing at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing.
At the time and place of such hearing, the city manager or his or her designee shall present the report and the appealing party shall present all
information in opposition to the calculation of the removal. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall determine what cost, if any, is to be
imposed upon the appealing party. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-40: SALE OF AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINERS OR WIDE TIPPED MARKER PENS TO MINORS:
It is unlawful for any person or firm to sell or furnish to any minor, and for any minor to purchase, any aerosol or pressurized container of paint and/or any
wide tipped marker pens exceeding four millimeters (4 mm) in width, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water when dry,
capable of defacing property. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-41: POSSESSION BY MINORS:
It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is in a public place or on private property, without the consent of the owner,
tenant or operator thereon, and who is not accompanied by a responsible adult, to possess: a) an aerosol or pressurized container of paint, or b) wide
tipped marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters (4 mm) in width which contain solutions other than that which can be removed with water when dry.
Such violation shall constitute an infraction. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-42: RESTITUTION AND COMMUNITY SERVICE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 265/636
Any minor or other person found guilty or pleading nolo contendere to a violation or violations described in subsection 18-34D2 of this article shall pay
restitution to the property owner, in addition to authorized penalties. If the violator is a minor, the responsible adult shall be responsible for payment of
restitution. In lieu, in whole or in part, of requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions
Code section 602, a violation of this article will result in said minor being ordered to perform community service with the following requirements: a) the
minor shall perform not less than twenty four (24) hours; b) at least one of the custodial parents, or if none, the responsible adults, shall be in attendance
for the maximum amount of time allowed by law for the assigned community service; and c) the entire period of community service shall be performed
under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the Tulare County probation department. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-43: ALTERNATIVES:
Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under
applicable California Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. The city shall be entitled to utilize any and all
remedies permitted by law with regard to the violations specified in this article. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-44: EVIDENTIARY USE:
In the event it is necessary pursuant to notice from the proper legal authorities for sufficient evidence of graffiti to be preserved prior to its removal, the city
shall make every effort to have its evidentiary use expedited in order to permit abatement of the graffiti as quickly as possible. For the time period that any
portion of the graffiti will be required by the proper legal authorities to remain on the property for this purpose, the property owner shall not be held
responsible for maintaining a public nuisance. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
18-45: SEVERABILITY:
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article form an interrelated
program for dealing with the problem of graffiti and vandalism within the city, but that such subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases are
distinct and severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses and phrases are declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by
any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs,
clauses or phrases of this article. (Ord. 1638 § 1, 8-19-2003)
Chapter Article III
SALE AND USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
18-46: LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE:
The city of Porterville has determined that in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of those citizens within the city and metropolitan area under the
age of eighteen (18) years, it is necessary to regulate the sale, acquisition, or possession of tobacco products facilitated by self-service displays. (Ord.
1656 § 1, 7-20-2004)
18-47: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, those terms identified in this section shall, unless the context indicates otherwise, be ascribed the meaning contained herein.
EMPLOYEE: Any person in the service of another under any contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written, where the employer has the power or right
to control and direct the employee in the material details of how the work is to be performed. "Employee" also includes any person volunteering his or her
time or service.
MINOR: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, chewing tobacco, or any other form of tobacco which may be
utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling, snuffing, or other manner of ingestion or absorption in the human body.
TOBACCO SHOP: A business establishment in which fifty percent (50%) or more of any one or more of the following is devoted to or attributable to the
sale of tobacco products:
A. Wall space or any other display area such as tables, racks, or display structures; or
B. Gross revenues.
WHOLESALE RETAILER: Any large scale retail establishment with supporting goods and services designated to service a regional service trade area.
(Ord. 1656 § 1, 7-20-2004)
18-48: USE OF TOBACCO BY MINOR:
No minor shall, in the streets or in any public place, smoke a cigar, pipe, cigarette, or shall use tobacco in any form. (Ord. 1656 § 1, 7-20-2004)
18-49: DISPLAY OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 266/636
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, business, partnership, or other entity doing business within the city of Porterville to store, stock, keep,
or display for sale or transfer any tobacco product in any area other than a place that is locked and secured, or is otherwise made inaccessible to the
public and which is accessible only to the employees of the business. This prohibition shall not apply to "tobacco shops" or "wholesale retailers". (Ord.
1656 § 1, 7-20-2004)
Chapter Article IV
AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION
18-50: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
A. The city council finds that the increase in aggressive solicitation throughout the city has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and
businesses, and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear, intimidation
and disorder.
B. The city council also finds that solicitation at major intersections in the city and near freeway on and off ramps poses a dangerous condition for the
solicitor and motorists in the area.
C. Aggressive solicitation usually includes approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane
language to cause fear and intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The city council
further finds that the presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks, automated teller machines, or in public transportation
vehicles is especially troublesome because of the enhanced fear of crime in those confined environments. Motorists also find themselves confronted by
persons seeking money who, without permission, wash their automobile windows at traffic intersections, despite explicit instructions by drivers not to do
so. People driving or parking on city streets frequently find themselves faced with persons seeking money by offering to open car doors or locate
parking spaces. Such activities carry with them an implicit threat to both persons and property.
D. The city council is enacting this article pursuant to its police power, as stated in article XI, section 7 of the California constitution, in addition to the power
set forth in section 647(c) of the state of California Penal Code. This law is timely and appropriate because current laws and city regulations are
insufficient to address the aforementioned problems.
E. The law is not intended to limit any persons from exercising their constitutional right to solicit funds, picket, protest or engage in other constitutionally
protected activity. Rather, its goal is to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation that have become an
unwelcome and overwhelming presence in the city. (Ord. 1706 § 2, 10-3-2006)
18-51: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER: Means and includes:
A. Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the solicitation without the person's consent;
B. Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: 1) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the
commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being
solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation;
C. Continuing to solicit within the immediate area of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative response, if continuing the
solicitation is: 1) intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property
in the person's possession; or 2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation;
D. Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take
evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket
or legally protest, and acts authorized by a permit issued pursuant to city regulations, shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
E. Intentionally or recklessly using obscene or abusive language or gestures: 1) intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent
bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 2) words intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate
the person into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; or
F. Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that: 1) is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or
the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 2) is intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being
solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE: A device, linked to a financial institution's account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including, but not
limited to: account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, and mortgage and loan payments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY: The area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made
available to banking customers during and after regular banking hours.
BANK: Any banking corporation, savings and loan association, or credit union chartered under the laws of this state or the United States.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS: Any person duly permitted by the superintendent of banks to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts or money
orders for consideration pursuant to the provisions of the banking laws.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 267/636
PUBLIC AREA: An area to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, alleys, bridges, buildings,
driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, and the doorways and entrances to buildings and
dwellings, and the grounds enclosing them.
SOLICIT: For the purposes of this article only, means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless
of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed
word, or by other means of communication. (Ord. 1706 § 2, 10-3-2006)
18-52: PROHIBITED ACTS:
It is unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value, or to solicit the sale of goods or services:
A. In an aggressive manner in a public area.
B. In any public transportation vehicle, or bus station or stop.
C. Within fifteen feet (15') to any entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing businesses or within fifteen feet (15') of any automated teller machine
during the hours of operation of such bank, automated teller machine or check cashing business without the consent of the owner or other person
legally in possession of such facilities. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be
measured from the entrance or exit to the automated teller machine facility.
D. On private property, if the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating
that solicitations are not welcome on the property.
E. From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street, including, but not limited to, major intersections in the city and near freeway on
and off ramps, whether in exchange for cleaning the vehicle's windows, or for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space, or directing the
occupant to a public parking space; this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the
operator or passengers of such vehicle. (Ord. 1706 § 2, 10-3-2006)
18-53: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates section 18-52 of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with California Penal Code
section 19. Upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, the court may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction, as set forth
under section 1-9 of this code. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from pursuing criminal, civil, administrative, or any other legal remedy to address
violations of this article. (Ord. 1706 § 2, 10-3-2006)
18-54: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this article or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional
or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this
article or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in
this article or any part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be
declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1706 § 2, 10-3-2006)
Chapter Article V
PROXIMITY OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS TO CHILDREN'S FACILITIES
(Rep. by Ord. 1815, 7-1-2014)
Chapter Article VI
USE OF SKATEBOARDS
18-61: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of this article is to promote the public peace, morals, safety, and general welfare of persons in the city
by regulating the activity of skateboarding on certain public property and on certain private property which is accessible to the general public. (Ord. 1661
§ 2, 3-1-2005)
18-62: DEFINITION:
"Skateboard" means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, upon which a person may place
one or more feet, and which is designed to be, or can be propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code.
The term skateboard also includes motorized skateboards. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 268/636
18-63: SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED; PUBLIC PROPERTY:
A. The use of skateboards is prohibited on any sidewalk, walkway, crosswalk or other area designed primarily for pedestrian travel in the area bounded by
Morton and Olive and Second and D Streets.
B. The city council may, by resolution, prohibit the riding of skateboards, as defined in section 18-62 of this article, on public streets, sidewalks, parking
lots, and other public property over which it has jurisdiction when it is determined to be necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
pedestrians, motorists, or persons operating said skateboards on said streets and sidewalks. The riding of skateboards shall be prohibited upon any
public property when such property is posted pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-64: SKATEBOARDING PROHIBITED; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
No person shall skateboard on any privately owned property which is posted with "No Skateboarding" signs as required by this article, without the express
consent of the property owner or property manager/agent. Private property owners and/or their managers or agents are authorized to post or erect signs,
at their own expense, prohibiting the riding of skateboards in or on those premises for which such a request has been made to, and approved by, the chief
of police or his or her designee. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-65: POSTING OF NO SKATEBOARDING SIGNS:
A. The city manager, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to post or erect, or cause to be posted or erected, signs prohibiting skateboarding or the
use of skateboards on public streets, sidewalks, or facilities so designated by resolution of the city council.
B. A property owner shall post or erect, or cause to be posted or erected, at the property owner's sole cost and expense, signs that are readily visible to
the general public. Authorized signs shall be a minimum of seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22"), with one inch (1") letters, posted
adjacent to the entrances to the subject property. These signs may be erected in such a position to prevent vandalism or theft. The property owner, or
manager, shall have on file with the police department a signed consent form authorizing the police to enforce said ordinance. Example sign:
Skateboards Prohibited on Posted Property by CPMC Section 18-65, Porterville Police Department 782-7400
(Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-66: SKATEBOARDING; NUISANCE:
No person shall use a skateboard in a manner that creates a danger to others or in a manner that creates a nuisance. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-67: EXCEPTION; STATE LAW:
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to make punishable an act or acts which are prohibited by any statute of the state of California. (Ord.
1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-68: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. A person over the age of eighteen (18) who violates subsection 18-63A of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be an infraction, and punishable as such, notwithstanding the fact that at the discretion
of the city or district attorney, the violation of any section of this article may be filed as a misdemeanor. The complaint charging such violation shall
specify whether the violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Each day a violation of any provision of this article shall continue, it shall constitute a
new and separate violation.
C. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through a civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. With regard to violations
committed by minors, the parent or legal guardian having control or custody of the minor whose conduct violates this section shall be jointly and
severally liable with the minor for all penalties and/or costs and fees. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-69: CONFISCATION OF SKATEBOARDS; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
Notwithstanding the police department's ability to confiscate a skateboard as an instrumentality or evidence of a violation of this article, and in addition to
the enforcement provisions of the preceding section, the city may seize and hold the skateboard at the time an individual is cited for any violation of any
provisions of this article for the second time within a one year period1. Any time a violator's property is confiscated pursuant to this section, the city shall
provide the violator with a receipt and notice of a time and location for an automatic hearing in front of the city's designated administrative hearing officer
no later than ten (10) days from confiscation of the skateboard. The violator shall be entitled to the return of the skateboard either one hundred eighty
(180) days from the date of the confiscation, or at the time as determined at the conclusion of the hearing. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
18-70: SEVERABILITY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 269/636
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are distinct and
severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses and/or phrases are declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs,
clauses, or phrases of this article. (Ord. 1661 § 2, 3-1-2005)
Chapter Article VII
SQUATTER CAMPS
18-76: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to assist code/law enforcement in minimizing the impact that squatter camps have on the city's quality of life. Squatter camps
are unsightly, accumulating over time on public and private property causing blight and similar conditions resulting in depreciation of property values and
deterioration of the city's neighborhoods. Such encampments are also detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare, and constitute a public
nuisance and, hence, the city herewith provides a means by which they can be eliminated. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-77: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise stated herein, whenever used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
HEALTH OFFICER: The health officer of the city, as appointed by the city manager, and the health officer's duly authorized representatives and deputies.
SQUATTER: One who settles or locates on land enclosed or unenclosed with no bona fide claim or color of title or without the express consent of the
owner or person legally in charge of the land.
SQUATTER CAMP: An area of land, public or private, upon which any person has settled or located, or which he/she occupies, without having a bona fide
claim or color of title thereto, or without the express consent of the owner or person legally in charge thereof or the agent of the same, and which is
occupied or inhabited in violation of section 103 of the California building code or chapter 10 of the uniform housing code as adopted by the city of Tulare.
It includes any tent camp space, house court and every other kind of camp, tent, shelter, structure, or collection of tents, shelters, or structures of any kind
established, constructed, maintained, or operated thereon. It also includes the inhabiting of any vacant structure without permission of the property owner,
or the inhabiting of any structure deemed substandard and/or unsuitable for habitation by city building officials. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-78: UNLAWFUL OCCUPANCY:
No person shall settle or locate on or occupy any land without a bona fide claim or color of title thereto, or without the express consent of the owner or
person legally in charge of said land, or erect or construct any tent, shelter, or structure of any kind thereon. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-79: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or the city health officer to enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-80: NUISANCE:
Every "squatter camp" as defined in this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city in the manner provided in this
article. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-81: PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The health officer and the chief of police are hereby authorized to abate such a nuisance as follows:
A. Service Of Notice: Notice must be served upon the owner or person in charge of the property upon which said squatter camp is located. Such notice
shall be in writing, signed by the health officer or chief of police, and served upon the owner or the person in charge of the property upon which said
squatter camp is located according to the provisions of section 1162 of the Code of Civil Procedure of California. Such notice shall require that said
squatter camp be completely abandoned, abated, closed and vacated and demolished within three (3) days from the date of service of notice upon the
owner or operator or person in charge thereof. Failure or refusal on the part of any such owner or person in charge of such squatter camp to abate,
vacate, and close it in compliance with such written notice shall constitute a violation of this article. Where public property is involved, the notice shall
be served upon the squatter(s).
B. Posting Of Notice: Upon the failure or refusal on the part of the owner or person in charge of the land, upon which the squatter camp is located, to
comply with the notice, the health officer or chief of police may post notices notifying all squatters that said squatter camp is condemned as a public
nuisance and that all persons shall, within three (3) days, vacate the premises upon which such squatter camp space is located. Any person who shall
thereafter enter in or upon or make any use of such squatter camp shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
C. Notice Of Condemnation; Removal Of Belongings: If the health officer or chief of police is unable to ascertain or find the owner of the land upon which
any such squatter camp is located, or where no person is in charge of the same, the health officer or chief of police may notify all squatters within such
squatter camp, in writing, that the same has been condemned and to remove all personal belongings therefrom within three (3) days. In addition, the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 270/636
health officer or chief of police shall post a written notice in a conspicuous place, within said squatter camp, notifying all squatters to remove all
personal belongings and vacate said squatter camp within three (3) days, after which the city may remove all remaining personal belongings and shall
hold such for ten (10) days. The city may discard all items not claimed within the ten (10) day holding period.
D. Failure To Comply A Violation: Failure or refusal of any person to comply with any notice provided according to this article shall be a violation of this
article. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-82: PENALTY:
Every "squatter camp", as defined by this article, is hereby declared a public nuisance, and as such may be abated in the manner provided for in this
article. Furthermore, all violations of this article shall be considered misdemeanors, punishable according to section 1-9 of this code. Upon the
recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, the court may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction, punishable under California
Penal Code section 19.8. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
18-83: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and,
to this end, the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1719 § 1, 4-17-2007)
Chapter Article VIII
RESERVED
(Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
Chapter Article IX
NOISE
18-90.1: PURPOSE:
A. The city council declares and finds that excessive noise levels are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and contrary to the public interest
as follows:
1. By interfering with sleep, communication, relaxation and the full use of one's property; and
2. By contributing to hearing impairment and a wide range of adverse physiological and psychological stress conditions; and
3. By adversely affecting the value of real property.
B. It is the intent of this article to protect persons from excessive levels of noise within or near a residence, school, church, hospital or public library and to
warn persons of the hazards of excessive noise in places of public entertainment. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this article shall have the following meanings:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL: The sound level in decibels as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighted network (scale) at slow meter
response. The unit of measurement is referred to herein as dBA.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL: The composite of noise from all sources excluding the alleged offensive noise. In this context it represents the normal or
existing level of environmental noise at a given location for a specific time of the day or night.
CONSTRUCTION: Construction, enlargement, alteration, conversion or movement of any building, structures or land together with any scientific surveys
associated therewith.
CUMULATIVE PERIOD: An additive period of time composed of individual time segments, which may be continuous or interrupted.
DECIBEL: A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals (20 micronewtons per square meter).
EMERGENCY WORK: The use of any machinery, equipment, vehicle, manpower or other activity in a short term effort to protect, or restore safe
conditions in the community, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 271/636
FIXED NOISE SOURCE: A device, machine or combination thereof which creates sounds while fixed or stationary, including, but not limited to, residential,
agricultural, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment.
HOSPITAL: Any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured or infirm persons including rest homes and
nursing homes.
IMPULSIVE NOISE: A noise of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay.
INTRUDING NOISE LEVEL: The sound level created, caused, maintained or originating from an alleged offensive source, measured in decibels, at a
specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation.
Leq: The equivalent sound level. The sound level containing the same total energy as a time varying signal over a given sample period. For purposes of
this article, the Leq is measured over a one hour sample period.
MOBILE NOISE SOURCE: Any source other than a fixed noise source.
NOISE DISTURBANCE: Any sound which violates the quantitative standards set forth in this article.
PURE TONE NOISE: Any noise which is distinctly audible as a single pitch (frequency) or set of pitches. For the purposes of this article, a pure tone shall
exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two (2)
contiguous one-third octave bands by 5 dB for center frequencies of 500 Hz and above and by 8 dB for center frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and
by 15 dB for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY: A parcel of real property which is developed and used either in whole or in part for residential purposes.
SCHOOL: Public or private institutions conducting regular academic instruction at preschool, kindergarten, elementary, secondary or collegiate levels.
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. Sound amplifying
equipment shall not include standard automobile radios or tape players when heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is
installed. Sound amplifying equipment as used in this article shall not include warning devices in authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning
devices in any vehicle, which are used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument meeting American National Standard Institute (ANSI) standard S1.4-1971 for type 1 or type 2 sound level meters
or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment, which will provide equivalent data.
SOUND TRUCK: Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon any sound
amplifying equipment. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.3: NOISE STANDARDS; GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Standards: The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of section 18-90.4 or 18-90.5 of this article exists shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
1. The volume of the noises.
2. The intensity of the noises.
3. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
4. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
5. The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.
6. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
7. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
8. The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.
9. The time of day or night the noise occurs.
10. The duration of the noise.
11. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
12. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.
B. Public Nuisance: It is unlawful for any person to make, continue, allow, or cause to be made or emanate any excessively, unnecessarily, unnaturally, or
unusually loud noise or sound from any radio, compact disc player, stereo, television or other mechanical, electrical, or electronic sound amplification
device or instrument which annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, quiet, health, peace, or safety of other persons in the city; such
acts are hereby being declared a public nuisance. In interpreting and applying this section, the following shall apply:
1. Emanating Noise Or Sound: Emanating noise or sound shall be defined for these purposes as it is described in subsections 18-90.4 and/or 18-90.5
of this article.
2. Prima Facie Evidence: Prima facie evidence exists when such noise or sound annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, quiet,
health, peace, business, or safety of other persons and is shown by proof of noncompliance with subsection A of this section, or by a complaint by a
person or persons regarding such noise or sound. A complainant must have standing to file a complaint.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 272/636
3. Measuring Of Distance: The distance from the source of such noise or sound shall be measured from the actual source itself, or where the source is
located on private property not adjacent to residential property, in which case the distance shall be measured from the property line.
4. Alternative Prima Facie Evidence: Alternative prima facie evidence that such noise or sound is excessively, unnecessarily, unnaturally, or unusually
loud is shown by a sound level exceeding the ambient sound level by more than five (5) decibels measured at the property line, or in the case of
common wall construction such as condominiums, apartments, or business facilities, measured within the adjoining occupied units.
5. Exemptions: Nothing in this section prohibits or declares unlawful or a nuisance:
a. The operation of warning or amplification devices by emergency, fire, or law enforcement vehicles or personnel;
b. Lawful use of vehicle horns or backup warning devices;
c. Private or public warning equipment or systems;
d. The conduct of previously authorized and otherwise lawful public activity such as parades, speeches, lectures, ceremonies, entertainment, sports,
music, or recreation events;
e. The usual and customary operations of bells, gongs, buzzers, or similar mechanical, electrical or electronic sound amplification devices to mark
time or call to attendance for an otherwise lawful use or purpose, except within public rights of way pursuant to section 20-6 of this code.
6. Sound Amplification Devices (Refer To Advertising And Signs Code, Section 3-15 Of This Code): The use of sound trucks or any other vehicle in the
city with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall comply with the provisions of section 3-15 of this code.
C. Public Park/City Facilities:
1. Sound or noise produced by amplification equipment used at all city parks and other city facilities shall not exceed seventy five (75) dBA when
measured at a distance of one hundred feet (100') from the sound source or the closest residential property line, whichever is closest to the noise
source.
2. It should be the event sponsor's responsibility to ensure that sound levels are below the specified noise level standard. The sponsor shall provide a
sound level meter to accomplish this task.
3. Failure of the event sponsor to enforce the sound limits may result in any or all of the following:
a. The forced curtailment of activities as ordered by the police department.
b. Citation issued by the police department under the city's nuisance abatement ordinance.
c. Forfeiture of deposits placed with city by the sponsor for use of the facility.
D. Noise Measurement: Any noise measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be made with a sound level meter using the "A"
weighted network (scale) at slow meter response. Fast meter response shall be used for impulsive type sounds. Calibration of the measurement
equipment utilizing an acoustical calibrator certified by its manufacturer to be in compliance with National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
reference calibration levels shall be performed immediately prior to recording noise level data.
E. Exterior Noise Levels: Exterior noise levels shall be measured from the nearest residential, school, hospital, church or public library property line to the
noise source. Where practical, the noise testing microphone shall be positioned three (3) to five feet (5') above the ground and away from reflective
surfaces.
F. Interior Noise Levels: Interior noise levels shall be measured within the affected dwelling unit, at points at least four feet (4') from the wall, ceiling or floor
nearest the noise source, with windows in the normal seasonal configuration. Reported interior noise levels shall be determined by taking the arithmetic
average of the readings taken at the various microphone locations. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.4: EXTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS:
A. It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated areas of the city to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise, on
property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the exterior noise level when measured at any affected
residence, school, hospital, church or public library to exceed the noise level standards as set forth in the following table:
EXTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS, dBA
Category
Daytime
7:00 A.M. To 10:00 P.M.
Nighttime
10:00 P.M. To 7:00 A.M.
Hourly Leq 50 45
Maximum sound level (LMAX) 70 65
B. In the event the measured ambient noise level without the alleged offensive source in operation exceeds the applicable noise level standard in either
category above, the applicable standard or standards shall be adjusted so as to equal the ambient noise level.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 273/636
C. Each of the noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five (5) dB for pure tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music,
or for recurring impulsive noises.
D. If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level without
the source can be measured, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the noise level standards. (Ord.
1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.5: RESIDENTIAL INTERIOR NOISE STANDARDS:
A. It is unlawful for any person at any location within the incorporated areas of the city, to operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit or on
property occupied by a nonresidential use, any source of sound or to allow the creation of any noise which causes the noise level when measured
inside another dwelling unit to exceed the noise level standards as set forth in the following table:
INTERIOR NOISE LEVEL STANDARDS, dBA
Category
Daytime
7:00 A.M. To 10:00 P.M.
Nighttime
10:00 P.M. To 7:00 A.M.
Maximum sound level (LMAX) 55 45
B. The noise level standards specified above shall be reduced by five (5) dB for pure tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for
recurring impulsive noises.
C. If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably be discontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the ambient noise level without
the source can be measured, the noise level measured while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to the noise level standards. (Ord.
1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.6: NOISE SOURCE EXEMPTIONS:
The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this article:
A. Noises from safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves.
B. Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
C. Noises resulting from emergency work, including repair of public utilities.
D. Activities conducted in public parks, public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to, school athletic and school
entertainment events, except as otherwise noted in this article.
E. Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to, or connected with emergency activities or emergency work.
F. Noise sources associated with construction, whether private or public, within five hundred feet (500') of the uses mentioned in subsection 18-90.4A of
this article, provided such activities do not take place before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any day except Saturday or
Sunday, or before seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on Saturday or Sunday.
G. Noise sources associated with the maintenance of residential property provided such activities take place between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on any day except Saturday or Sunday, or between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. on
Saturday or Sunday.
H. Noise sources associated with a lawful commercial or industrial property caused by mechanical devices or equipment, including air conditioning or
refrigeration systems, installed prior to the effective date of this chapter; provided that this exemption shall expire twelve (12) months after the effective
date of this chapter.
I. Noise sources associated with the collection of waste or garbage.
J. Noise sources associated with seasonal agricultural packing operations provided that noise levels produced by such operations do not exceed the
exterior noise level standards set forth in section 18-90.3 of this article when measured as provided in section 18-90.4 of this article for a cumulative
period of more than ninety (90) days out of the year.
K. Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 274/636
18-90.7: RESIDENTIAL AIR CONDITIONING AND REFRIGERATION SYSTEMS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-90.3 of this article where the intruding noise source when measured as provided in section 18-90.4 of this
article is an existing residential air conditioning or refrigeration system or associated equipment, the exterior noise level shall not exceed fifty five (55) dBA.
For residential air conditioning or refrigeration systems or associated equipment installed after the effective date of this chapter, the exterior noise level
when measured as provided in section 18-90.4 of this article shall not exceed fifty (50) dBA. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.8: WASTE AND GARBAGE COLLECTION EQUIPMENT:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-90.3 of this article, the collection of waste or garbage from residential property by persons authorized to
engage in such activity, and who are operating truck mounted loading or compacting equipment, shall not take place before six o'clock (6:00) A.M. or after
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. The noise level created by such activities when measured at a distance of fifty feet (50') in an open area shall not exceed the
following standards:
A. Eighty five (85) dBA for equipment in use, purchased or leased prior to the effective date of this chapter;
B. Eighty (80) dBA for new equipment purchased or leased after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.9: ELECTRICAL SUBSTATIONS:
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 18-90.3 of this article, noise sources associated with the operation of electrical substations shall not exceed fifty
(50) dBA when measured as provided in section 18-90.4 of this article. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.10: WARNING SIGNS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing vehicle, or other source
of sound for public entertainment within a building or structure wherein the noise level exceeds ninety five (95) dBA as determined by using the slow
response of a sound level meter at any point normally occupied by a customer, without a conspicuous and legible sign stating:
WARNING! SOUND LEVELS WITHIN MAY CAUSE HEARING IMPAIRMENT.
(Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.11: PERMIT FOR RELIEF:
Applications for a permit for relief from the noise level designated in this chapter on the basis of undue hardship and special events may be made to the
city manager or his duly authorized representative for recommendation to the city council. Any permit granted by the city council under this section shall
contain all conditions upon which the permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the permit shall be effective. The city council may
grant the relief as applied for if the council finds:
A. That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify his/her activity or operation to comply with this chapter; or
B. The activity, operation, or noise source will be of temporary duration. The noise source cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this chapter;
and
C. That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
The city council may prescribe any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or surrounding
neighborhood. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
18-90.12: VIOLATIONS:
A. Penalty: Each violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six
(6) months, or by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both. Upon recommendation of the prosecuting attorney, the court may
reduce the charged offense from misdemeanor to an infraction, punishable under section 1-9 of this code.
B. Prosecution: Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor violations of this code; provided, however, that in
the event of violation, a written notice of intention to prosecute will be given to the alleged violator not less than five (5) calendar days prior to the
issuance of a misdemeanor complaint. No complaint shall be issued in the event the cause of violation is removed, the condition abated or fully
corrected within the five (5) day period. In the event the alleged violator cannot be located in order to serve the notice of intention to prosecute, the
notice as required in this section shall be deemed to be given upon mailing the notice by registered or certified mail to the alleged violator at his/her last
known address or at the place where the violation occurred, in which event the five (5) day period shall commence at the date of the day following the
mailing of the notice. (Ord. 1757, 8-18-2009)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 275/636
Chapter Article X
SHOPPING CARTS
18-100: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
The City Council finds that abandoned shopping carts on public and private property create conditions that are unsightly, interfere with pedestrian and
vehicular traffic, accumulate over time on public and private property, promote blight, resulting in reduction of property values and deterioration of
neighborhoods, are detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, and constitute a public nuisance. This article is intended to ensure that measures
are taken to prevent the removal of the shopping carts from the owner's premises and facilitate the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts in a manner
consistent with State law. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-101: DEFINITIONS:
ABANDONED CART: Shall mean any cart that has been removed, without the written consent of the owner, from the owner's business premises or
parking area of the retail establishment on which the cart owner's business premises are located, is located on either public or private property, and is no
longer in the possession or under the physical control of the person who removed the cart. A cart abandoned by a person, other than the owner, shall not
constitute a relinquishment of ownership of the cart by the owner.
BUSINESS PREMISES: Means the interior of a cart owner's commercial establishment, adjacent walkways, any loading area, and parking areas, as
defined herein. The owner's business premises may include a multi-store shopping center with shared areas of parking and public access. The entire area
owned, rented, leased or utilized by a business establishment that provides shopping carts for customer use, including parking areas.
CART: A basket or platform which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a business establishment by a customer for the purpose of
transporting goods of any kind or used in a coin-operated laundry or dry-cleaning retail establishment by a customer or an attendant for the purpose of
transporting fabrics and the supplies necessary to process them. This includes, but is not limited to, laundry, grocery or shopping carts.
CART IDENTIFICATION SIGN: Means a sign or engraved surface which is permanently affixed to a shopping cart containing all of the information
specified in section 22435.1 of the California Business and Professions Code.
CART OWNER: Means the owner or operator of a commercial establishment which provides carts for use by its customers for the purpose of transporting
goods of any kind. Any person, business establishment or entity that owns, possesses or has the power to make a shopping cart available to customers.
For the purpose of this article, owner includes, but is not limited to, the store owner, manager, on-site manager, on-duty manager or other designated
agent of a business establishment providing shopping carts for customer use.
CART REMOVAL WARNING: Means a placard, sign or painted text which meets the requirements specified in section 18-106 of this article.
CART RETRIEVAL SERVICE: Means a third party commercial service in the business of retrieving and returning shopping carts.
DIRECTOR: The City Manager or his or her designee.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Means any officer or employee of the City designated with the authority to enforce the applicable provisions of this Code.
INDIVIDUAL CART IDENTIFICATION NUMBER: Means a number unique to each cart owned or provided by a cart owner.
ON-SITE CART CONTAINMENT PROGRAM: Means one or more of the following measures:
A. Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise
preventing the movement of the carts.
B. An on-site security guard to deter customers who attempt to remove carts from the business premises.
C. Bollards and chains around the business premises to prevent cart removal, if permitted by the applicable zoning and the site plan, and if approved
by the Fire Marshal.
D. Obtaining a security deposit from customers for the on-site use of shopping carts.
E. The rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or permanently used for the transport of goods.
F. Any other measure approved by Community Development as a means to contain carts on the premises.
PARKING AREA: Means a parking lot or other property provided by a commercial establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other
vehicle. In a multi-store complex or shopping center, "parking area" includes the entire parking area used by or controlled by the complex or center.
PERSON: Any person, corporation, partnership, association, joint-stock company, limited liability company, limited liability partnership and other entity
capable of being sued.
PHYSICAL CONTAINMENT SYSTEM: Means one of the following, as approved by the Director of Community Development:
A. Disabling devices on all shopping carts which prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels or otherwise
preventing the movement of the carts.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 276/636
B. Any other system of equipment approved by the Community Development Director or designee which physically contains shopping carts on the
premises.
SHOPPING CART OR CART: Means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device provided by the operator of a commercial establishment for
the use of customers for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. A cart sold by a commercial establishment to a retail customer for that customer's
personal use is not a shopping cart for the purposes of this article.
SHOPPING CART OR LAUNDRY CART RETRIEVAL BUSINESS: To search for, gather and restore possession to the owner, or an agent thereof, for
compensation or in expectation of compensation, of shopping carts or laundry carts located outside the premises or parking area of a retail establishment.
STREET: Any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, park, parking lot, parking area and
place used by the general public. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-102: ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY AND REMEDIES:
A. This article shall be administered and enforced by the Director with the assistance of the Police Chief, Fire Chief and their designated agents and Code
Enforcement Officers. The Director is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate and implement rules, regulations and procedures necessary or
appropriate for the enforcement of this article. The Director, Police Chief, Fire Chief and their designated agents and Code Enforcement Officers are
authorized as follows:
1. To enter upon and inspect any public and private property or premises to ascertain whether the provisions of this article or applicable State laws are
being obeyed. As used herein, public property includes the outdoor common area of any building, business premises, apartment building or complex
or other premises or portion thereof which is adjacent to public property, open to the public and which contains a shopping cart or shopping carts
visible at street or ground level from the adjacent public property. All inspections, entries and examinations shall be done in a reasonable manner. If
an owner, tenant, occupant or agent or other responsible party refuses to grant the City permission to enter or inspect, the City may seek an
inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure. Nothing contained in this section shall be
deemed a limitation upon the Director to enter private property pursuant to permission from the owner or occupant thereof or pursuant to a duly
issued inspection warrant or other court order;
2. To examine a shopping cart or parts thereof, or to obtain information as to the identity of the owner of any shopping cart, or to retrieve shopping carts
in accordance with the provisions of this article;
3. To determine whether a violation of this article exists and to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this article and
applicable State laws; and
4. To issue administrative citations and to impose civil penalties for any violation of this article.
B. The Police Chief, City police officers and designated City employees, who shall be designated by a separate resolution pursuant to the provisions of
California Penal Code section 836.5, shall have the authority to issue criminal citations for violations of this article. The City Attorney and the District
Attorney shall have the authority to file criminal complaints to enforce this article.
C. In addition to the above listed authority, the City may exercise the following remedies:
1. Pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 22435.7, any owner that fails to retrieve its abandoned cart(s) within three (3) business days
after receiving notice from the City, shall pay the City's administrative costs for retrieving the cart(s) and providing the notification to the owner. Any
owner who fails to retrieve abandoned carts in accordance with this article in excess of three (3) times during a specified six-month period shall be
subject to a fifty dollar ($50.00) fine for each occurrence. An occurrence includes all carts owned by the owner that were impounded by the City for a
one-day period.
2. If a cart is not retrieved by its owner within thirty (30) days after the owner has received notice of the cart being impounded, including a failure to pay
costs and fines, or if the cart's owner cannot be determined, the cart will be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the City sees fit.
3. Following the City having retrieved more than ten (10) carts in any thirty-day period or the issuance of more than ten (10) administrative citations in
any twelve-month period, the Director of Community Development may require the owner to install a physical containment system.
4. Violations by any person of section 18-103 of this article may be enforced through any of the penalties for violations of this Code specified in section
1-9 of this Code. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-103: PROHIBITION AGAINST REMOVING, POSSESSING AND ALTERING CARTS:
It is unlawful for any person except the owner of a cart or the owner's agent to do any of the following acts:
A. No person shall be deemed to be authorized to remove a cart with cart identification from the business premises unless he or she possesses written
authorization from the cart owner. Removal authorization shall be valid for a period not to exceed twelve (12) hours. The authorization shall include: the
date and time of removal, the name, address, and phone number of the store where the cart was removed, as well as the name, title and signature of
the person authorizing the removal. This section shall not apply to the possession of a shopping cart removed from the business premises at the
direction of the cart owner for the purposes of repair, maintenance, or when found in the possession of a cart retrieval service returning it to the cart
owner;
B. To be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of the owner of the cart without the express written consent
of the owner. Written permission to remove a shopping cart shall be valid for a period not to exceed twelve (12) consecutive hours;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 277/636
C. It shall be unlawful for a person to possess a shopping cart with a cart identification sign on sidewalks, streets, trails, other public property open to the
public, or on private property open to public view, without written authorization from the cart owner, unless the person has written permission of the cart
owner to repair or maintain the cart, is a cart retrieval service in the process of returning an empty cart to the cart owner, or is moving the cart so it can
be picked up by a cart retrieval service;
D. To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated or altered; or
E. To alter, convert or tamper with a cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers or the cart identification
sign on a cart. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-104: PROHIBITION AGAINST ABANDONING CARTS:
It is unlawful for any person to leave, abandon or store any cart upon any sidewalk, street or other public place, or upon private property exposed to public
view, at a location other than the premises of the owner. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-105: IMPOUNDMENT OF ABANDONED CARTS:
A. The City of Porterville hereby adopts California Business and Professions Code section 22435 in reference to the impoundment of abandoned carts.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Business and Professions Code, a cart that has a sign affixed to it in accordance with California Business and
Professions Code section 22435.1 may be impounded by the City provided both of the following conditions have been satisfied:
1. The shopping cart is located outside the premises or parking area of a retail establishment. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a
multi-store complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the complex or center.
2. Except as provided in subsection G of this section, the shopping cart is not retrieved within three (3) business days from the date the owner of the
shopping cart, or his or her agent, receives actual notice from the City of the shopping cart's discovery and location.
B. In instances where the location of a shopping cart will impede emergency services, the City is authorized to immediately retrieve the shopping cart from
public or private property.
C. When the City impounds a shopping cart under the authority provided in subsections A and B of this section, the City is authorized to recover its actual
costs for providing this service.
D. Any shopping cart that is impounded by the City pursuant to subsections A and B of this section shall be held at a location that is both:
1. Reasonably convenient to the owner of the shopping cart; and
2. Open for business at least six (6) hours of each business day.
E. The City shall fine the owner of a shopping cart in an amount as set by the Porterville City Council for each occurrence in excess of three (3) during a
specified six-month period for failure to retrieve shopping carts in accordance with this section. An occurrence includes all shopping carts impounded in
accordance with this section in a one-day period.
F. The City may sell or otherwise dispose of any shopping cart not reclaimed from the City within thirty (30) days of receipt of a notice of violation by the
owner of the shopping cart.
G. Notwithstanding subsection A2 of this section, the City may impound a shopping cart that otherwise meets the criteria set forth in subsection A1 of this
section without complying with the three-day advance notice requirement provided that all of the following occur:
1. The owner of the shopping cart, or his or her agent, is provided actual verbal or written notice within twenty four (24) hours following impound of the
cart and that notice informs the owner, or his or her agent, as to the location where the shopping cart may be claimed.
2. Any shopping cart so impounded shall be held at a location in compliance with subsection D of this section.
H. Any shopping cart reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent, within three (3) business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant to
subsection G1 of this section, shall be released and surrendered to the owner or agent at no charge whatsoever, including the waiver of any impound
and storage fees or fines that would otherwise be applicable pursuant to subsection C or E of this section. Any cart reclaimed within the three (3)
business day period shall not be deemed an occurrence for purposes of subsection E of this section.
I. Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent, within three (3) business days following the date of actual notice as provided pursuant
to subsection G1 of this section, shall be subject to any applicable fee or fine imposed pursuant to subsection C or E of this section commencing on the
fourth business day following the date of the notice.
J. Any shopping cart not reclaimed by the owner or his or her agent, within thirty (30) days of receipt following the date of actual notice as provided
pursuant to subsection G1 of this section, may be sold or disposed of in accordance with subsection F of this section. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-106: CART IDENTIFICATION SIGNS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 278/636
A. Removal Prevention And Retrieval: Every owner who provides or intends to provide carts to be used by customers shall do the following:
1. Pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 22435.1, each shopping cart owned or used within the City shall have permanently affixed to it
and easily visible a cart identification sign or engraved surface which includes all of the following information: the name of the cart owner; the
telephone number of the cart owner and/or commercial establishment to which the cart belongs; a valid toll-free phone number for cart retrieval; the
procedure (if any) to be followed to obtain permission to remove the cart from the business premises; and a notice to the public that unauthorized
removal of the cart from the business premises is a violation of State law and City ordinance.
2. In addition to the cart identification and cart removal notice required on each cart, the cart owner shall post a notice in substantially the following form
prominently and conspicuously in the area where carts are stored for customer use. Post prominently and conspicuously at all public entrances and
exits where there is frequent cart activity, a notice no smaller than 12 inches by 18 inches, or approved by the Director, in the following form:
REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS (OR LAUNDRY CARTS, IF APPLICABLE,) FROM THESE PREMISES IS PROHIBITED BY LAW (PMC § 18-
103) AND WILL SUBJECT THE VIOLATOR TO A FINE OF UP TO $1,000.00 OR SIX MONTHS IN JAIL OR BOTH THE FINE AND THE JAIL
TERM.
The notice required by this section shall be considered exempt from chapter 21, article 305 of this Code.
B. Maintenance Of Signs: It shall be the responsibility of each cart owner to comply with subsections A1 and A2 of this section, and to continuously
maintain, or cause to be maintained all signs so that all of the required information is accurate and clearly legible.
C. Identification Of Ownership Required: A cart without a sign attached, pursuant to subsection A of this section, shall bear some form of identification to
establish ownership. Every business that utilizes shopping carts during normal operations within the City of Porterville shall provide the Director with a
valid, current telephone number of the owner or provider of the cart.
D. Chain Stores: Carts provided by individual stores or retailers that are owned by or affiliated with the same company and share the same name (chain
stores) shall bear some form of identification which identifies the specific store that the cart is assigned to.
E. Presumption Of Abandonment: A cart that does not have a sign attached as required by subsection A of this section or fails to provide information to the
Director as required in subsection C of this section is presumed to be abandoned if it has been left standing unattended on any public or private
property other than the owner's or the owner's agent. The City may impound, sell or otherwise dispose of such a cart immediately upon discovery of the
cart. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-107: CART CONTAINMENT SYSTEM REQUIRED:
Every cart owner shall operate and maintain an on-site cart containment program as defined in section 18-101 of this article. A cart owner may be
exempted from this requirement if he or she provides proof of contracting with a qualified cart retrieval service and submits information to the Community
Development Director or designee which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Director that the qualified cart retrieval service will: a) actively locate
shopping carts within the City limits of Porterville seven (7) days per week, eight (8) hours per day; and b) respond to complaints from the public in a
manner which results in the retrieval of shopping carts within twenty four (24) hours after receiving complaint(s). (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-108: RETRIEVAL SERVICES:
A. Any person who engages in the business of shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval, as defined in this article, in the City shall have a City business
license and shall retain records showing written authorization from the cart owner, or an agent thereof, to retrieve the cart or carts and to be in
possession of the cart or carts retrieved, unless the person is an employee of the cart owner.
B. A copy of the record showing written authorization shall be maintained in each vehicle used for shopping cart or laundry cart retrieval.
C. Each vehicle employed for the retrieval of shopping carts or laundry carts shall display a sign that clearly identifies the retrieval service or the cart's
owner.
D. Any person who violates the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-9 of this
Code. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-109: PENALTY:
Any person who violates any provision of this Code, or the California Business and Professions Code as referenced above shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance to California Penal Code section 19. Upon recommendation of the Prosecuting Attorney, the court
may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction, punishable under section 1-9 of this Code. An administrative fine may also be
imposed as set forth in section 2-144 of this Code. Nothing in this article shall prevent the City from pursuing criminal, civil, administrative or any other
legal remedy to address violations of this article. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
18-110: PROSECUTION FOR THEFT NOT PRECLUDED:
The provisions of this article are not intended to preclude the application of any other laws relating to prosecution for theft. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 279/636
18-111: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision, clause, sentence or division of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the invalidity shall
not affect the other provisions or application of the provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application and, to
this end, the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. (Ord. 1848, 8-7-2018)
Chapter 19
PARKS
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
19-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMISSION: The parks and leisure services commission.
DEPARTMENT: The parks and leisure services department.
DIRECTOR: The director of parks and leisure services. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977)
19-2: PARKS AND LEISURE SERVICES COMMISSION CREATED; COMPOSITION; FUNCTION:
There is hereby created a park and leisure services commission, and said commission shall be composed of eight (8) members, who shall be residents of
the city of Porterville. The park and leisure services commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977; Ord. 1686
§ 1, 1-17-2006)
19-3: APPOINTMENT:
Seven (7) of the said commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of a majority of the city council. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977;
Ord. 1686 § 2, 1-17-2006)
19-4: TERM OF OFFICE AND COMPENSATION:
Terms for all commissioners appointed shall be four (4) years, excepting the term for the first appointee by Porterville Unified School District as described
in section 19-5 of this article and excepting the terms for the first appointees to the commission, which shall be as follows: four (4) commissioners shall be
appointed to four (4) year terms and three (3) commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms commencing July 1, 1977. The terms of
commissioners first appointed shall be determined by lot at an organization meeting of the commission, to be held and conducted within a reasonable time
after said appointments. All commissioners shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council at any
time and for any reason. Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. No member of the commission shall serve more than two (2)
consecutive four (4) year terms. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977; Ord. 1686 § 3, 1-17-2006)
19-5: MEMBER APPOINTED BY PORTERVILLE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT:
One representative of the Porterville Unified School District shall be selected by the district to serve as a voting member of the commission, excepting the
term for the first appointee which shall be as follows: the first commissioner's term will commence March 1, 2005, and will terminate on October 31, 2007.
The four (4) year term thereafter will commence on November 1, 2007. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977; Ord. 1686 § 4, 1-17-2006)
19-6: VACANCIES:
Vacancies occurring otherwise than by expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment as in the first instance, such appointees to serve for the unexpired
term of the vacant office. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977)
19-7: MEETINGS; RECORDS; QUORUM:
The commission shall hold meetings regularly and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a
record of its proceedings. All meetings and records of the commission shall be public. Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977; Ord. 1686 § 5, 1-17-2006)
19-8: GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 280/636
The commission:
A. Shall advise the city council and the director on the management and control of parks, parkways and public grounds except as otherwise provided;
B. May establish all reasonable rules and regulations for the protection of rights and property vested in the city and under control of the parks and leisure
services department for the use, care and management of all parks, squares, avenues, grounds or recreation centers, and for the governing, use and
enjoyment of any building, structure, equipment, apparatus or appliances therein; which rules and regulations shall be posted in some conspicuous
place in the park, square, avenue, grounds or recreation center, or in or near the building, structure, equipment, apparatus or appliance to which the
rule or regulation applies;
C. May call upon the police department to assist in enforcing all ordinances, rules and regulations governing parks, squares, avenues, grounds or
recreation centers as have been or may hereafter be established;
D. Shall recommend schedules of charges for the golf course, swimming pools and all special services;
E. Shall give due attention and study to park and leisure services as they affect the welfare of the people;
F. Shall interpret the leisure and park services of the department to the community;
G. Shall take initiative in planning for future park and leisure areas and facilities, as well as determining means of bringing present areas and facilities up to
an acceptable standard;
H. Shall serve as a sounding board against which the director and staff may test their plans and ideas;
I. Shall recommend policy to the city council keeping in mind that the adoption of policy is the prerogative of the city council and that the director must have
a free hand to carry on the work of the department within the framework of these policies;
J. Shall define the objectives and goals of the department. (Ord. 1114 § B, 8-5-1977)
19-9: DRIVING AUTOMOBILE, GOLF CART, ETC., WITHIN CONFINES OF GOLF COURSE:
A. Restricted: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person engaged in the performance of his duties as a municipal employee, or a person who
has hired from the Porterville golf course manager or golf professional a golf cart, to operate or drive any motorcycle, automobile, golf cart or other
vehicle within the confines or upon the Porterville municipal golf course excepting therefrom that portion of said golf course designed and utilized for
public parking.
B. "Golf Cart" Defined: For purposes of this section a "golf cart" is any vehicle, electric or gasoline propelled, that is customarily utilized in the playing of the
game of golf.
C. Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. (Ord. 1093 § A, 6-15-1976)
19-10: PRESENCE UPON GOLF COURSE WHEN CLOSED TO PUBLIC DECLARED UNLAWFUL:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the Porterville municipal golf course for the purpose of playing or practicing the game of golf or to play
or practice the game of golf on any day when said golf course is closed to play to the general public.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain upon the Porterville municipal golf course on any day when the same is closed to play to the general public
when instructed to leave or depart by the golf course manager, any of his agents or employees, or any officials, agents or employees of the city of
Porterville.
C. Any person violating any of these provisions or failing to comply with any requirement of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted
of the misdemeanor under the provisions of this section shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 990 §§ 1_4, 1-5-1971)
19-11: CLOSING HOURS IN PARKS:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, to remain in, or to refuse to leave Murry park, Westview park, Olivewood park, Noon Lions' park, North park,
or Zalud park between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
B. The Zalud park tennis courts shall be excluded from such restriction as stated in subsection A of this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 281/636
C. Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1219 §§ A_C, 10-28-1980)
Chapter Article II
PARKWAY TREES
19-31: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to promote and regulate the planting, long term care, maintenance, and protection of street trees within the city. (Ord. 1748,
11-18-2008)
19-32: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the words and terms used herein are defined as follows:
CITY: The city of Porterville.
COMMISSION: The city of Porterville parks and leisure services commission.
CROWN DRIP LINE: The outer perimeter of a tree's canopy.
DIRECTOR: The city of Porterville parks and leisure services director.
PARKWAY: That area of the public right of way that is between the back of curb, or edge of pavement if no curb, and the right of way line that is not
covered by sidewalk. A parkway can also mean a tree well that is within a sidewalk.
PARKWAY TREE: Any tree or other plant, other than ground cover, located within a parkway.
PERSON: Individuals, associations, corporations, public agencies, joint ventures, partnerships, contractors, and other agents or employees.
PROPERTY OWNER: The owner of property directly adjacent to the public right of way.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT: Any street paving, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water pipes and appurtenances, sewer pipes and appurtenances, driveways or any
other publicly owned facility located in a publicly owned street right of way, easement or on private property.
STREET: Any public street, way, place, alley or other public property owned or controlled by the city for the present or future use of pedestrians or
vehicles.
STREET TREE: Any tree that is located within the public right of way, or any tree within a street tree easement in or adjacent to the public right of way.
TOP: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within a tree's crown drip line to such a degree so as to remove
the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-33: STREET TREE GUIDELINES:
The city of Porterville is authorized to develop and administer guidelines for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of
street trees. These guidelines shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The commission's recommendation shall be considered when adopting the
guidelines. The guidelines shall include an authorized species list, spacing guidelines for each authorized species, specifications for street tree planting,
and specifications for nursery stock quality of street trees. The guidelines shall be periodically reviewed and updated as needed. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-34: TREE PLANTING:
A. No parkway tree shall be planted by any person without prior approval in writing of the director.
B. It is unlawful for any person to plant or maintain any tree within ten feet (10') of any public sidewalk, street, or curb, exclusive of alleys, without approval
of the director or as part of a discretionary permit approval. Any person planting or maintaining trees contrary to this section may be required, after
notice and hearing by the commission, to remove said tree or perform such corrective measures as may be deemed necessary by the commission.
(Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-35: PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STREET TREES:
A. Regulations: No street tree shall be altered, pruned, or removed except in accordance with the provisions of this article and the adopted street tree
guidelines. No person shall cause any substance or material to be on or near a street tree which shall restrict its natural growth or shall cause it
damage. No person, without the approval of the director, shall place or maintain any stone, cement or other substance so that it shall impede the free
access of water or air to the roots of any parkway tree.
B. Attachment To Trees: No person, without the approval of the director, shall attach or keep attached to any parkway tree, or to the guard or stake
intended for the protection thereof, any wire, rope, sign, or any other device whatsoever. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 282/636
19-36: TOPPING:
Except as necessary to ensure public safety or as authorized by the director, no person shall top any street tree or other tree located on public property.
Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be
exempted from this section at the discretion of the director. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-37: INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED:
No person shall interfere with the director or persons acting under his authority while engaged in planting, mulching, pruning, trimming, spraying, treating
or removing any parkway tree of the city, or in the removing of any stone, cement or other substance from about the trunk of any parkway tree. (Ord. 1748,
11-18-2008)
19-38: PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Street trees shall be protected to the extent possible from damage during construction, sidewalk repair, repair of utility structures and facilities above and
below ground, and other similar activities by the person conducting the construction or activity. The zone of protection shall include the ground beneath the
crown drip line of the tree. Protection measures shall be included in building permit applications when building permits are required for construction. (Ord.
1748, 11-18-2008)
19-39: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CARE AND MAINTENANCE:
All watering and trimming of street trees for maintenance and beauty shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner, unless these
responsibilities are fulfilled by a funding program authorized by the city, such as, but not limited to, a homeowners' association or similar assessment
district. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-40: TRIMMING HEIGHTS:
Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, property owners shall keep street trees adjoining their property and all private trees trimmed up to a height
of not less than twelve feet (12') over a street or alley, and up to a height of not less than ten feet (10') over the parkway and sidewalk. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-
2008)
19-41: TRIMMING SPECIFICATIONS:
All street trees shall be pruned in accordance with American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A300 standards, as amended from time to time. A copy of
the standards shall be maintained by the director and made available for review upon request. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-42: PROTECTION OF RIGHTS OF WAY:
Property owners shall keep public rights of way adjacent to owner's property clear of debris. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-43: QUALITY OF STREET TREES:
New plantings of street trees shall be in accordance with the street tree guidelines for nursery stock quality. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-44: REPLACEMENT OF STREET TREES:
Street trees removed by the director or by natural causes shall be replaced on site, on a one for one basis. The location and species of any replacement
tree shall be determined by the director. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-45: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of removed street trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the
ground. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-46: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIR OF CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK:
Repair and/or replacement of curb, gutter, and sidewalk damaged by a tree is the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-47: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIR OF WATER SERVICES:
Repair and/or replacement of water lines and other water infrastructure, between the water meter and the structure, damaged by a tree shall be the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 283/636
responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-48: RESPONSIBILITY FOR REPAIR OF SEWER LATERALS:
Repair and/or replacement of sewer laterals damaged by a tree shall be the responsibility of the adjoining property owner. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-49: PLANTINGS IN NEW DEVELOPMENTS:
In new residential, commercial, and industrial developments, the developer shall plant street trees in the size, number, manner, and type required by the
street tree guidelines and the city improvement standards. Funding for long term maintenance and care of the street trees, and repair to infrastructure
damaged by the street trees, in new developments shall be provided through a homeowners' association or a similar assessment district. (Ord. 1748, 11-
18-2008)
19-50: STREET TREES UNDER UTILITY LINES:
Street trees planted under utility lines shall be of an approved species specified in the street tree guidelines. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-51: PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND WELFARE:
The director shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, spray and remove trees, plants and shrubs within public rights of way, as may be necessary to
ensure public safety and pedestrian clearance, and the long term health of the trees. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-52: CITY'S RIGHT TO REMOVE STREET TREES:
No person shall severely prune, remove, injure or interfere with any parkway tree without a permit therefor from the director.
A. The director may remove parkway trees at city expense for the following reasons:
1. Trees threatening an immediate hazard to persons or property;
2. Trees directly in the way of the construction of public improvements;
3. Dead trees.
B. The director may authorize the removal or alteration of parkway trees at the property owner's expense or at the expense of other than the city when
said removal or alteration is, in the opinion of the director, necessary to permit the alteration, repair, demolition or moving of any structure.
C. The commission may authorize the removal of parkway trees at city expense for the following reasons:
1. Dying, decayed or potentially hazardous trees;
2. Trees diseased beyond reclamation;
3. Trees causing a visual hazard to the traveling public;
4. Trees hosting economically undesirable insects or diseases.
D. The commission may authorize the removal of parkway trees at the expense of the property owner, or other than the city, for the following reasons:
1. For property improvement when the commission finds that a better or more suitable planting may be developed;
2. For thinning to proper spacing;
3. When the removal is for the purpose of repairing public improvements;
4. For a more desirable planting or conformance with the approved tree list.
E. The director shall advise the commission of all removals authorized by the director under this section.
F. It is the intention of the city council to facilitate the planting of new trees whenever trees are removed, and to bring about the repair of public
improvements damaged by parkway trees. In order to effect these purposes the commission or director shall, whenever practicable, require the
following actions to be performed by the affected person as part of any removal authorization:
1. Replacement of tree with a new tree of appropriate size;
2. Repair of any public improvements damaged by the tree to be removed.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 284/636
The said replacement of tree or repair of public improvements specified in subsections A and B of this section shall be agreed upon in writing by the
affected person prior to any removals hereunder, in a form approved by the city attorney.
G. The director may refer any matter within the scope of subsections A and B of this section to the commission as he deems appropriate.
H. All authorization for tree removals granted under this section shall be valid for thirty (30) days following the date of said authorization. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-
2008)
19-53: UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF PARKWAY TREES; PROCEDURE FOR REPLACEMENT:
A. The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a public right of way or parkway who have removed, or caused to be removed, any
parkway tree shall, within thirty (30) days following notice to replace, cause said tree to be replaced with a variety of tree approved by this article.
B. Notice to replace may be given by delivering a written notice personally to the owner or to the person in possession of the property facing upon the
parkway where said tree has been removed, or by mailing said written notice, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property, or to the
owner thereof, at his last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment records of the city of Porterville or to the name and
address of the person owning such property as shown in the records of the city clerk. Said written notice shall contain a notice to replace said tree and
the director shall immediately upon mailing of the notice cause a copy thereof, printed on a card of not less than eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in
size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the property.
C. The notice shall particularly specify the types of trees that are permitted for replacement and in the event any public improvement has been damaged
by the tree removal, the notice shall specify the work of public improvement that is to be done, how it is to be done and what materials shall be used in
the repair; it shall further specify that if the tree is not replaced and the repair is not commenced within thirty (30) days after notice is given and
diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the director shall make such repair and replacement and the cost of the same shall be a
lien on the property.
D. Upon completion of the replacement and repair by the city of Porterville, the director shall cause notice of the cost of repair and replacement to be given
in the manner specified in this section for the giving of written notice, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council will hear
and pass upon a report of the director of the cost of repair and replacement, together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by
any property owner liable to be assessed by the provisions of this section or any other interested person.
E. Upon completion of the repair and replacement, the director shall prepare and file with the city council a report specifying the trees which have been
replaced and the public improvements which have been repaired, the cost of the tree replacement, the cost of the repairs, a description of the real
property in front of which the repairs have been made or trees replaced, and the assessment against each lot or parcel of real property to be levied to
pay the cost thereof. Any such report may include the cost of repairs or tree replacement of any number of parcels of property whether contiguous to
each other or not.
F. Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the director together with any objections or protests
which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for the replacement of a parkway tree and for the work of making such repair
and any other interested person. Thereupon the city council may make revision, correction or modification in the report as it may deem just, after which,
by motion or resolution, the report as submitted or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed. The city council may adjourn the hearing from
time to time. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections that may be made shall be final and conclusive.
G. The cost of tree replacement and the cost of repair, if any, may be assessed by the city council against the parcel of property fronting upon the parkway
where such tree has been replaced and repairs made, and cost so assessed, and if not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the legislative
body, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property and shall be a lien on the property for the amount thereof, which lien shall
continue until the assessment and all interest thereon is paid or until it is discharged of record.
H. The director may file in the office of the county recorder of Tulare a certificate giving notice of the lien and a description of the real property so assessed
and the amount of the lien.
I. The lien shall be collected at the time and in the manner as ordinary city taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and interest and
to the same procedure under foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary city taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection
and enforcement of city taxes and county taxes are hereby made applicable to such special assessment and lien. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-54: TREE REMOVAL; PUBLIC UTILITIES, AND OTHERS:
Any person maintaining any overhead wires, pipes, or underground conduits or appurtenances along or across any street desiring to have any parkway
tree trimmed, pruned or removed in connection with the maintenance of its facilities may file with the director a written request that such work be done.
Such request shall describe the work desired to be done, and it shall be within the discretion of the director to require a written agreement upon the part of
the petitioner to pay the cost thereof and to do such work in the way stipulated by the director before the issuance of any permit hereunder, including the
replacement of any trees removed hereunder. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-55: CITY'S RIGHT TO PERFORM MAINTENANCE:
The director shall have the right to prune a tree overhanging any street or right of way within the city so that branches shall not severely obstruct the light
from any streetlamp or intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of twelve feet (12') above street surface or ten feet (10') above the parkway
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 285/636
and sidewalk surface. The director may enter upon and may prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a streetlight, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-56: UTILITY COMPANY'S RIGHT TO PERFORM MAINTENANCE:
Tree limbs growing near overhead lines and utility facilities may be pruned to clear such facilities by the affected utility company in compliance with
applicable franchise agreements with the city. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-57: CITY'S RIGHT TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS IN RIGHT OF WAY:
If, in the director's opinion, a real and significant vehicular sightline or pedestrian obstruction or hazard is created by shrubs, hedges, and similar
vegetation within the parkway, the adjoining property owner shall be required upon notification, to satisfactorily correct the situation within thirty (30) days.
Upon failure of the property owner to comply with written notice, the director will cause such obstructions to be removed and will bill the property owner for
all costs involved. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-58: STREET TREE REMOVAL PERMITS:
The director shall establish a permit system to be used to authorize street tree removal. The director shall use his or her discretion with respect to tree
removal permits as governed by this article and by the street tree guidelines. No person will be authorized to remove trees covered by this article without
first having received a permit to do such work. Permits shall not be valid for a period longer than thirty (30) days from issuance date. Exceptions, in the
discretion of the director, shall be those permits issued to public utilities serving the area, which permits may be valid for a period of one year. (Ord. 1748,
11-18-2008)
19-59: ABATEMENT OF TREES CAUSING OBSTRUCTION:
A. Generally: It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be
trees, to prune such trees in such manner that they will not obstruct or shade the streetlights, obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks,
obstruct vision of traffic signs, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be
ten feet (10') over sidewalks, and twelve feet (12') over all streets except truck thoroughfares which shall have a clearance of sixteen feet (16').
B. Notice To Prune: Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as hereinabove provided, the director
shall order such person or persons, within ten (10) working days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees.
C. Order Required: The order required herein shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified
mail.
D. Failure To Comply: When a person to whom an order is directed shall fail to comply within the specified time, it shall be lawful for the municipality to
prune such trees, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner. The administrative services director or designee shall, at the appropriate
time each year, cause to be filed with the tax assessor of the county a description of the property together with the name of the owner or reputed owner
thereof against which such special assessment shall be made, and the installment then due and unpaid with accruing interest, may be assessed as
taxes against the owner or reputed owner of the real property, and the amount of money so assessed shall bear the same penalties and interest as
taxes regularly assessed on default of payment thereof. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-60: APPEAL TO COUNCIL:
Any interested person may appeal, in writing, a decision of the director regarding a removal permit, setting forth his/her reason(s) for such appeal to the
commission. Such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) business days after the notice of the director's decision.
Any interested person may appeal a decision of the commission to the city council if a request therefor is filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days after
notice of the commission's decision. The appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the council's next regular meeting after the appeal is filed. If the appeal
is filed within ten (10) business days of the council's next regular meeting, the appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the council's second regular
meeting following the filing of the appeal. It shall be the duty of the director to notify the property owner or other affected person of the time and place any
appeal will be heard, such notice to be given at least ten (10) days prior to said hearing. The council shall consider the appeal and uphold, reverse, or
modify the decision of the director. The decision of the council shall be final. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
19-61: LIABILITY:
Nothing in this article shall impose any liability upon the city, or members of the council, or any of its officials or employees, nor relieve the property owner
or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep his or her private property, sidewalks, and rights of way abutting such private property in a safe
condition. (Ord. 1748, 11-18-2008)
Chapter Article III
PARK IMPACT FEE
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 286/636
19-42: PURPOSE:
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the parks and recreation element of the city's general plan to acquire and develop park facilities, parks
must be constructed or expanded commensurate with growth of the city. The city council has determined that a park impact fee is needed in order to assist
in the financing of these public park improvements and to pay for new development's fair share, excluding expansion of existing development within the
boundaries of the existing legally defined property, of the acquisition and development costs of these improvements. In establishing the fee described
below, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code section 66000. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
19-43: PARK IMPACT FEE ESTABLISHED:
A park impact fee is hereby established on issuance of certificate of occupancy for new development, excluding expansion of existing development, in the
city. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the park impact
fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationships
between this fee and the various types of new development and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this impact fee shall be paid
prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. On an annual basis, the fee shall be adjusted by the director of the public works department, or designee, in
accordance with the "Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index" publication. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
19-44: LIMITED USE OF FEES:
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that
account, shall be used solely to: a) pay for the city's future acquisition and development of new or expanded park facilities described in the resolution
enacted with this article. (Ord. 1567 § 1, 1-19-1999)
Chapter Article IV
SKATEPARK REGULATIONS
19-45: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of this article is to comply with California Health and Safety Code section 115800 with regard to the
operation of any and all skateboard parks and facilities operated by the city, as well as to set forth basic requirements for use of such parks and facilities.
(Ord. 1708 § 1, 11-7-2006)
19-46: HELMET AND PADS REQUIRED:
In any skateboard park or facility owned or operated by the city, any person riding a skateboard, in-line skates, a bicycle or similar device shall wear a
helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 11-7-2006)
19-47: FACILITY/PARK SIGNS AND RULES:
A. The parks and leisure services department shall cause a sign or signs to be posted at all such parks or facilities providing reasonable notice of section
19-46 of this article and stating that any person failing to comply with this section will be subject to citation in accordance with this article and the city's
applicable regulations.
B. The parks and leisure services commission shall prepare additional rules for use of city owned skateboard facilities consistent with this article. The rules
shall be posted at the applicable facility(ies) and shall state that any person that fails to comply with these rules will be subject to citation in accordance
with this article and the city's applicable regulations. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 11-7-2006)
19-48: VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
A. Any violation of section 19-46 of this article and/or the posted rules shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and punishable as such; however, at the
discretion of the city attorney, the violation may be filed and charged as an infraction. The complaint charging such violation shall specify whether the
violation is a misdemeanor or an infraction. Any person found guilty of an infraction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00) for the first violation in a one year period, a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second violation in a one year period,
and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for third and subsequent violations, charged as infractions, in a one year period. Individuals
found guilty of a misdemeanor under this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to
exceed sixty (60) days in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. In addition to the provisions of this section, subsequent violations of this article by
the same person within one hundred twenty (120) days may, in the discretion of the city attorney, constitute a misdemeanor. Violators may, in the
discretion of the city attorney and with approval of the court, be referred to an appropriate community service program, in the alternative or in addition
to the penalty provisions of this section, if such program is available.
B. Notwithstanding the police department's ability to confiscate a skateboard as an instrumentality or evidence of a violation of this article, and in addition
to the enforcement provisions of subsection A of this section, the city may seize and hold the skateboard at the time an individual is cited for any
violation of any provisions of this article for the second time within a one year period1. Any time a violator's property is confiscated pursuant to this
section, the city shall provide the violator with a receipt and notice of a time and location for an automatic hearing in front of the city's designated
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 287/636
administrative hearing officer no later than ten (10) days from confiscation of the skateboard. The violator shall be entitled to the return of the
skateboard either one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the confiscation, or at the time as determined at the conclusion of the hearing.
C. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of section 19-46 of this article and who is injured while using the park or facility shall be
deemed negligent.
D. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through a civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. With regard to violations
committed by minors, the parent or legal guardian having control or custody of the minor whose conduct violates this section shall be jointly and
severally liable with the minor for all penalties and/or costs and fees.
E. The city shall be entitled to recover all attorney fees and costs incurred in the filing or prosecution of any action or administrative proceeding brought to
enforce any provision(s) of this article. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 11-7-2006)
19-49: SEVERABILITY:
It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are distinct and
severable and, in the event that any subsections, paragraphs, clauses and/or phrases are declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining subsections, paragraphs,
clauses, or phrases of this article. (Ord. 1708 § 1, 11-7-2006)
Chapter 19A
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
19A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CONNECTION: The act of installing and/or constructing any improvement with the purpose of allowing storm water runoff to directly or indirectly enter a
storm drainage system from or because of such improvement.
DEVELOPER: Any individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership, trust or other legal entity engaging in development.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction or arranging for the construction of buildings, dwellings or any other improvements or property not previously
developed that would increase the storm water runoff.
PRIVATE OR SINGLE PURPOSE STORM DRAINS: Any storm drainage system not within public streets, alleys, easements or property, or which is
specifically intended to benefit a specific property and/or development and not the general area as a whole.
REDEVELOPER: Any individual, firm, association, corporation, partnership, trust or other legal entity engaged in redevelopment.
REDEVELOPMENT: The construction or arranging for the construction of buildings or dwellings or additions thereto, or any other improvements on
property previously developed that would increase the storm water runoff.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Any improvement specifically intended for the conveyance and/or retention of storm water runoff which is located within
public streets, alleys, easements or property and which benefits the general area as a whole.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: All that rainwater arriving at and/or originating on the property being developed or redeveloped which by reason of topography,
geology or any other obstruction is not retained and which does not infiltrate into the ground within the confines of the property being developed or
redeveloped by means or methods considered to be a "storm drainage system" as herein defined.
SUBDIVIDER: The same as defined in chapter 21 of this code.
SUBDIVISION OR DIVISION OF LAND: The same as defined in chapter 21 of this code. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-2: PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONSTRUCT STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a storm drainage system in a public street, alley, easement or property without first receiving a permit to do
so and complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-3: PRIVATE OR SINGLE PURPOSE STORM DRAINS:
This chapter is not intended to provide funding for planning, engineering, administration and construction of private or single purpose storm drains which
are not within public streets, alleys, easements or property, or which are specifically intended to benefit a specific property and/or development and not the
general area as a whole. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 288/636
19A-4: STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS:
This chapter is intended to provide for planning, engineering, administration and construction of storm drainage systems which will be constructed within
public streets, alleys, easements or property and which benefit the general area as whole, and are required for the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city.
Storm drainage systems would include all necessary rights of way, property and improvements specifically intended for the conveyance and/or retention of
storm water runoff excluding street improvements, such as curb and gutters, cross gutters, sidewalks, driveways, "V" gutters and paving; and all other
improvements not specifically intended for the conveyance and/or retention of storm water runoff unless such improvements are damaged or destroyed
because of construction of a storm drainage system then it shall be considered that the repair or replacement of such improvements are part of the storm
drainage system. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
Chapter Article II
ACREAGE CHARGE
19A-11: GENERALLY:
Before development or redevelopment of any property, there shall be paid a storm drainage systems acreage charge in accordance with the cost per acre
as established by resolution of the city council.
The charge shall be used to reimburse the city for construction of storm drainage systems, to provide the city with funds for construction of storm drainage
systems and to reimburse others who have constructed or advanced the cost of construction of storm drainage systems. The charge shall be paid to the
city prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for development or redevelopment of any property. However, the charge shall not apply to
redevelopment of any property unless the cost of said redevelopment exceeds fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) within a twelve (12) month period.
This valuation is to be adjusted, by resolution, each year to reflect changes in the cost of construction as indicated in the "Engineering News Record".
Property for which development or redevelopment is being proposed which has already had the charge paid to the city, will not again be subject to the
charge.
The charge shall be computed on the gross area of the property being improved, such area being defined as the parcel of land being developed or
redeveloped including half of all adjacent dedicated streets and alleys, and all of interior dedicated streets and alleys.
The charge shall be levied and payable prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a building constructed on any property within the city. (Ord. 1754,
6-2-2009)
19A-12: CONSTRUCTION FUND:
There is hereby established and set up a storm drainage systems construction fund. All money collected from the storm drainage systems acreage charge
shall be placed in said fund and disbursed therefrom to reimburse the city for construction of storm drainage systems, to provide the city with funds for
construction of storm drainage systems and to reimburse others who have constructed or advanced the cost of construction of storm drainage systems as
provided for in this chapter. All interest earned on monies deposited in the fund shall be retained in the fund. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
Chapter Article III
FUNDING AND/OR CONSTRUCTION
19A-19: GENERALLY:
The city council may review proposed development or redevelopment of property to determine the necessity of storm drain systems. Said review may be
requested by any affected property owner, developer, redeveloper or the city engineer. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-20: WHEN FEASIBLE:
If in the opinion of the city council a storm drainage system is necessary and feasible and the fund and/or the charges to be collected are sufficient to
guarantee the construction of the storm drainage system, then the city council may make direction to proceed in accordance with article IV of this chapter.
(Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-21: WHEN NOT FEASIBLE:
If in the opinion of the city council, construction of a storm drainage system is not feasible because the construction fund and/or the charges to be collected
are insufficient to guarantee the construction of the storm drainage system, then the city council may pass a resolution in accordance with one of the
following:
A. That the request, development or redevelopment is premature to the basic development or redevelopment of the general area as a whole and that such
request, development or redevelopment is denied or held in abeyance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 289/636
B. That in the case of development or redevelopment that the developer or redeveloper pay such charges due as set forth in this chapter and detain on
site all stormwater runoff from said development or redevelopment by means or methods approved by the city engineer in such a way as to not cause
any damage to properties receiving stormwater overflows.
C. That the request, development or redevelopment necessitates a storm drainage system and that the construction thereof is not feasible only because
the construction fund and/or the charges to be collected are deemed insufficient as set forth herein, and therefore said property owner, developer or
redeveloper may pay such charges due as set forth in this chapter and construct or advance the cost of construction of the storm drainage system and
that said costs over and above that which can be borne by the construction fund be reimbursed to the said property owner, developer or redeveloper,
providing that the source of such reimbursement funds be the charges collected from other users of said storm drainage system and providing that
such agreement terminate within twenty (20) years of the date thereof. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
Chapter Article IV
CONSTRUCTION
19A-28: PREPARATION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
In accordance with article III of this chapter, the city council shall cause plans and specifications for the construction thereof to be prepared by the city
excepting that for those developments which are subject to the provisions of chapter 21 of this code (subdivisions, or divisions of land), the city council
shall have the authority to cause the subdivider to prepare the plans and specifications for the construction thereof. All such plans and specifications shall
be prepared to the satisfaction of the city engineer and the city engineer's signature thereon shall indicate his approval thereof. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-29: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS PUT OUT FOR BID; SUBMISSION OF BIDS; ACTION ON BIDS; ADMINISTRATION OF
CONTRACT:
Immediately after approval of the plans and specifications as provided for in section 19A-28 of this article, the calling for bids shall be authorized in
conformance with the provisions of this code. The city shall call for bids on all plans and specifications excepting that the city council shall have the
authority to cause the subdivider to call for bids on the plans and specifications which the subdivider prepared as provided for in section 19A-28 of this
article.
All bids received, including those received by the subdivider, shall be submitted to the city council for acceptance or rejection. Should the city council
decide to reject all bids, it shall be the responsibility of the city council to recommend and resolve as to what, if any, further action is to be taken concerning
the storm drainage system. Should the city council decide to accept certain bids, and reject all other bids, it shall be the responsibility of the city to issue
and administer all contracts for construction of storm drainage systems excepting that the city council shall have the authority to cause the subdivider to
issue and administer contracts for construction of storm drainage systems for which the subdivider had prepared the plans and specifications as provided
for in section 19A-28 of this article. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-30: INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION; RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE:
It shall be the responsibility of the city to inspect the construction of all storm drainage systems for compliance with the approved plans and specifications
and with all applicable standards, codes and ordinances.
The responsibility for compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with all applicable standards, codes and ordinances shall be with the
contractor for contracts being administered by the city and with the subdivider, for contracts being administered by the subdivider, both as provided for in
section 19A-29 of this article. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-31: PROGRESS OR PARTIAL PAYMENTS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
19A-32: ACCEPTANCE OF WORK; NOTICE OF COMPLETION:
Upon certification of the city engineer that all of the work complies with the approved plans and specifications and with all applicable standards, codes and
ordinances and is completed in its entirety, the city council will accept the work and file a notice of completion. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-33: FINAL PAYMENT:
Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of completion and upon full occupancy of the development or phased development,
money shall be disbursed from the storm drainage systems construction fund to pay for or to reimburse others for the cost of all the work referred to in said
notice of completion; said money disbursed shall be the actual value of the work completed, as determined by the city engineer.
Developer shall submit all documentation necessary to support final payment within ninety (90) days of full occupancy of the development or phased
development. Failure to do so shall void developer's right to request reimbursements. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
Chapter Article V
CONNECTION
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 290/636
19A-40: ACREAGE FEE:
A. Purpose: In order to implement the goals and objectives of the storm drain master plan of the city, and to provide needed storm drainage facilities for
new development in the planning area, certain public storm drain facilities must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development
impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development's fair share of the construction costs of these
improvements. In establishing the fee described below, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to
Government Code section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element
of the general plan.
B. Established: An acreage fee is hereby established, upon issuance of certificate of occupancy for development in the city, or upon creation of any
additional runoff to the city's storm drain system to pay for storm drainage improvements. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the
specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be
financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationships between this fee and the various types of new
development and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer prior to issuance
of certificate of occupancy or upon creation of any additional runoff to the city's storm drain system. On an annual basis, this fee shall be adjusted by
the public works director or designee in accordance with the "Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index" publication.
C. Limited Use Of Fees: The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any
interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:
1. Pay for the city's future construction of storm drainage facilities described in the resolution enacted with this chapter, or to reimburse the city for
those described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or
2. Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted as set forth below, to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental
size, length, or capacity.
D. Developer Construction Of Facilities: Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility
described in a resolution adopted pursuant to this section, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the
facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not exceed the actual cost of the
construction of the facility by the developer. In the event the actual construction cost of the facility exceeds the fee required of the development project,
the city shall enter into a reimbursement agreement for the cost in excess of the fee required for the project, to be paid from the special account
established pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
19A-41: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONNECTION:
No person shall make connection to a storm drainage system without first obtaining a permit to do so and complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
19A-42: CONNECTION TO STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM TO BENEFIT PROPERTY OUTSIDE CITY BOUNDARIES:
The city council may, at its sole discretion, elect to make available the city storm drainage systems to benefit property outside the city boundaries, said
property so benefited shall be subject to the storm drainage system acreage charge as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1104, 3-15-1977)
Chapter 20
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
20-0: SIDEWALK DEFINED:
As used in this chapter, "sidewalk" includes a park or parking strip maintained in the area between the property line and the street line and also includes
curbing, bulkheads, retaining walls or other works for the protection of any sidewalk or of any such park or parking strip. (Ord. 1365 § A(1), 11-18-1986)
20-0.5: PERSON DEFINED:
A "person" shall be defined as any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, company, railroad entity, estate, trust, the state of
California, all public districts and other political subdivisions or governmental entities of the state of California, but excluding the city of Porterville, and any
group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 1756, 8-4-2009)
20-1: OBSTRUCTIONS GENERALLY; RIDING OR DRIVING BICYCLES, ANIMALS, OR VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS:
Any person who obstructs with machinery, vehicles or merchandise or in any manner, any street, alley or sidewalk, in such manner as to impede, delay or
endanger travel thereon, or shall ride or drive or cause to be ridden or driven any horses, mules, hogs, sheep or cattle, bicycles or other vehicles on any
sidewalk in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 291/636
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that any provision of this article is violated is
a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as a separate and distinct offense. Notwithstanding the classification of a violation of this article as
a misdemeanor, at the time an action is commenced to enforce the provisions of this article, the trial court, upon recommendation of the prosecuting
attorney, may reduce the charged offense from a misdemeanor to an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction under this article shall be punished
by:
A. A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;
B. A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this article within one year; and
C. A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this article within one year.
Street vendors/peddlers utilizing pushcarts (walking type) licensed by the city in compliance with section 15-8 of this code shall be exempt from this
section to the extent that said pushcarts do not endanger travel. (Ord. Code § 3311; Ord. 1531 § D1, 6-18-1996)
20-1.1: SKATEBOARDS PROHIBITED1:
(Rep. by Ord. 1661 § 1, 3-1-2005)
20-1.2: OCCUPANCY OF PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY:
Except as provided by section 20-57 of this chapter pertaining to Porterville redevelopment project area no. 1 and section 20-58 of this chapter pertaining
to fence encroachment permits, any person who constructs or affixes, or causes to be constructed or affixed, any structure, sign, canopy, awning, lighting
fixture, or any other device, equipment or fixture which projects into the public right of way beyond the property line of a building site, without first having
obtained approval from the city council by way of an encroachment agreement, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1498 § 1, 6-7-1994; Ord. 1563 § 1, 12-1-
1998)
20-1.3: ENCROACHMENT AGREEMENT; DEFINED:
An agreement between the city and the owner of real property located within the city permitting the property owner who is a party to the agreement to
construct or place temporary or permanent improvements, structures, signs, awnings, fences, fixtures, or other similar appurtenant structures, within the
public right of way owned by the city and adjacent to the real property described in the agreement, and which is subject to the terms, covenants and
conditions contained therein. (Ord. 1498 § 2, 6-7-1994)
20-2: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS; REQUIRED; NOTICE:
When any portion of any improved public street in the city or any sidewalk or curb constructed thereon shall be out of repair or pending reconstruction, and
in condition to endanger persons or property passing thereon, or in condition to interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof, it shall be the duty
of the superintendent of streets, or such other person as shall be appointed or delegated by the council or the city manager for that purpose, to require, by
notice in writing, to be delivered to them, or their agent personally, or left on the premises, or mailed to their last known address, the owners or occupants
to forthwith proceed to do the work necessary to be done, and such notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and how the same is
to be done and what materials shall be used, if any are required. (Ord. Code § 4221)
20-2.5: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS; MAINTENANCE BY LOT OWNERS:
The owners of lots or portions of lots fronting on any portion of a public street or place when that street or place is improved or, if and when the area
between the property line of the adjacent property and the street line is maintained as a park or parking strip, shall maintain any sidewalk in such condition
that the sidewalk will not endanger persons or property and maintain it in a condition which will not interfere with the public convenience in the use of those
works or areas, save and except as to those conditions created or maintained in, upon, along, or in connection with such sidewalk by any person other
than the owner, under and by virtue of any permit or right granted to him by law or by the city authorities in charge thereof, and such persons shall be
under a like duty in relation thereto. (Ord. 1365 § A(2), 11-18-1986)
20-3: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS; WORK PERFORMED BY CONTRACT WITH CITY UPON FAILURE OF ABUTTING
OWNER TO PROCEED AFTER NOTICE; CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION; LIEN2:
If the work required by the notice specified in section 20-2 of this article shall not be commenced within thirty (30) days after notice is given as aforesaid,
and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to completion, the official may, under the authority of this section, proceed to do the work called for by
the aforesaid notice, or enter into a contract in the name of the city with any suitable person, at the expense of the owner, tenant or occupant, after the
specifications for doing of such work shall have been conspicuously posted by him in his office for two (2) days, inviting bids for doing such work, which
bids shall be delivered to him at his office on or before the second day of such posting, and opened by him on the next day following the expiration of such
two (2) days of posting, and the contract by him be awarded to the lowest bidder, if in the judgment of such official such lowest bid is reasonable. All of
such bids shall be preserved in his office and open at all times after the letting of the contract to the inspection of all persons, and such owner, tenant or
occupant shall be liable to pay such contract price. Such work shall be commenced within twenty four (24) hours after the contract shall have been signed,
and completed without delay to the satisfaction of the city official, and when so satisfactorily completed, the official shall make and deliver to such
contractor a certificate to the effect that such work has been properly done by such contractor according to specifications, and that the charges for the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 292/636
same are reasonable and just, and that the official, has accepted the same. Such certificate of completion shall be recorded in a book kept for the purpose
in the office of the city clerk, and when so recorded the sum to be paid shall be a lien against the property affected. (Ord. 1537 § B61, 8-6-1996)
20-4: REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS; COLLECTION OF COSTS:
When the work required by the notice provided in section 20-3 of this article shall have been completed, either by the city official, or by contractor as
hereinbefore set forth, and a certificate of acceptance and completion or of performance by the city recorded as aforesaid, the charges for the costs of
doing such work shall be due and payable to the city on demand. This demand shall be made by a bill or charges for such work presented personally to
the owner, tenant, occupant or agent, or mailed to their last known address, or posted on the property, and if same shall not be paid within thirty (30) days
from the date of such demand the city shall pay the contractor from the appropriate city fund the amount due him on his contract for doing such work, and
may then proceed to dun the owner, tenant or occupant for the amount of such charges to be paid, and the certificate of such official shall be prima facie
evidence that the amount claimed for such work and materials is correct, and of the right of the city to recover the same in such action; or, the city council
may by resolution order that such unpaid charges be added to and become a part of the municipal taxes against the property affected by such work,
payable in the same manner, and subject to all the regulations, penalties and charges as such municipal taxes on real property in the city.
Any tenant or lessee of the lands or lots made liable by this chapter, may pay the amount assessed or charged against the property of which he is the
tenant or lessee under the provisions of this chapter, together with all accrued costs, either before or after suit has been brought, or he may redeem the
property if sold on execution or decree for the benefit of the owner, within the time prescribed by law, and deduct the amount so paid from the rents due
and to become due from him, and for any sums so paid beyond the rents due from him, he shall have a lien upon and may retain possession of such land
and lots until the amount so paid and advanced be satisfied, with legal interest, from accruing rents, or by payment by the owner. (Ord. Code § 4221.2)
20-5: PLANS, PROFILES AND CROSS SECTIONS FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalk construction shall be done in accordance with the plans, profiles and cross sections on file in the office of the city engineer, should such plans,
profiles and cross sections have been adopted for the work, and all work shall, during its progress and on its completion, conform to the lines and levels
which may, from time to time, be given by the city engineer. (Ord. Code § 3321.1)
20-6: UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sound or cause or permit to be used or sounded, in or upon any public street any bell, siren, chime, gong, horn,
whistle or other alarm, except when necessary to give warning, or when authorized by permit from the chief of police to do so. (Ord. Code § 9181)
Chapter Article II
STREET EXCAVATIONS
20-7: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and
words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY: The city manager or his delegated representative of the city.
EXCAVATION: Any opening in the surface of a public place made in any manner whatsoever, except an opening into a lawful structure below the surface
of a public place, the top of which is flush with the adjoining surface and so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage to the
public place.
FACILITY: Pipe, pipeline, tube, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, wire, tower, pole, pole line, anchor, cable,
junction box, transformer or any other material, structure, or object of any kind or character, whether enumerated herein or not, which is or may be lawfully
constructed, left, placed, maintained in, upon, along, across, under or over any public place.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, company, railroad entity, estate, trust, the state of California, all public
districts and other political subdivisions or governmental entities of the state of California, but excluding the city of Porterville, and any group or
combination acting as a unit.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any public street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, park, square, plaza or any other public property owned or controlled by any governmental
agency in a governmental capacity.
SUBSTRUCTURE: Any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, manhole, vault, buried cable, or wire, or any other structure located below the surface of any public
place. (Ord. 1756, 8-4-2009)
20-8: EXCAVATION PERMIT; REQUIRED GENERALLY; COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
No person shall make an excavation or fill any excavation in any public place without first obtaining a permit so to do from the administrative authority,
except as otherwise provided in this article. No permit to make an excavation or fill an excavation in a public place shall be issued except as provided in
this article. (Ord. 684 § 3)
20-9: EXCAVATION PERMIT; PERSONS TO WHOM ANNUAL PERMIT MAY BE ISSUED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 293/636
The administrative authority may issue an annual blanket permit for the purpose of placing, replacing or repairing any facility within a public place where
the opening or excavation does not exceed two feet (2') in width and four feet (4') in length, to the following:
A. A public utility regulated by the public utilities commission of the state.
B. A person holding a franchise from the city.
C. The water, electric and gas departments of the city. (Ord. 684 § 3)
20-10: EXCAVATION PERMIT; APPLICATION:
No excavation permit shall be issued unless a written application, on a form provided by the administrative authority, for the issuance of an excavation
permit is submitted to the administrative authority. The written application shall state the name and address and principal place of business of the
applicant, the authority of applicant to occupy the public place for which the permit is sought, the location and dimensions of the installation or removal for
which excavation is to be made, the purpose of the facility and the length of time which will be required to complete such work, including backfilling such
excavation and removing all obstructions, material and debris. The application, when approved and signed by the administrative authority, shall constitute
a permit. (Ord. 684 § 4)
20-11: EXCAVATION PERMIT; DEPOSIT REQUIRED WITH APPLICATION; EXCEPTION:
The application for an excavation permit to perform excavation work under this article shall be accompanied by a performance bond or cash in the amount
of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
Any person required to file a performance bond or cash under this section may file said bond with or pay said cash to the city in any amount not less than
two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) as a continuing deposit and said deposit shall satisfy the requirements of this section so long as said amount satisfied
the aggregate amount required of said person at any one time for excavation under this article.
Any deposit made hereunder shall serve as security for the repair and performance of work necessary to put the public place in as good a condition as it
was prior to the excavation.
Thirty (30) days (or as soon thereafter as possible) after satisfactory completion of the work as determined by administrative authority the bond shall be
released or the cash deposit shall be returned to the permittee; provided, however, that the bonding company may be required or the cash may be used by
the city to complete any work not satisfactorily completed by the permittee and the amount of the cash deposit refunded to the permittee shall be
decreased by the amount expended by the city in the completion of the work; provided, however, that in the case of a continuing deposit no release of the
bond shall be given nor shall any cash be refunded except upon the written request of the permittee.
In the case of excavations by public utility companies operating under a franchise issued by the city or under the supervision of the public utilities
commission or utilities operated by governmental agencies a permit may be granted without making such deposit, but in such cases, the utilities shall be
liable for the actual cost of any work required to be done by the city in restoring the area covered by such excavations to as good a condition as the same
was in before such work was done; further provided, that the city may, in the future, require such deposit from such utility if a bill rendered in accordance
with this section remains unpaid thirty (30) days after billing. (Ord. 1537 § B62, 8-6-1996)
20-12: EXCAVATION PERMIT; FEE:
A permit fee shall be charged by the administrative authority for the issuance of an excavation permit. The fee for a permit shall be fixed by resolution of
the city council. (Ord. 684 § 5; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
20-13: EXCAVATION PERMIT; INSURANCE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
Before an excavation permit, as provided in this article, is issued the applicant shall provide to the administrative authority proof that the applicant has in
full force and effect with a reputable insurance company permitted to do business in the state of California liability insurance insuring said applicant in the
performance of the work covered by the excavation permit in the minimum amounts set forth by resolution.
The city may require that the applicant deposit with the city a certificate of said indemnity insurance prior to issuing the excavation permit. (Ord. 684 § 6;
Ord. 875 § A, 3-23-1967; Ord. 1120 §§ A, B, 9-20-1977)
20-14: FREE MOVEMENT OF TRAFFIC MAINTAINED IF POSSIBLE; CLOSING OF STREETS WHEN NECESSARY; NOTICE TO
PUBLIC AGENCIES AND GENERAL PUBLIC:
The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as
practicable shall be maintained at all times so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the general
public; provided, that the administrative authority may permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his
opinion it is necessary.
The written approval of the administrative authority may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In
such case, such written notice shall not be valid until such notice is given. (Ord. 684 § 8)
20-15: SPECIFICATIONS FOR WARNING SIGNS AND LIGHTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 294/636
Warning signs shall be placed far enough back of the construction operation to alert traffic within a public street and cones or other approved devices shall
be placed to channel traffic, all in accordance with the "Manual Of Traffic Controls For Construction And Maintenance Work Zones", prepared by the state
of California business, transportation and housing agency, department of transportation (including latest revisions). (Ord. 1537 § B63, 8-6-1996)
20-16: INTERFERENCE WITH FIRE HYDRANTS, WATER GATES, ETC.:
The excavation work regulated by this article shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire
escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital equipment as designated by the administrative authority. (Ord. 684
§ 9)
20-17: SAFE TRAFFIC CROSSINGS REQUIRED:
The permittee shall maintain safe crossings for two (2) lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than three hundred feet (300'). If any excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk, at least one safe crossing
shall be maintained, when possible, for vehicles and pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the
adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half (1/2) of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line. (Ord. 684 § 10)
20-18: RELOCATION AND PROTECTION OF UTILITIES:
The permittee shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the administrative authority and the owner of the utility. If it becomes
necessary to relocate an existing utility, this shall be done by its owner. No utility owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless
the cost of such work be borne by the permittee. The cost of moving privately owned utilities shall be similarly borne by the permittee unless the permittee
makes other arrangements with the person owning the utility. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles,
wires or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them
under, over, along or across such work. In case any of such pipes, conduits, poles, wires or apparatus should be damaged, and for this purpose pipe
coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure, they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them and
the expense of such repairs shall be charged to the permittee, and his or its bond shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall be responsible for any
damage done to any public or private property by reason of the breaking of any water pipes, sewer, gas pipe, electric conduit or other utility, and its bond
shall be liable therefor. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage.
(Ord. 684 § 11)
20-19: ABANDONMENT OF SUBSTRUCTURES:
Whenever the use of a substructure is abandoned, except the abandonment of a service line designed to serve a single property owner, the person
owning, using, controlling, or having an interest therein, shall within thirty (30) days after such abandonment file with the administrative authority a
statement in writing giving in detail the location of the substructure so abandoned. If such abandoned substructure is in the way, or subsequently becomes
in the way, of an installation of the city or any other public body, which installation is pursuant to a governmental function, the owner shall remove such
abandoned substructure or pay the cost of its removal during the course of excavation for construction of the facility by the city or any other public body.
(Ord. 684 § 12)
20-20: PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY GENERALLY:
The permittee shall at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect from injury any adjoining property by providing proper foundations and taking
other measures suitable for the purpose. Where in the protection of such property it is necessary to enter upon private property for the purpose of taking
appropriate protective measures, the permittee shall obtain a license from the owner of such private property for such purpose, and if he cannot obtain a
license from such owner, the administrative authority may authorize him to enter the private premises solely for the purpose of making the property safe.
The permittee shall at its own expense, shore up and protect all buildings, walls, fences or other property likely to be damaged during the progress of the
excavation work and shall be responsible for all damage to public or private property or highways resulting from its failure properly to protect and carry out
such work. Whenever it may be necessary for the permittee to trench through any lawn area, the sod shall be carefully cut and rolled and replaced after
ditches have been backfilled as required in this article. All construction and maintenance work shall be done in a manner calculated to leave the lawn area
clean of earth and debris and in a condition as nearly as possible to that which existed before such work began. The permittee shall not remove, even
temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in parking strip areas without first obtaining the consent of the appropriate city department or city official having
control of such property. (Ord. 684 § 13)
20-21: REQUIRED BARRIERS AND WARNING DEVICES:
It shall be the duty of every person, cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public place, to place and maintain such barriers and warning devices
necessary for safety as specified by the state division of highways' publication "Manual Of Traffic Controls For Construction And Maintenance Work
Zones", prepared by the state of California business, transportation and housing agency, department of transportation (including latest revisions).
Barriers shall meet the requirements of the administrative authority. Warning lights shall be flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each
day to sunrise of the next day. Flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or
reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not replace, light sources. (Ord. 1537 § B64, 8-6-1996)
20-22: DISPOSITION OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL; SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR TRENCH AND TUNNEL EXCAVATIONS
GENERALLY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 295/636
All material excavated from trenches and piled adjacent to the trench or in any street shall be piled, and maintained in such manner as not to endanger
those working in the trench, pedestrians or users of the streets, and so that as little inconvenience as possible is caused to those using streets and
adjoining property. Where the confines of the area being excavated are too narrow to permit the piling of excavated material beside the trench, such as
might be the case in a narrow alley, the administrative authority shall have the authority to require that the permittee haul the excavated material to a
storage site and then rehaul it to the trench site at the time of backfilling. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to secure the necessary permission and
make all necessary arrangements for all required storage and disposal sites.
All materials excavated shall be laid compactly along the side of the trench and kept trimmed so as to cause as little inconvenience as reasonably possible
to vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or as specified by the administrative authority. Whenever necessary, in order to expedite the flow of traffic or to abate
the dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins may be required by the administrative authority to prevent the spreading of dirt into traffic lanes.
All trench and tunnel excavations and construction shall conform with the safety requirements for shoring, bracing and ladders in trenches in accordance
with "trench and tunnel construction safety orders of the state of California", as they now or may hereafter exist. (Ord. 684 § 15)
20-23: CLEANING UP OF RUBBISH, DEBRIS, ETC.:
As the excavation work progresses, all streets shall be thoroughly cleaned of all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris resulting from such work. All
cleanup operations at the location of such excavation shall be accomplished at the expense of the permittee and shall be completed to the satisfaction of
the administrative authority. From time to time, as may be ordered by the administrative authority and in any event immediately after completion of such
work, the permittee shall, at his own expense, clean up and remove all refuse and unused materials of any kind resulting from such work, and upon failure
to do so within twenty four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by the administrative authority, such work may be done by the administrative
authority and the cost thereof charged to the permittee, and the permittee shall also be liable for the cost thereof under the surety bond provided for by this
article. (Ord. 684 § 16)
20-24: PROTECTION OF WATERCOURSE:
The permittee shall maintain all gutters free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot (1') in width from the face of
such curb at the gutterline. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. The
permittee shall make provisions to take care of all surplus water, muck, silt, slickings, or other runoff pumped from excavations or resulting from sluicing or
other operations and shall be responsible for any damage resulting from its failure to so provide. (Ord. 684 § 17)
20-25: BREAKING THROUGH OR CUTTING PAVEMENT:
A. Heavy duty pavement breakers may be prohibited by the administration authority when the use endangers existing substructures or other property.
B. Saw cutting of Portland cement concrete may be required by the administrative authority when the nature of the job or the condition of the street
warrants. When required, the depth of the cut shall be no less than one inch (1") in depth; however, depths greater than one inch (1") may be required
by the administrative authority when circumstances warrant. Saw cutting may be required by the administrative authority outside of the limits of the
excavation over cave outs, overbreaks and small floating sections.
C. Approved cutting of bituminous pavement surface ahead of excavations may be required by administrative authority to confine pavement damage to the
limits of the trench.
D. Sections of sidewalks shall be removed to the nearest score line or saw cut edge.
E. Unstable pavement shall be removed over cave outs and overbreaks and the subgrade shall be treated as the main trench.
F. Pavement edges shall be trimmed to a vertical face and neatly aligned with the centerline of the trench.
G. Cutouts outside of the trench lines must be normal or parallel to the trench line.
H. Boring or other methods to prevent cutting of new pavement may be required by the administrative authority.
I. The permittee shall not be required to repair damage existing prior to excavation unless his cut results in small floating sections that may be unstable, in
which case the permittee shall remove and pave the area. (Ord. 684 § 18)
20-26: DEPTH OF SUBSURFACE STRUCTURES:
No person shall, without written permission of the administrative authority, install any substructure, except manholes, vaults, valve casings, culverts and
catch basins at a distance less than the following:
A. Streets: Twenty four inches (24") below the established flow line of the gutter. If such flow line is not established, then the depth shall be at a minimum
of twenty four inches (24") below the surface of the outermost edge of the traveled portion of the street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 296/636
B. Parkway:
1. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be sixteen inches (16") below established gutter grade when said substructure parallels the parkway.
2. The minimum depth of any substructure shall be twelve inches (12") below the top of the established sidewalk or curb when such substructure is at
right angles to the parkway.
C. Other Public Places: The minimum depth of any substructure in any other public place shall be twelve inches (12") below the surface; provided,
however, that the administrative authority may permit a lesser depth in special cases.
Nothing in this section shall impose a duty upon the permittee to maintain such specifications as required herein upon subsequent changes of grade in the
surface unless the grade in such substructure interferes with the maintenance of, or travel on, a public street. (Ord. 684 § 19)
20-27: BACKFILLING:
Fine material, free from lumps and stone, selected from the spoil shall be thoroughly compacted around and under the substructure to the upper level of
such substructure. Above the upper level of the substructure, backfill material shall be placed to the subgrade of the pavements in lifts consistent with the
type of soil involved and the method of consolidation being used. Broken pavement, large stones, roots and other debris shall not be used in the backfill.
Each lift shall be flooded, jetted, rolled or tamped, or a combination of these methods shall be used, depending upon the type of soil involved, to compact
the backfill material. Such backfill shall be done in a manner that will permit the restoration of the surface to condition equivalent to that in which it was
prior to excavation. The administrative authority may require soil tests to be furnished by a recognized soil testing laboratory or registered professional
engineer specializing in soil mechanics when, in his opinion, backfill for any excavation is not being adequately compacted. In order for the resurfacing to
be permitted, such tests must show that the backfill material meets the minimum requirements as prescribed by the administrative authority. All expense of
such tests shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 684 § 20)
20-28: RESTORATION OF SURFACE; GENERALLY:
Permanent resurfacing of excavations may be made where the type of consolidation used in replacing the backfill is adequate, in the opinion of the
administrative authority, to prevent settling and when the moisture content of the backfill is not excessive. In the event the type of consolidation used in
replacing the backfill is not adequate to prevent further settling or the moisture content is excessive, temporary resurfacing shall be provided. If temporary
surfacing is provided, the top surface of the backfill shall be covered with one inch (1") of bituminous material. Such temporary paving material shall be
cold mix, except that the permittee may use or the administrative authority may require hot mix. All temporary paving material shall conform closely
enough to the level of the adjoining paving surface and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for pedestrian travel
over it as well as for vehicular traffic to pass safely over it at a legal rate of speed. The permittee shall maintain temporary paving for a period not
exceeding ninety (90) days after all backfilling is completed, unless additional time is required by the administrative authority, and shall keep same safe for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic until the excavation has been resurfaced with permanent paving, except that if it is impracticable to maintain the surface of
the temporary paving in a safe condition for pedestrian travel or vehicular traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and lights where required by this
article.
Acceptance or approval of any excavation work by the administrative authority shall not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the permittee and
his or its surety under the surety bond required hereunder for incomplete or defective work if discovered within twenty four (24) months from the
completion of the excavation work. The administrative authority's presence during the performance of any excavation work shall not relieve the permittee
of its responsibilities pursuant to this section. (Ord. 684 § 21)
20-29: RESTORATION OF SURFACE; RIGHT OF CITY TO DESIGNATE PERSON TO DO RESURFACING:
Upon completion of the backfilling, and when required, temporary resurfacing of an excavation within a public place for the installation or removal of
substructures, the administrative authority, at his option, may require the permittee to resurface that portion of the street surface damaged by the
permittee's excavation, in which event resurfacing shall be done in a manner and under specifications prescribed by this article, subject to administrative
authority inspection, and shall be completed within a period of ninety (90) days after such authorization to complete final resurfacing. The administrative
authority may elect to do such resurfacing with city forces, in which event, the cost of such resurfacing shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 684 § 22)
20-30: RESTORATION OF SURFACE; SPECIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Subgrades shall be restored to that existing prior to the excavation or in accordance with standards for the construction of new streets used by the city.
B. Portland cement concrete used in the repair of trenches shall not have a slump in excess of two inches (2").
C. Portland cement concrete used in the repair of trenches in streets shall be replaced with a thickness equivalent to that removed, but in no case less
than five inches (5"). Bituminous pavement shall be replaced at the same thickness as the existing pavement.
D. Portland cement sidewalks shall be replaced with the thickness of that removed; but in no case less than three and one-half inches (31/2") and shall be
of a color and texture of the adjoining sidewalk.
E. Expansion joints in Portland cement patches shall be matched with saw cut lines.
F. Portland cement shall be finished to match the texture of that of the adjoining pavement.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 297/636
G. Concrete shall be compacted by tamping, rodding or mechanical vibration.
H. Repairs in rock and oil streets shall be made in accordance with the existing specifications for bituminous type pavement.
I. Seal coats may be required by the administrative authority when the street has been seal coated or when it is a general practice of the local jurisdiction
to seal coat bituminous type pavement. (Ord. 684 § 22)
20-31: MAXIMUM LENGTH OF TRENCHES:
The maximum length of open trench permissible at any time shall be in accordance with existing ordinances or regulations, or as may be specified by the
administrative authority, and no greater length shall be open for pavement removal, excavation, construction, backfilling, patching and all other operations
without the written permission of the administrative authority. (Ord. 684 § 23)
20-32: DUTY OF PERMITTEE TO EXPEDITE WORK; GENERALLY:
After an excavation is commenced, the permittee shall prosecute with diligence and expedition all excavation work covered by the excavation permit and
shall promptly complete such work and restore the street to its original condition, or as near as may be, so as not to obstruct the public place or travel
thereon more than is reasonably necessary. (Ord. 684 § 24)
20-33: DUTY OF PERMITTEE TO EXPEDITE WORK; URGENT WORK:
If in his judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the traveling public or the public interest require the excavation work be performed as
emergency work, the administrative authority shall have full power to order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate facilities be
employed by the permittee twenty four (24) hours a day to the end that such excavation work may be completed as soon as possible. (Ord. 684 § 25)
20-34: APPLICABILITY OF ARTICLE TO EMERGENCY ACTION:
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the making of such excavations as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property or for the
location of trouble in conduit or pipe, or for making repairs; provided, that the person making such excavation shall apply to the administrative authority for
such a permit on the first working day after such work is commenced. (Ord. 684 § 26)
20-35: CONTROL OF NOISE, DUST AND DEBRIS:
Each permittee shall conduct and carry out excavation work in such manner as to avoid unnecessary inconvenience and annoyance to the general public
and occupants of neighboring property. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to reduce to the fullest extent practicable in the performance of the
excavation work, noise, dust and unsightly debris and during the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. shall not use, except with
the express written permission of the administrative authority, or in case of an emergency as otherwise provided in this article, any tool, appliance or
equipment producing noise of sufficient volume to disturb the sleep or repose of occupants of the neighboring property. (Ord. 684 § 27)
20-36: PRESERVATION OF MONUMENTS:
Any monument set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street or property subdivision, or a precise survey reference point, or a
permanent survey bench mark within the city, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission in
writing from the administrative authority so to do. Permission to remove or disturb such monuments, reference points or bench marks shall only be granted
upon condition that the person applying for such permission shall pay all expenses incident to the proper replacement of this monument by the
administrative authority. (Ord. 684 § 28)
20-37: INSPECTIONS:
The administrative authority shall make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the enforcement of this article. The administrative authority shall
have the authority to promulgate and cause to be enforced such rules and regulations as may be reasonably necessary to enforce and carry out the intent
of this article. (Ord. 684 § 29)
20-38: MAINTENANCE OF DRAWINGS OF SUBSURFACE STRUCTURES:
Every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in substructures, under the surface of any public place used for the purpose of supplying or
conveying gas, electricity, communication impulse, water, steam, ammonia or oil in the city, shall file with the administrative authority within one hundred
twenty (120) days after the adoption of this article a map or set of maps each drawn to a scale of not less than one inch to two hundred feet (1" = 200')
showing in detail the location, size, description and date of installation, if known, or all substructures, except a service line designed to serve a single
property owner, beneath the surface of the public place belonging to, used by or under the control of such person having any interest, and shall file with
the administrative authority within fifteen (15) days after the first day of January of each and every year a corrected map or set of maps each drawn to
such scale including all installations made during the previous year to and including the last day of such year; provided, however, that a public utility owner
may at its option provide corrected atlas sheets at more frequent intervals. (Ord. 684 § 30)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 298/636
20-38.1: RAILROAD CROSSINGS; SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE:
A. Unless otherwise provided by contract made between the railroad and the city, it shall be the duty of all railroad companies or entities owning or
operating and maintaining a railroad passing through the city to place, keep or maintain crossings, and all places within their right of way where the
public streets or alleys of the city intersect and cross any of the railroad tracks, in a suitable and safe condition for public travel over and across the
same.
B. If the railroad facilities are at any time abandoned and removed, it shall be the duty of the railroad company or entity owning or operating and
maintaining the crossing to remove the rails through the crossing at the same time as the remainder of the rails are removed and to reconstruct the
crossing in the same manner as the remaining portions of the city street or alley are paved or in such other manner and with such other materials as
shall be required by the city and in a suitable and safe condition for public travel. The term "crossing", as used in this section, shall include viaducts and
roadways under or over the tracks of any railroad.
C. If any railroad crossing shall be at any time in bad condition or unsafe or inconvenient for public travel, the city council, upon recommendation of the city
manager or his designee, may, by ordinance, resolution or motion call upon the proper railroad company to repair or replace the crossing and render
the same safe and convenient for public travel. Unless otherwise ordered by the city council, all railroad crossing replacements shall be made with steel
rails or steel plates. A copy of every such ordinance, resolution or motion shall be served upon the local agent of the railroad company whose duty it is
to maintain such crossing; and for a failure or refusal to comply with such ordinance, resolution or motion within thirty (30) days after the service
thereof, as aforesaid, such railroad company shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
D. Whenever any highway or alley upon, along or through which any railroad track is laid, shall be ordered paved by the city council, it shall be the duty of
the railroad entity owning or operating such railroad track to pave all that portion of the street or alley, including in the space between the rails of its
track or tracks, and for one foot (1') on the outer edge of the rails, in the same manner as the remaining portions thereof are paved or in such other
manner and with such other materials as shall be required by the city's regulations and requirements. In the case of any default on the part of such
company to comply with this requirement, the city council may cause such railroad track or tracks to be taken up, and pavement to be laid pursuant to
the city's regulations and requirements, and every such railroad company shall be liable to the city for the cost and expense of paving such portion of
the street or alley, together with lawful interest thereon from the completion of work. (Ord. 1756, 8-4-2009)
20-39: LIABILITY OF CITY:
This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by
the performance of any excavation work for which an excavation permit is issued hereunder, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof be
deemed to have assumed any such liability for the issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work. (Ord. 684 § 31)
Chapter Article III
CURBS AND GUTTERS
20-40: LEGISLATIVE DETERMINATION RELATIVE TO EXISTENCE OF DIRT CURBS AND GUTTERS:
The existence of dirt curbs and gutters adjoining dwellings and buildings within the city, or conversely, the lack of adequate curbs and gutters, is hereby
found and declared to be dangerous to the public health and safety of the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. Code § 3323.3)
20-40.1: WHEN CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS REQUIRED:
Any owner, lessee, agent, licensee, or other person, corporation, association or firm who is:
Constructing or arranging for the construction of a building, dwelling, or any other improvement; or
Arranging for the remodeling, improving, modifying or otherwise altering in any manner whatsoever, an existing building, dwelling, or other improvement;
upon any lot or parcel of real property in the city of Porterville shall provide, subject to the provisions of this article and chapter and to the ordinances and
regulations of the city of Porterville that may now be or hereafter be in effect, for the construction of concrete curbs, gutters, and sidewalks unless in
accordance with city specifications therefor, they already exist in a satisfactory condition along all street frontages adjoining the lot or lots, parcel or parcels
of land on which the building, dwelling, or other improvement is to be constructed or remodeled or modified. In lieu of installation of concrete
improvements, payment for said concrete improvements shall be provided to the city upon development of the property as specified above, if said concrete
improvements have been installed by the city. In the event the construction of improvement is being made upon a portion of an undeveloped parcel and
the portion to be developed does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the entire undeveloped parcel, and the concrete improvements have not already been
installed by the city, the curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be provided on the street frontage so that said curbs, gutters, and sidewalks will extend the
length of the building or improvement and to include side yard requirements as set forth in the zoning ordinance. In determining whether the developed
portion exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the entire portion there shall be considered the portion of the parcel on which the building or other improvement
rests, together with all yard and open area requirements required by the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 826 § A, 8-5-1965; Ord. 1070 § B, 1-28-1975; Ord. 1644
§ 1, 1-20-2004)
20-40.2: EXCEPTIONS TO CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A. In the event any public improvements are required under the provisions of this article and chapter, the provisions of this article and chapter shall not
apply unless the construction or remodeling set forth in section 20-40.1 of this article shall be the cost of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) or more
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 299/636
within a two (2) year period. This valuation is to be adjusted, by resolution, each year to reflect changes in the cost of construction as indicated in the
engineering news record. This exception does not pertain to street dedication requirements.
B. Payment for city installed concrete improvements shall not be required when said improvements have been installed with grant funds. (Ord. 826 § A, 8-
5-1965; Ord. 1070 § B, 1-28-1975; Ord. 1224 § 1, 11-18-1980; Ord. 1644 § 2, 1-20-2004)
20-40.3: REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS; APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
A. Whenever it is deemed by the city that in the best interest of public health, safety or welfare it is necessary to maintain and repair a building or dwelling
used exclusively for residential purposes or to correct damage caused by fire, flood, earthquake or act of God, the provisions of this article and chapter
shall not apply, unless that within any consecutive twelve (12) month period the total dollar amount of building permits issued to maintain and repair the
building or dwelling will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total current building cost value of the building or dwelling following the completion of the
repairs. As used herein the term "necessary maintenance and repair" shall be defined as maintenance and repair required by any law, ordinance, code
or regulation of any political subdivision in effect in the city of Porterville.
B. Whenever it is deemed by the city that improvements, maintenance, or repairs to a building or dwelling used exclusively for residential purposes are for
the purpose of weatherization, the provisions of this article and chapter shall not apply, unless that within any consecutive twelve (12) month period the
total dollar amount of building permits issued to maintain and repair the building or dwelling will exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total current building
cost value of the building or dwelling following the completion of the repairs. (Ord. 826 § A, 8-5-1965; Ord. 1070 § B, 1-28-1975; Ord. 1644 § 3, 1-20-
2004)
20-40.4: LOCATION OF CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS:
The construction of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks in accordance with the provisions of this article and chapter shall be located on a line and at a place to
be determined by the city of Porterville and in determining this line the city shall take into consideration the ultimate right of way presently owned or to be
acquired by the city. (Ord. 826 § A, 8-5-1965; Ord. 1070 § B, 1-28-1975)
20-40.5: DEFERRED CONSTRUCTION; CASH DEPOSIT; LIEN AGREEMENT:
If it is determined by the city that it shall be in the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to construct said curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, at a later date,
or curbs, gutters, and sidewalks do not presently exist within one thousand feet (1,000') of the real property under consideration, or street grades are not
available from the office of the city engineer; then the city shall require the owner, agent, lessee or licensee to deposit with the city of Porterville a cash
amount determined by the city engineer to equal the then current costs for installing integral concrete curbs, gutters, and sidewalks required by the
provisions of this article and chapter, or, the owner or owners of said property shall execute an agreement with the city that shall become a lien or charge
upon said property in an amount determined by the city engineer to equal the then current costs for installing integral concrete curbs, gutters, and
sidewalks herein required.
Said deposit or agreement shall be used or exercised by the city for the installation of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks adjacent to the street frontage(s) of the
property upon which such deposit or agreement was required, at an expeditious time as determined by the city to be in the best interest of the city and its
inhabitants. (Ord. 826 § A, 8-5-1965; Ord. 1070 § B, 1-28-1975)
20-40.6: COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT, FINAL APPROVAL, ETC.:
The building inspector of the city of Porterville, shall deny the issuance of a permit unless the building plans and specifications therefor provide for curbs,
gutters, and sidewalks in compliance with the requirements of this article and chapter, and shall deny final approval and acceptance to any said building,
dwelling or other improvement unless and until said integral curbs, gutters, and sidewalks exist in a serviceable condition or are constructed in accordance
with the provisions of this article and chapter or unless and until the cash deposit or lien agreement provisions of this article and chapter have been
complied with. Furthermore, under circumstances where payment is required for concrete improvements installed by the city, the building inspector of the
city of Porterville, shall deny the issuance of a permit unless the building plans and specifications therefor provide for curbs, gutters, and sidewalks in
compliance with the requirements of this article and chapter, and shall deny final approval and acceptance to any said building, dwelling or other
improvement unless and until payment for said improvements has been provided for in conformity with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 826 § A, 8-5-
1965; Ord. 1070 § B, 1-28-1975; Ord. 1644 § 4, 1-20-2004)
20-40.7: WAIVER OF ARTICLE PROVISIONS:
In the event construction of sidewalks is not feasible due to street location, topography or other physical factor, the city council may waive or modify the
provisions of this article and chapter as they apply to sidewalks upon written application of the owner of the property or other person against whom this
article and chapter may apply, and upon hearing the recommendation of the city engineer. Sidewalks shall not be required in the area designated by the
city as the "enterprise zone". City council approval for a waiver or modification of the sidewalk requirement pertains only to the building permit being acted
upon, and does not release in perpetuity the provisions and requirements of this article and chapter on subsequent building permits.
In areas where special circumstances common to the same street frontages of more than one parcel of land, such as, but not limited to, soil conditions,
rock outcroppings, drainage courses, topography, zoning, or lot sizes, would appear to preclude or obstruct the standard installation of sidewalks as
otherwise herein required, the city engineer may initiate studies and prepare plans for submission to the city council of alternate solutions and methods of
implementation as may be approved following a public hearing thereon, to provide, within defined boundaries of affected areas, public walkways for the
protection of pedestrian traffic and public safety. Upon receipt of an alternate sidewalk plan and a recommendation from the city engineer, the city council
may schedule a public hearing to consider the effect, feasibility, and appropriateness of same, and by resolution set forth its decision to adopt or deny the
plan. (Ord. 1537 § B65, 8-6-1996)
20-40.8: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 300/636
A. Deductions For Improvements To Be Removed: Under circumstances where payment will be required to pay for city installed concrete improvements
under this article, if an approved parcel map, improvement plans or building plan identifies proposed concrete improvements that will require removal of
existing city installed concrete improvements, the reimbursement cost of the portion of the city installed concrete improvements to be removed shall be
deducted from the cost of the city installed improvements adjacent to the property, so long as the concrete improvements specified are installed as part
of the improvement(s).
B. Process For Objecting To Payment For Improvements: Prior to or at the time the city council considers whether to go out to bid on a street
improvements project that will result in the installation of concrete improvements for which payment will be required in conformity with this article, the
city shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the time and place of hearing shall be mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting to all property
owners affected by the proposed project. Additionally, prior to establishing the development fees to be paid for city installed improvements, the city
shall hold at least one public hearing in conformity with the applicable provisions of the mitigation fee act. Said fees for concrete improvements related
to specific street improvement projects shall be established by resolution, and shall be administered and accounted for in compliance with the
mitigation fee act.
C. Record Notice Of Reimbursement Requirement: The city shall record a general notice of the potential applicability of said development fees for
concrete improvements with the office of the Tulare County recorder.
D. Payment Agreements With City: The city shall allow anyone required to pay a fee for concrete improvements in conformity with this article to pay over a
period not to exceed five (5) years, with additional terms and interest as determined by the city. (Ord. 1644 § 5, 1-20-2004)
20-41: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 825 § A, 7-6-1965)
20-42: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 825 § A, 7-6-1965)
20-43: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 825 § A, 7-6-1965)
20-44: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REVOLVING ACCOUNT; GENERALLY:
There is hereby created, set up and established a curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving account for financing and paying for the installation of curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, alleys and paveouts in the city.
The curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving account shall be used, employed and expended for the sole and only purpose of and in providing property owners
of improved real property with necessary and required money for building, erecting and completing curbs, gutters, sidewalks, alleys and paveouts in, on
and along the public streets and highways in the city adjacent to improved real property of such of the owners as may elect to cause curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, alleys and paveouts to be built, erected, constructed and completed, and payment therefor to be made from the curb, gutter and sidewalk
revolving account. (Ord. Code § 3323.4; Ord. 827 § A, 7-6-1965; Ord. 1337, 9-3-1985)
20-45: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REVOLVING ACCOUNT; FINANCING AND REPAYMENT:
A. Owners of improved real property electing to avail themselves of financing the installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, alleys and paveouts from the
curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving account, and electing to have curbs, gutters, sidewalks, alleys and paveouts built, erected, installed and completed,
and payment therefor made from the curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving account shall make written application therefor to the city manager and, if
such application is acceptable to the city, shall enter into a written contract with the city for financing and payment therefor from the curb, gutter and
sidewalk revolving account.
B. Such owners shall, in the written agreement, bind, contract and obligate themselves to reimburse and repay to the city all funds and monies withdrawn
or disbursed from the curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving account amortized in monthly payments with the entire amount thereof to be fully refunded
and repaid to the city within a period of time not exceeding five (5) years from the date of such agreement and on such terms and under such
conditions as may be set forth in the written agreement, with all unpaid balances to bear interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the
date of the agreement. The owners of the real property and the applicant in agreement shall agree that any installment payment with accruing interest,
as specified and set up in the agreement, remaining unpaid for ten (10) days from the due date thereof, may be assessed as taxes against the real
property of the owner or applicant thus benefitted, and the amount of money unpaid shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel of real
property thus benefitted, and shall be a tax lien on the property for the amount thereof with the accruing interest, and shall continue to be a lien thereon
until the full amount thereof and all accruing interest is paid and discharged in full.
C. The administrative services director or designee of finance shall, at the appropriate time each year, cause to be filed with the tax assessor of the county
of Tulare a description of the property together with the name of the owner or reputed owner thereof against which such special assessment shall be
made, and the installment then due and unpaid with accruing interest, together with all other sums of money due and unpaid under the agreement, may
be assessed as taxes against the owner or reputed owner of the real property, and the amount of money so assessed shall bear the same penalties
and interest as taxes regularly assessed on default of payment thereof. (Ord. Code § 3323.4; Ord. 824 § A, 7-6-1965; Ord. 1337, 9-3-1985; Ord. 1614
§ 1, 9-17-2002)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 301/636
20-46: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK REVOLVING ACCOUNT; RESTORATION OF DISBURSEMENTS:
All principal received and paid under the written agreement referred to in section 20-45 of this article, or assessed and collected as taxes, shall be restored
to the curb, gutter and sidewalk revolving account on receipt thereof for the use and employment therein. All interest received shall be used for the design
and construction of storm drains and drainage structures throughout the city. (Ord. Code § 3323.4; Ord. 1337, 9-3-1985)
20-46.1: CHARGE FOR CURB AND GUTTER AND OTHER IMPROVEMENT RE-STAKING:
In the event the city of Porterville is required to re-stake for any reason whatsoever in connection with the construction of curbs and gutters or other
improvements requiring staking, the city shall require from the person so requesting said staking a fee or charge as fixed by resolution of the city council.
For purposes of this section, re-staking shall be required on the eighth day following the original staking if said stakes are unused. (Ord. 856 § A, 3-15-
1966; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
Chapter Article IV
CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS ACROSS SIDEWALKS
20-47: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall mean:
COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY: Any driveway having a width of more than twelve feet (12') measured lengthwise with the street.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY: A driveway twelve feet (12'), or less in width measured lengthwise with the street. Residential driveways may be permitted up
to twenty feet (20') in width, where it is necessary for service of two (2) car garages, and when and if approved by the board referred to in section 20-50 of
this article. (Ord. Code § 3323.2)
20-48: COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE:
All driveways, for the passage of traffic from a public street over and across sidewalks, hereafter laid down, built or constructed in the city shall be built,
laid down and constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article, and not otherwise. (Ord. Code § 3323.2)
20-49: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXECUTION OF APPLICATION; APPLICATION TO CONSTITUTE AGREEMENT FOR REMOVAL
UPON NONUSE:
No driveways across sidewalk space shall be constructed until a permit for doing such work shall have first been obtained from the city, and in all cases
the application for such permit shall be executed by the owner of the property to be served by the driveway, and in and by such signed application it shall
be agreed that the person executing the same will, upon demand of the city engineer, remove such driveway and replace the same by a sidewalk of
standard construction and dimension, if at any time such driveway shall cease to be used for the purpose for which it was constructed. (Ord. 1537 § B66,
8-6-1996)
20-50: MAXIMUM WIDTH AND NEAREST TO STREET INTERSECTION GENERALLY; APPROVAL OF DRIVEWAY IN EXCESS
OF FIFTY FEET:
Commercial driveways shall not exceed fifty feet (50') in width measured lengthwise with the street; no driveway shall be closer than four feet (4') to the
prolongation of the property line at right angles to the driveway at any street intersection. Should it be necessary, in order to serve the business
requirements of the owner of the property to which a commercial driveway gains entrance to increase the width thereof from the maximum of fifty feet (50')
as hereinbefore provided, written application therefor shall be made to the city engineer for permission to lay and install such additional driveways, or for
increasing the maximum width thereof hereinbefore provided. Such application shall be filed with the city engineer and shall be acted on and considered
by the city council, which body shall have the power to grant or deny such application. (Ord. Code § 3323.2; Ord. 755 § 1, 3-5-1963)
20-51: CONSTRUCTION STANDARD; GENERALLY:
All driveways must be built and constructed in conformity with the city standard plans and specifications, or as directed by the city engineer. Coloring may
be added to the concrete, if it is desired. All details of the entire driveway shall be subject to the direction and supervision of the city engineer. None of
such work shall be done until the contractor, or other person doing such work shall furnish, and file with the city, a bond in the penal sum to be fixed by the
city engineer, conditioned for the faithful performance of such work in accordance with the specifications herein set forth, or such additional specifications
as may be required by the city engineer. (Ord. 1537 § B67, 8-6-1996)
20-52: CONSTRUCTION STANDARD; STEEL REINFORCEMENT, MAXIMUM EXTENSION OF SLOPING PORTION FOR
COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAYS:
All commercial driveways when constructed and installed shall have a mat composed of reinforcing steel composed of one-fourth inch (1/4") round rods on
six inch (6") centers longitudinally and transversely. Such mat shall be placed one and one-half inches (11/2") above the bottom of the concrete. The
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 302/636
sloping portion of all such driveways rising from a point one inch (1") above the flow line of the gutter, shall not extend back from the curb face more than
one-half (1/2) the distance to the property line. (Ord. Code § 3323.2)
20-53: CONSTRUCTION STANDARD; REBUILDING SIDEWALKS WHEN NECESSARY:
In the event of excessive height of curbing where driveways are to be constructed, the sidewalks shall be rebuilt the necessary distance back on each side
of such driveway, so that the slope will not exceed three-fourths inch (3/4") per foot, so that the driveway permits safe entrance and exit. (Ord. Code
§ 3323.2)
20-54: CONSTRUCTION STANDARD; ADOPTION OF STANDARD PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
All driveways shall conform to the standard plans and specifications as prepared by the city engineer and filed in the offices of the city clerk and the city
engineer; and such plans, profiles and cross sections and each thereof are hereby made a part of this section. (Ord. 1537 § B68, 8-6-1996)
Chapter Article V
SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS
20-55: EL GRANITO CUL-DE-SAC:
A. El Granito Street, between Grand Avenue on the south and Henderson Avenue on the north, is established as a cul-de-sac street; and the intent of this
section is to prohibit the movement of through traffic along the western edge of Exalt park. In establishing El Granito as a cul-de-sac, it may be
necessary to waive the established standards for length of cul-de-sacs and construction of cul-de-sac bulbs in order to construct access to adjacent
parcels. The city council has made the following findings in establishing this section:
1. El Granito Street serves Exalt park on the east and residential property on the west.
2. In developing Exalt park and El Granito Street, the city implied to area residents that such street development would not provide through access
between Grand Avenue and Henderson Avenue.
3. The city fire department has reviewed the area and established that a nonstandard length cul-de-sac would not significantly affect fire protection.
4. The city police department has expressed concerns over potential traffic related problems if El Granito Street were to be extended to connect with
Henderson Avenue.
5. Establishing El Granito Street as a cul-de-sac serves the best interests of the community and residents.
B. In addition to the findings, the council establishes the following as the minimum design criteria for El Granito Street:
1. Minimum right of way width is sixty feet (60').
2. Minimum curb to curb width is forty feet (40').
3. Minimum curb to curb distance between abutting cul-de-sacs is ten feet (10').
4. Maximum depth of cul-de-sac from intersecting street centerline to radius of cul-de-sac bulb shall be nine hundred feet (900').
5. Walkways are required adjacent to residential units.
6. Right of way must be dedicated sufficient to allow sewer, water, storm drain and utility service connection between Grand Avenue and Henderson
Avenue. Dedication to be approved by the city engineer and shown on final maps. (Ord. 1323 § A, 10-16-1984)
20-56: SCENIC HEIGHTS:
The area of the city of Porterville known as Scenic Heights and consisting of Highland Drive, Highland Road, Scenic Drive and Marshall Street is of a
unique and unusual character and contains topographical and geological formations that make it impractical to construct streets, roads, drives and ways
that conform to established city standards.
A. Findings: The city council has made the following findings in establishing this section:
1. The Scenic Heights area of the community is a unique geological and topographical area of the community.
2. Construction of standard streets is not deemed appropriate considering the topography, geological features, existing development and nature of the
area.
3. The Porterville planning commission, in resolution 184, dated February 9, 1966, resolved that, because of topographical and engineering factors,
sidewalks were not required in this area.
4. There is a need to establish design criteria for the orderly development of this area and to prevent arbitrary and nonuniform construction.
5. It is desirable to maintain the unique qualities of this area and to preserve the existing development which might be destroyed by the construction of
standard improvements.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 303/636
6. There exists unique traffic problems in this area by virtue of its topography and development, and this area generates substantial amounts of traffic
over and above the resident traffic.
7. There is need to maintain adequate and safe access for emergency vehicles as well as residents of the area.
B. Design Criteria: Based on the findings, the city council hereby establishes minimum design criteria:
1. Street sections will be designed in accordance with standard engineering practice and soils data for the area and be subject to the approval of the
city engineer.
2. Standard curb and gutter, per city standard, will be required at the time of development or redevelopment.
3. Construction shall be confined to the dedicated roadway area and in conformance with existing street improvements.
4. Full roadway dedication will be required to assure adequate room for utilities and to protect locations of existing utilities.
5. Design widths are as follows:
Curb To Curb Width (Feet)
a. Marshall Street 24
b. Highland Road 24
c. Scenic Drive 28
d. Highland Drive:
Main to Highland Road 26
Highland Road to Pioneer 28
Pioneer to north limit 24
6. Grades are subject to review and approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 1322 § A, 10-16-1984)
20-57: PORTERVILLE REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA NO. 1:
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have authority for the administrative approval of requests for permission to encroach into the public rights of
way in the redevelopment project area no. 1. Consideration of said encroachments shall be in conjunction with approval of required city permits.
Encroachments into the public rights of way within the redevelopment project area no. 1, which may be approved by the city manager or his/her designee
as described herein, shall be limited to the erection of those elements consistent with the design guidelines adopted for the redevelopment project area no.
1 in effect at the time of approval. (Ord. 1498 § 3, 6-7-1994)
20-58: ENCROACHMENT PERMITS (FOR FENCES):
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have authority for the administrative approval of requests for permission to encroach into the public rights of
way for fencing if applicant meets all other conditions as required by this code. Consideration of said encroachments shall be in conjunction with approval
of required city permits, and payment of applicable fees. (Ord. 1563 § 1, 12-1-1998)
Chapter Article VI
TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE
20-59: PURPOSE:
In order to implement the goals and objectives of the circulation element of the city's general plan and to improve and maintain the level of service of the
community's infrastructure including streets and highways, transit, bicycle/pedestrian facilities, truck routes, and transportation system management
strategies, certain public transportation facilities must be constructed or expanded commensurate with growth of the city. The city council has determined
that a transportation impact fee is needed in order to assist in the financing of these public transportation improvements and to pay for new development's
fair share, excluding expansion of existing development within the boundaries of the existing legally defined property, of the construction costs of these
improvements. In establishing the fee described below, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to
Government Code section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of
the general plan. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
20-60: TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE ESTABLISHED:
A transportation impact fee is hereby established on issuance of certificate of occupancy for new development, excluding expansion of existing
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 304/636
development, in the city. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on
which the transportation impact fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe
the reasonable relationships between this fee and the various types of new development and set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution,
this impact fee shall be paid prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy. On an annual basis, this fee shall be adjusted by the public works director or
designee in accordance with the "Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index" publication. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
20-61: LIMITED USE OF FEES:
The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any interest earnings on that
account, shall be used solely to: a) pay for the city's future construction of new or expanded transportation facilities described in the resolution enacted
with this ordinance; or b) reimburse developers who have been required or permitted as set forth below, to install certain transportation facilities as listed in
the most recently adopted circulation element. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 5-20-1998)
20-62: DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES:
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct an off site public transportation facility described in a
resolution adopted pursuant to this section, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the transportation
facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer may be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not exceed the actual cost of the
construction of the facility by the developer. Should the reimbursement amount exceed available funding in the transportation impact fee account, the
developer may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the city with repayment to the developer to be paid from the transportation impact fee account
as funding becomes available. (Ord. 1558 § 1, 5-20-1998)
Chapter 21
DEVELOPMENT CODE
Chapter Series 100
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 100. TITLE, COMPONENTS, AND PURPOSES
100.01: TITLE AND AUTHORITY:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the PORTERVILLE DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
PORTERVILLE, DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE, or CHAPTER.
The Porterville development ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in section 65850 of the California Government Code. In addition, the
provisions of this chapter relating to the regulation and control of subdivisions are adopted pursuant to the authority contained in title 7, division 2 of the
California Government Code, commencing with section 66410, hereinafter referred to as the "subdivision map act", as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.02: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the city's general plan and to protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare. More specifically, this chapter is adopted to achieve the following objectives:
A. To provide a precise guide for the physical development of the city in a manner as to progressively achieve the arrangement of land uses depicted in
the Porterville general plan, consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan.
B. To foster a harmonious, convenient and workable relationship among land uses and ensure compatible infill development, consistent with the general
plan.
C. To support economic development and job creation.
D. To provide for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
E. To promote high quality architecture and design, consistent with the general plan.
F. To promote the stability of existing land uses that conform with the general plan, protecting them from incompatible development.
G. To promote a safe and efficient traffic circulation system, foster the provision of adequate off street parking and off street loading facilities, bicycle
facilities and pedestrian amenities, and support a multimodal transportation system.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 305/636
H. To facilitate the appropriate location of community facilities, institutions, parks, and other recreational areas.
I. To protect and enhance real property values.
J. To safeguard and enhance the appearance of the city.
K. To define duties and powers of administrative bodies and officers responsible for implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.03: STRUCTURE OF ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Organization Of Regulations: This chapter consists of seven (7) series:
100 series: Introductory Provisions
200 series: Base Districts
300 series: Additional Use And Development Regulations
400 series: Land Divisions
500 series: Overlay Districts
600 series: Administration And Permits
700 series: General Terms
B. Types Of Regulations: Four (4) types of zoning regulations control the use and development of property:
1. Land Use Regulations: These regulations specify land uses permitted, conditionally permitted or specifically prohibited in each zoning district, and
include special requirements, if any, applicable to specific uses. Land use regulations for base zoning districts are in the 200 series of this chapter
and in the 500 series of this chapter for overlay district regulations. Certain regulations, applicable in some or all of the districts, and performance
standards which govern special uses, are in the 300 series of this chapter.
2. Development Regulations: These regulations control the height, bulk, location and appearance of structures on development sites. Development
regulations for base zoning districts are in the 200 series of this chapter. The regulations for overlay districts are in the 500 series of this chapter.
Certain development regulations, applicable to some or all districts are in the 300 series of this chapter. These include regulations for specific uses,
development and site regulations, performance standards, parking, sign, antennas and wireless communications and nonconforming uses.
3. Subdivision Regulations: These regulations control the division of land and specify the design, improvement, and survey data of subdivisions as well
as the procedures to be followed to secure final approval for subdivision maps. Subdivision regulations are in the 400 series of this chapter.
4. Administrative Regulations: These regulations contain detailed procedures for the administration of this chapter, and include common procedures,
processes and standards for discretionary entitlement applications and other permits. Administrative regulations are in the 600 series of this chapter.
5. General Terms And Use Classifications: The 700 series of this chapter provides a list of use classifications and a list of terms and definitions used in
this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.04: GENERAL RULES FOR APPLICABILITY OF ZONING REGULATIONS:
A. Applicability To Property: This chapter shall apply, to the extent permitted by law, to all property within the corporate limits of the city of Porterville and to
property for which applications for annexation and/or subdivisions have been submitted to the city of Porterville, including all uses, structures and land
owned by any private person, firm, corporation or organization, or the city of Porterville or other local, state or federal agencies. Any governmental
agency shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter only to the extent that such property may not be lawfully regulated by the city of Porterville.
B. Compliance With Regulations: No land shall be used, and no structure shall be constructed, occupied, enlarged, altered, demolished or moved in any
zoning district, except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. Relation To Other Regulations:
1. General: The regulations of this chapter and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not supersede any other regulations
or requirements adopted or imposed by the Porterville city council, the state of California, or any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses
and development authorized by this chapter. All uses and development authorized by this chapter shall comply with all other such regulations and
requirements. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this chapter and any other city ordinance, chapter, resolution, guideline or regulation,
the more restrictive provisions shall control, unless otherwise specified. Where conflicts occurs between the articles of this chapter, the specific shall
supersede the general provision. In the case of any remaining uncertainty, the zoning administrator shall make a determination to resolve the conflict.
2. Permit Streamlining Act: It is the intent of this chapter that all actions taken by the decision making body pursuant to this chapter that are solely
adjudicatory in nature be within a time frame consistent with the provisions of Government Code section 65920 et seq. (the permit streamlining act).
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as imposing time limits on actions taken by the decision making body pursuant to this chapter that are
legislative in nature or that require both adjudicatory and legislative judgments.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 306/636
D. Relation To Private Agreements: This chapter shall not interfere with or annul any recorded easement, covenant, or other agreement now in effect,
provided that where this chapter imposes greater restriction than imposed by an easement, covenant, or agreement, this chapter shall control.
E. Relation To Prior Ordinance: The provisions of this chapter supersede all prior ordinances and any amendments of the city of Porterville. No provision of
this chapter shall validate any land use or structure established, constructed or maintained in violation of the prior ordinance, unless such validation is
specifically authorized by this chapter and is in conformance with all other regulations.
F. Application During Local Emergency: The city council may authorize a deviation from a provision of this chapter during a local emergency declared and
ratified under the municipal code. The city council may authorize a deviation by resolution without notice or public hearing. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.05: CONSISTENCY WITH GENERAL PLAN:
Any permit, license or approval issued pursuant to this chapter must be consistent with the Porterville general plan and all applicable specific plans. In any
case where there is a conflict between this chapter and the general plan, the general plan shall prevail. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.06: EFFECT ON PREVIOUSLY APPROVED PROJECTS AND PROJECTS IN PROGRESS:
The city council shall adopt, by resolution, policies that detail the transitional implementation of this chapter for previously approved projects and projects in
progress. All other projects must comply with this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.07: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Porterville city council hereby
declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, regardless of the fact that any or one
or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
100.08: FEES:
The city council shall establish by resolution, and may amend and revise from time to time, fees for processing the discretionary entitlement applications
and other permits authorized or required by this chapter. All fees shall be paid at the time an application is filed, and no processing shall commence until
the fees are paid in full. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 101. ZONING DISTRICTS, ZONING MAP, AND BOUNDARIES
101.01: DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
The city shall be classified into districts or zones, the designation and regulation of which are set forth in this chapter and as follows:
A. Base Zoning Districts: Base zoning districts into which the city is divided are established as follows:
Short Name/Map Symbol Full Name
Agriculture/rural/conservation districts:
AC Agricultural/conservation
RR Rural residential
Residential districts:
RS-1 Very low density residential
RS-2 Low density residential
RM-1 Low-medium density residential
RM-2 Medium density residential
RM-3 High density residential
Downtown districts:
DR-N Downtown retail - north of Olive Avenue
DR-S Downtown retail - south of Olive Avenue
DR-D Downtown retail - D Street Corridor
D-MX Downtown mixed use
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 307/636
D-GC Downtown general commercial
D-PO Downtown professional office
D-PS Downtown public and semipublic
DRM-2 Downtown medium density residential
DRM-3 Downtown high density residential
Commercial districts:
CN Neighborhood commercial
CR Retail centers
CG General and service commercial
CMX Commercial mixed use
Employment districts:
PO Professional office
IP Industrial park
IG General industrial
IA Airport industrial
Public and open space districts:
PS Public and semipublic
PK Parks and public recreation facilities
REC Commercial recreation
Other base districts:
RN Residential neighborhood
PD Planned development
B. Overlay Zoning Districts: Overlay zoning districts, one or more of which may be combined with a base district, are established as follows:
Short Name/Map Symbol Full Name
Overlay zoning districts:
AE Airport environs
HZ Hillside development zone
S Single story
C. References To Classes Of Base Districts: Throughout this chapter, the following references apply:
1. "R district" or "residential district" means one or more of the following districts: RS-1 very low density residential, RS-2 low density residential, RM-1
low-medium density residential, RM-2 medium density residential, and RM-3 high density.
2. "D district" or "downtown district" means one or more of the following districts: DR-N downtown retail - north of Olive Avenue, DR-S downtown retail -
south of Olive Avenue, DR-D downtown retail - D Street Corridor, D-MX downtown mixed use, D-PO downtown professional office, D-GC downtown
general commercial, D-PS downtown public and semipublic, DRM-2 downtown medium density residential, and DRM-3 downtown high density
residential.
3. "C district" or "commercial district" means one or more of the following districts: CN neighborhood commercial, CR retail centers, CG general and
service commercial, and CMX commercial mixed use.
4. "E district" or "employment district" means one or more of the following districts: PO professional office, IP industrial park, IG general industrial, and
IA airport industrial. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
101.02: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP AND DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
The boundaries of the zoning districts established by this chapter are not included in this chapter but are shown on the official zoning map maintained by
the community development department. The official zoning map, together with all legends, symbols, notations, references, zoning district boundaries,
map symbols, and other information on the maps, have been adopted by the council and are hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference, together
with any amendments previously or hereafter adopted, as though they were fully included here.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 308/636
A. Application Of Preannexation Zoning: The city may apply preannexation zoning to unincorporated property located within the planning area boundary
consistent with the Porterville general plan. The preannexation zoning process shall comply with the provisions of article 608, "Amendments To Zoning
Map And Text", of this chapter. The zoning provisions and requirements so established shall become applicable at the same time that the annexation of
such territory becomes effective.
B. Uncertainty Of Boundaries: If uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of alleys, streets, highways, streams or railroads shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following lot lines, city limits, or extraterritorial boundary lines shall be construed as following such lines, limits
or boundaries.
3. In the case of unsubdivided property or where a district boundary divides a lot and no dimensions are indicated, the following shall apply:
a. Lots greater than one acre: The location of such boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the official zoning map.
b. Lots less than one acre: The lot shall be deemed to be included within the zone which is the more restrictive.
4. In the case of any remaining uncertainty, the zoning administrator shall determine the location of boundaries.
5. Where any public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to that
portion of such street or alley added thereto by virtue of such vacation or abandonment.
6. Where any private right of way or easement of any railroad, railway, transportation or public utility company is vacated or abandoned and said
property is unclassified, said property shall be automatically classified as being in the public and semipublic (PS) district. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 102. RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE
102.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide precision in the interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases
defined in this article apply throughout this chapter, except where the context indicates a different meaning. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
102.02: RULES FOR CONSTRUCTION:
In interpreting the various provisions of this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply:
A. The particular controls the general.
B. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
1. "And" indicates that all connected words or provisions shall apply.
2. "And/or" indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.
3. "Or" indicates that the connected words or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.
4. "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected words or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.
C. In case of conflict between the text and a diagram or graphic, the text controls.
D. All references to departments, committees, commissions, boards, or other public agencies are to those of the city of Porterville, unless otherwise
indicated.
E. All references to public officials are to those of the city of Porterville, and include designated deputies of such officials, unless otherwise indicated.
F. All references to days are to calendar days, unless otherwise indicated. If a deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, or a day when the city offices are
closed, it shall be extended to the next working day. The end of a time period shall be the close of business on the last day of the period.
G. The words "shall", "will", "must" and "is to" are always mandatory and not discretionary. The words "should" or "may" are permissive.
H. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future tense includes the past.
I. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.
J. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 309/636
K. Sections and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of
any section. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
102.03: RULES OF INTERPRETATION:
The zoning administrator shall make the interpretation for any definition not expressly identified in this article or provide clarification and determination of
these rules. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 103. RULES OF MEASUREMENT
103.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to explain how various measurements referred to in this chapter are to be calculated. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
For all calculations, the applicant shall be responsible for supplying drawings illustrating the measurements that apply to a project. These drawings shall be
drawn to scale and of sufficient detail to allow easy verification upon inspection by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.03: FRACTIONS:
Whenever this chapter requires consideration of distances, parking spaces, dwelling units or other aspects of development or the physical environment
expressed in numerical quantities, and the result of a calculation contains a fraction of a whole number, the results will be rounded as follows:
A. General Rounding: Fractions of one-half (0.5) or greater shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number and fractions of less than one-half (0.5) shall
be rounded down to the nearest whole number, except as otherwise provided.
B. Exception For State Affordable Housing Density Bonus: For projects eligible for bonus density pursuant to Government Code section 65915 or any
successor statute, and article 302, "Affordable Housing Density Bonus And Other Incentives", of this chapter, any fractional number of permitted bonus
density units shall be rounded up to the next whole number. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.04: MEASURING DISTANCES:
A. Measurements Are Shortest Distance: When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the
measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two (2) objects.
B. Distances Are Measured Horizontally: When determining distances for setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a
horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge of building, structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. These distances are not measured by
following the topography or slope of the land.
C. Measurements Involving A Structure: Measurements involving a structure are made to the outside edge of the foundation for the closest support wall of
the structure. Structures or portions of structures that are entirely underground are not included in measuring required distances.
D. Measurement Of Vehicle Stacking Or Travel Areas: Measurement of a minimum travel distance for vehicles, such as garage entrance setbacks and
stacking lane distances, are measured down the center of the vehicle travel area. For example, curving driveways and travel lanes are measured along
the center arc of the driveway or traffic lane.
E. Measuring Radius: When a specified land use is required to be located a minimum distance from another land use, the minimum distance is measured
in a straight line from all points along the lot line of the subject project.
FIGURE 103.04: MEASURING DISTANCES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 310/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.05: MEASURING HEIGHT:
A. Measuring Building Height: Building height is measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the
building to the highest point of the roof ridge, or parapet wall.
B. Measuring Height Of Other Structures: The height of other structures such as fences is the vertical distance from the ground level immediately under
the structure to the top of the structure. Special measurement provisions are also provided below.
1. Measuring The Height Of Fences On Retaining Walls: The height of a fence that is on top of a retaining wall is measured from the ground level on
the highest side of the fence and wall.
2. Measuring The Height Of Decks: Deck height is determined by measuring from the ground to the top of the floor of the deck.
FIGURE 103.05: MEASURING HEIGHT
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.06: MEASURING LOT WIDTH AND DEPTH:
A. Lot Width: "Lot width" is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines.
B. Lot Depth: Lot depth is measured along an imaginary straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear
property line or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 311/636
FIGURE 103.06: MEASURING LOT WIDTH AND DEPTH
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.07: DETERMINING AVERAGE SLOPE:
The average slope of a parcel is calculated using the following formula:
S = 100(I)(L)/A, where:
A. S = Average slope (in percent).
B. I = Contour interval (in feet).
C. L = Total length of all contour lines on the parcel (in feet).
D. A = Area of subject parcel (in square feet). (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.08: DETERMINING FLOOR AREA:
"Floor area" is the horizontal area (usually expressed in square feet) of all floors included within a building or buildings, according to the following rules:
A. Included In Floor Area: Floor area is deemed to include:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 312/636
1. The floor of atrium and lobby areas;
2. Storage and equipment spaces that are roofed and enclosed on all sides;
3. Enclosed and roofed halls, stairways, and elevator shafts;
4. Enclosed and roofed porches and balconies;
5. Portions of basements and attics that meet building code height requirements for habitable space; and
6. The actual floor space of mezzanines, interior balconies, lofts, closets and all habitable rooms.
B. Excluded From Floor Area: Floor area does not include:
1. Garages, carports or other areas used for parking and loading, or vehicular access to parking and loading spaces;
2. Unenclosed exterior balconies, decks, porches and stairs;
3. Substandard height portions of attics and basements not used as habitable space (per building code). (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.09: DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO:
"Floor area ratio (FAR)" is the ratio of the floor area of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot to the lot area. To calculate FAR, floor area is divided
by lot area, and typically expressed as a decimal. For example, if the floor area of all buildings on a lot totals twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, and
the lot area is ten thousand (10,000) square feet, the FAR is expressed as 2.0.
FIGURE 103.09: DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.10: DETERMINING LOT COVERAGE:
"Lot coverage" is the ratio of the total footprint area of all structures on a lot to the net lot area, typically expressed as a percentage. The footprints of all
principal and accessory structures, including garages, carports, covered patios, and roofed porches, shall be summed in order to calculate lot coverage.
The following structures shall be excluded from the calculation:
A. Unenclosed and unroofed decks, uncovered patio slab, porches, landings, balconies and stairways less than six feet (6') in height;
B. Eaves and roof overhangs projecting up to two and one-half feet (21/2') from a wall;
C. Trellises and similar structures that do not have solid roofs;
D. Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures or decks; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 313/636
E. One small, nonhabitable accessory structure under one hundred twenty (120) square feet. Structures above quantity of one shall be included in lot
coverage.
FIGURE 103.10: DETERMINING LOT COVERAGE
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.11: DETERMINING LOT FRONTAGE:
A. Corner lot: The front of a lot is the narrowest dimension of the lot with street frontage.
B. Through lot (double frontage lot): The front yard borders the street primarily used as frontage by neighboring lots. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.12: DETERMINING SETBACKS (YARDS):
A setback line defining a required yard is parallel to and at the specified distance from the corresponding front, side, or rear property line. The following
special regulations for determining yards apply when a lot abuts a proposed street or alley:
A. Yards Abutting Planned Street Expansions: If a property abuts an existing or proposed street for which the existing right of way is narrower than the
right of way ultimately required for the street, the required setback shall be established from the future right of way rather than the property line.
B. Yards On Alleys:
1. If a side lot line abuts an alley, the yard shall be considered an interior side yard rather than a corner side yard.
2. In computing the minimum yard for any lot where such yard abuts an alley, no part of the width of the alley may be considered as part of the required
yard.
FIGURE 103.12: DETERMINING SETBACKS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 314/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
103.13: MEASURING SIGNS:
The height of signs is measured in the same method as the height of other structures (see subsection 103.05B, "Measuring Height Of Other Structures", of
this article). Calculation of sign area is described in article 305, "Signs", of this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
Chapter Series 200
BASE DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 200. AGRICULTURE/RURAL/CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
200.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purpose of the agriculture/rural/conservation districts is to preserve agricultural and resource conservation areas while providing opportunities
for rural living.
Additional purposes of each agriculture/rural/conservation district:
AC agricultural/conservation: To preserve agricultural and resource conservation areas. Incidental residential uses with septic systems are allowed.
Industrial gravel and aggregate mining are allowed in areas classified by the state as mineral resource zones. Clustered development is encouraged.
RR rural residential: To provide opportunities for rural living on 2.5 acres or larger lots. This district serves as a transition between agriculture/open space
and more intensive urban uses and helps define the limits of urban development. Clustered development is encouraged, and smaller lots may be allowed,
provided that the overall density does not exceed 0.2 unit per acre, with lower limits applying in the hillside development zone. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
200.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
Table 200.02 of this section prescribes the land use regulations for agriculture/rural/conservation districts. The regulations for each district are established
by letter designations as follows:
"P" designates permitted uses.
"C" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
"M" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a minor conditional use permit by the city council.
"(#)" numbers in parentheses refer to specific limitations listed at the end of the table.
"-" designates uses that are not permitted.
Use classifications are defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the zoning
administrator shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Use classifications and subclassifications not
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 315/636
listed in the table or not found to be substantially similar to the uses below are prohibited. The table also notes additional use regulations that apply to
various uses. Section numbers in the right hand column refer to other sections of this chapter.
TABLE 200.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS -
AGRICULTURE/RURAL/CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Use Classification AC RR Additional Regulations
Residential uses:
Single-family dwelling:
Detached P P
Family daycare home:
Small P P
Large P P Section 301.07, "Family Daycare Home, Large"
Group residential - P(1)
Residential care facilities, limited P P
Public and semipublic uses:
Religious facilities - C
Commercial uses:
Animal care, sales and services:
Kennels M M
Veterinary services, large C C
Transportation, communication, and utilities uses:
Communication facilities:
Antenna and transmission towers, camouflage facilities P P Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Antenna and transmission towers, noncamouflage facilities M M Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Utilities, minor P P
Agricultural and extractive uses:
Animal raising P P(2)
Crop cultivation, commercial P P Section 301.06, "Crop Cultivation"
Crop cultivation, noncommercial P P
Mining and quarrying C(3) -
Other applicable types:
Accessory uses and structures P P Section 301.01, "Accessory Uses And Structures"
Animal keeping P P
Caretaker unit P(4) -
Home occupations P P Section 301.09, "Home Occupations"
Second dwelling unit P P Section 301.16, "Second Dwelling Units"
Nonconforming use Article 307, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Lots"
Temporary use Section 301.21, "Temporary Uses"
Notes:
Specific Limitations:
(1) Limited to no more than 2 rooms in a dwelling rented to not more than a total of 4 persons and meals are not provided to more than 4
boarders.
(2) Limited to 4-H and FFA projects, recognized youth organizations, school projects, and other similar projects when conducted in compliance
with the public health and animal laws of the city and to the keeping of bovine animals, horses and other equine animals, sheep and goats on
lots 20,000 square feet or more. The shelter for such animals shall not be closer than 50 feet to any residences.
(3) In areas designated as mineral resource zones in the general plan.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 316/636
(4) For agricultural employees, when located on farms or ranches containing more than 10 acres.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
200.03: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
Table 200.03 of this section prescribes the development standards for agricultural/rural/conservation districts. Additional regulations are denoted in the
right hand column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this chapter, while individual letters refer to notes that directly follow the table.
TABLE 200.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS -
AGRICULTURAL/RURAL/CONSERVATION DISTRICTS
Standard AC RR Additional Regulations
Lot and density standards:
Minimum lot area (acres) 40 2.5 (a)
Minimum lot width (feet) 120 120 (a)
Minimum lot depth (feet) 120 120 (a)
Maximum density (dwelling units/net acre) 0.02 0.25
Building form and location:
Maximum height (feet) 35 35 Section 300.06, "Heights And Height Exceptions"
Minimum yards (feet):
Front 30 30 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Interior side 30 30 (b); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Street side 30 30 (b); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Rear 30 30 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Maximum building coverage (percent of lot) 5 10 (c)
Notes:
Additional Development Regulations:
(a) Reduced Lot Area, Width, And Depth: Reduced lot area, width, and depth are allowed with cluster development provided the overall
maximum density does not exceed the standard. Deed restrictions shall be filed on each property to ensure the overall maximum density is not
exceeded through future subdivision or development.
(b) Narrow Lots: For lots less than 100 feet in width, each side yard shall be a minimum of 10 percent of the lot width, or 5 feet, whichever is
greater.
(c) Coverage Exception: Greater coverage on individual lots may be allowed with clustered development provided the overall site coverage of
the entire development does not exceed the standard.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 201. RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
201.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the residential districts are to:
A. Maintain and enhance the city's neighborhoods.
B. Ensure the provision of services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities.
C. Provide a basis for the evaluation of development proposals for appropriate densities within the given ranges.
D. Implement and provide appropriate regulations for general plan classifications of "very low density residential", "low density residential", "low-medium
density residential", "medium density residential", and "high density residential".
Additional purposes of each residential district:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 317/636
RS-1 very low density residential: To provide areas for large lot or executive home single-family subdivisions with a maximum residential density of 3.1
units per net acre. This district also allows for limited uses such as daycare homes and religious facilities that are appropriate in a very low density
residential environment.
RS-2 low density residential: To provide areas for attached or detached single-family homes with a maximum residential density of 7.5 units per net
acre. This district also allows for limited uses such as daycare homes, parks, and religious facilities that are appropriate in a low density residential
environment.
RM-1 low-medium density residential: To accommodate low-medium densities and more varied forms of residential development, including small lot
single-family homes, detached zero lot line developments, duplexes, townhouses, and garden apartments with a maximum residential density of 11.3
units per net acre. This district also allows for limited uses such as daycare homes, parks, schools and religious facilities that are appropriate in a lowmedium
density residential environment. This district provides for a transition from lower density residential neighborhoods to medium density multifamily
areas.
RM-2 medium density residential: To accommodate a variety of housing types, such as small lot single-family homes, detached zero lot line
developments, duplexes, townhouses, and garden apartments with a maximum residential density of 15.0 units per net acre. This district is intended to
be located closer to community and retail services, mixed use areas, parks, and areas where greater access can be provided. In addition to residential
uses, this district allows for a variety of public and semipublic uses such as cultural institutions, hospitals and clinics, and religious facilities that are
appropriate in a medium density residential environment. This district provides for a transition from lower density residential neighborhoods to higher
density multi-family development and commercial areas.
RM-3 high density residential: This classification is intended to accommodate attached homes, two- to four-plexes, and apartment buildings with a
maximum residential density of 30.0 units per net acre. This district allows for a variety of public and semipublic uses such as clubs and lodges, cultural
institutions, hospitals and clinics, and religious facilities that are appropriate in a high density residential environment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
201.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
Table 201.02 of this section prescribes the land use regulations for residential districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter
designations as follows:
"P" designates permitted uses.
"C" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
"M" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a minor conditional use permit by the city council.
"(#)" numbers in parentheses refer to specific limitations listed at the end of the table.
"-" designates uses that are not permitted.
Use classifications are defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the zoning
administrator shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Use classifications and subclassifications not
listed in the table or not found to be substantially similar to the uses below are prohibited. The table also notes additional use regulations that apply to
various uses. Section numbers in the right hand column refer to other sections of this chapter.
TABLE 201.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Use Classification RS-1 RS-2 RM-1 RM-2 RM-3 Additional Regulations
Residential uses:
Single-family dwelling:
Attached - P P P P
Detached P P P P P
Multi-family residential - - P P P
Family daycare home:
Small P P P P P
Large P P P P P Section 301.07, "Family Daycare Home, Large"
Group residential P(1) P(1) P(1) P P
Mobile home parks - - C(2) C(2) C(2) Sections 301.10, "Manufactured Homes" and 301.11,
"Mobile Home Parks"
Residential care facilities, limited P P P P P
Public and semipublic uses:
Clubs and lodges - - - C C Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Community center - - C C C
Cultural institutions - - - C C
Elderly and long term care - - - C P
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 318/636
Park and recreation facilities, public P P P P P
Religious facilities C C C C C
Residential care facilities, general - - C C C Section 301.15, "Residential Care Facilities, General"
Schools, public or private P P P P P
Social service facilities - - - - C Section 301.19, "Social Service Facilities"
Commercial uses:
Eating, drinking, and smoking
establishments:
Coffee shops/cafes - - - - M(3) Section 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"
Restaurants - - - - C(3) Sections 300.08, "Outdoor Seating" and 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Transportation, communication, and
utilities uses:
Utilities, minor P P P P P
Agricultural and extractive uses:
Crop cultivation, commercial M M M M M Section 301.06, "Crop Cultivation"
Crop cultivation, noncommercial P P P P P
Other applicable types:
Accessory uses and structures P P P P P Section 301.01, "Accessory Uses And Structures"
Animal keeping P P P P P Section 301.03, "Animal Keeping"
Home occupations P P P P P Section 301.09, "Home Occupations"
Second dwelling unit P P P P P Section 301.16, "Second Dwelling Units"
Nonconforming use Article 307, "Nonconforming Uses,
Structures, And Lots"
Temporary use Section 301.21, "Temporary Uses"
Notes:
Specific Limitations:
(1) Limited to no more than 2 rooms in a dwelling rented to not more than a total of 4 persons and meals are not provided to more than 4
boarders.
(2)Limited to sites with a minimum gross site area of 10 acres.
(3)Limited to a restaurant or cafe/coffee shop accessory to a mobile home court or a private club or lodge when such use has no direct access
off a public street and accommodates only residents, members, or their guests.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
201.03: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
Table 201.03 of this section prescribes the development standards for residential districts. Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand column.
Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this chapter, while individual letters refer to notes that directly follow the table.
TABLE 201.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Standard RS-1
RS-2
RM-1
RM-2
RM-3
Additional Regulations
Lot and density standards:
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 12,500
6,000
6,000
6,000
6,000
Subsection 201.04C, "Reduced Minimum Lot Size, Width, And
Depth"
Minimum lot width (ft.) 90 60 60 60 60 Subsection 201.04C, "Reduced Minimum Lot Size, Width, And
Depth"
Minimum lot depth (ft.) 100 75 75 75 75 Subsection 201.04C, "Reduced Minimum Lot Size, Width, And
Depth"
Maximum density (units/net acre) 3.1 7.5 11.3 15.0 30.0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 319/636
Minimum density (units/net acre) n/a n/a n/a n/a 20.0
Minimum area per dwelling unit (sq.
ft.)
n/a n/a 3,000
1,500
1,000
Building form and location:
Maximum height (ft.) 35 35 35 50 50 (a); and section 300.06, "Heights And Height Exceptions"
Minimum yards (ft.):
Residence (front) 15 15 15 15 15 (b); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Porch (front) 10 10 10 10 10
Garage (front) 20 20 20 20 20
Interior side 5 5 5 5 5 (c), (d) and (f); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into
Yards"
Street side 10 10 10 10 10 (e); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Rear 10 5 5 10 10 (f); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Maximum building coverage (% of
lot)
30 45 45 50 60
Minimum courtyard dimension n/a n/a n/a 20 20 (g)
Additional standards:
Private open space (sq. ft. per unit)
n/a n/a 200 75 50 Subsection 201.04B, "Residential Multi-Family Development"
Common open space (sq. ft. per
unit)
n/a n/a n/a 100 100 Subsection 201.04B, "Residential Multi-Family Development"
Notes:
Additional Development Regulations:
(a) Transitional Standards: Where a site is adjacent to an RS-1, RS-2, or RM-1 district, the following standards apply:
(1) The maximum height within 40 feet of an RS-1, RS-2, or RM-1 district boundary is 35 feet. The maximum height within 50 feet of an RS-1,
RS-2, or RM-1 district boundary is 40 feet.
FIGURE 201.03(a)(1): RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT TRANSITIONAL STANDARDS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 320/636
(2) Buildings exceeding 30 feet in height must be set back or stepped back 1 foot from the required interior side and rear setback lines for
every foot of height above 30 feet.
(b) Front Yards: Where more than 60 percent of such portion of the linear frontage of lots improved with residential buildings within any block is
comprised of lots with less than the minimum front yard requirement, then the minimum front yard requirement for other residential buildings in
such block may be reduced to the average of the actual front yards of all of the lots in such block with existing residential buildings, counting
those which have front yards of greater depth than the minimum requirement.
FIGURE 201.03(b): FRONT YARDS
(c) Existing Structures: When the existing side yard setback is less than required in this chapter, additions to such structures may conform to the
existing setback, provided that the addition does not encroach closer to the property line than the existing structure.
(d) Attached Single-Family Dwellings: Required setbacks apply to the ends of rows of attached single-family dwellings.
FIGURE 201.03(d): SETBACKS FOR ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 321/636
(e) Street Side Yard; Reversed Corner Lots: Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum street side yard width of 12 feet. No accessory structure
shall project beyond the extension of the required front yard line of the lot in the rear (key lot).
(f) Increased Yard For Certain Institutional Uses: Any building erected or used for a school, government, or other institutional use mentioned
elsewhere in this chapter, shall be located at least 15 feet from an RS district, notwithstanding any lesser requirement in the district where
located, provided such building shall not be required to be located more than 5 feet from any lot line adjacent to any alley. The city council may
waive this requirement for accessory buildings to provide reasonable accommodation.
(g) Minimum Courtyard Dimensions: Courtyards surrounded by building walls on 3 sides shall have a minimum dimension of 20 feet.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1826, 9-15-2015)
201.04: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. Residential Single-Family Development: Residential single-family structures shall be developed in accordance with the following standards:
1. Garage Frontage And Location:
a. Where garage doors face a street, garage width shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the width of the front facade of the building for a two (2) car
garage home, or seventy percent (70%) for a three (3) car garage. Maximum of three (3) garage doors may face a street.
b. Where garage doors face the interior of the lot (i.e., a side loading garage) the face of the door shall be set back at least twenty five feet (25') from
the side lot line. The front setback for such a garage is no less than fifteen feet (15').
c. Garages with three (3) or more doors, at least one garage front must be separated from the remaining garage fronts by at least two feet (2').
FIGURE 201.04A1: GARAGE FRONTAGE AND LOCATION
2. Architectural Articulation: On all facades that face a street, at least two (2) architectural articulations are required, such as window trim, window
recesses, shutters, window boxes, bay windows, cornices, changes in material (i.e., stone veneer), larger than normal porch, decorative garage
windows, or two (2) other projections or recesses in a pattern that creates architectural interest across the length of the face as determined by the
zoning administrator.
3. Width: All residential structures shall have a minimum width of twenty feet (20').
4. Two-Story Dwellings: Two-story dwellings shall include windows on the facade facing the street. No second story street facing wall shall run in a
continuous plane of more than twenty feet (20') without a window or a projection, offset, or recess of the building wall at least one foot (1') in depth.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 322/636
B. Residential Multi-Family Development: Each multiple-family residential project with two (2) or more dwelling units on a single lot shall be developed in
accordance with the following standards:
1. Parking And Garage Frontage Limitation: The total frontage of parking areas visible from the street (excluding alleys), including open parking,
carports, and garages, but excluding underground parking and parking located behind buildings, shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the lot
frontage. The zoning administrator may approve a modification to this standard where existing development patterns or topographic features make it
infeasible to limit parking and garage frontage to thirty percent (30%) of lot frontage. Parking areas not visible from the street are not subject to this
limitation.
FIGURE 201.04B1: PARKING AND GARAGE FRONTAGE LIMITATIONS
2. Building Entrances:
a. Orientation: Developments shall relate directly to the adjacent street, and present a pedestrian scaled entry with a residential character.
b. Projection Or Recess: Building entrances must have a roofed projection (such as a porch) or recess with a minimum depth of at least five feet (5')
and minimum area of fifty (50) square feet. Alternative designs that create an enhanced entry feature facing the street, such as a trellis or
landscaped courtyard entry, may be approved.
3. Architectural Articulation: All multiple-family residential buildings shall include adequate design features to create visual variety and avoid a large
scale and bulky appearance. Building facades shall be articulated to give the appearance of a collection of smaller structures. This requirement shall
be met by using two (2) or more of the following methods:
a. Facade Articulation: All street facing facades have at least one horizontal or vertical projection or recess at least four feet (4') in depth, or two (2)
projections or recesses at least two and one-half feet (2.5') in depth, for every twenty five (25) horizontal feet of wall. If located on a building with
two (2) or more stories, the articulated elements must be greater than one story in height, and may be grouped rather than evenly spaced in twenty
five foot (25') modules. Building entrances and front porches and projections into required yards such as stoops, bays, overhangs, fireplaces, and
trellises may count toward meeting this requirement.
b. Variable Roof Form: Variable roof forms incorporated into the building design, and no more than two (2) side by side units may be covered by one
unarticulated roof. Articulations may be accomplished by changing roof height, offsets, and direction of slope, and by introducing elements such as
dormers, towers, or parapets.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 323/636
c. Facade Detailing And Materials: All visible building facades incorporate details, such as window trim, window recesses, cornices, changes in
materials or other design elements, in an integrated composition. Each side of a building that is visible from a public right of way shall be designed
with a complementary level of detailing and quality of materials.
d. Scale: The scale of a multi-family development shall be considered within the context of its surroundings.
e. Use Of Balconies, Bay Windows, And Other Such Projections Or Recesses: The building incorporates balconies, bay windows, entry porches or
other projections and recesses in a pattern that creates architectural interest across the length of the facade.
FIGURE 201.04B3: ARCHITECTURAL ARTICULATION
4. Open Space: Private and common areas shall be provided in accordance with this subsection. Private areas typically consist of balconies, decks,
patios, and fenced yards. Common areas typically consist of landscaped areas, patios, swimming pools, barbecue areas, playgrounds, trees,
bushes, ground cover, and turf. All areas not improved with buildings, parking, vehicular accessways, trash enclosures, and similar items shall be
developed as common areas with the types of attributes described above.
a. Minimum Dimensions: Open space shall have the following minimum dimensions in order to count toward open space requirements:
(1) Open space located on the ground level (e.g., yards, decks, patios): Ten feet (10').
(2) Open space located above ground level (e.g., balconies): Five feet (5').
b. Usability: A surface shall be provided that allows convenient use for outdoor living and/or recreation. Such surface shall be a combination of lawn,
garden, flagstone, wood planking, concrete, or other serviceable, dust free surfacing. Slope shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
c. Accessibility:
(1) Private open space: The space shall be accessible to only one residential unit by a doorway to a habitable room or hallway.
(2) Common open space: The space shall be accessible to all the residential units on the lot. It shall be served by any stairway or other accessway
qualifying as an egress facility from a habitable room.
5. Walkways: Walkways shall link the residential units to the public right of way and with recreational and other internal facilities as well as with other
residential units.
C. Reduced Minimum Lot Size, Width, And Depth: Smaller lots with a minimum area of three thousand (3,000) square feet, a minimum lot width of thirty
five feet (35'), and a minimum lot depth of sixty feet (60') may be approved with a conditional use permit when the city council finds that the lot size and
configuration are consistent with the general plan and will not adversely affect adjoining uses. All such projects are subject to the following standards:
1. Development Design Elements: The following required elements and the specified number of optional elements shall be provided in addition to the
open space requirements listed below:
a. Required Elements: All of the following elements shall be provided:
(1) Street Trees: Fifteen (15) gallon shade trees shall be planted at least thirty feet (30') on center along all sidewalks. Tree guards shall be
provided.
(2) Variety Of Lot Widths: A variety of lot widths shall be provided to accommodate a variety of home styles, setbacks, and garage placements. At
least thirty percent (30%) of the lots shall vary from the "typical" (mode) lot width in the development by at least twenty percent (20%).
b. Optional Elements: At least two (2) of the following elements shall be provided:
(1) Traffic Calming: The development shall include streetscape improvements, such as roundabouts, neck downs, curb bulbs, or similar traffic
calming techniques. Provisions shall be included for the private maintenance of such facilities by a homeowners' association or other body or a
local assessment district established by the developer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 324/636
(2) Park Land And Open Space: The development shall include privately maintained park or common open space at least thirty percent (30%)
greater in area than the minimum required. (See subsection C3 of this section for required open space area.)
(3) Variable Front Yards: No more than fifty percent (50%) of homes shall be set back the same distance from the front lot line unless at least half
of them have front porches, and at least twenty five percent (25%) of the homes shall be set back at least five feet (5') farther than the minimum.
This component may be implemented by recording "build-to" lines on the final subdivision map.
(4) Alley Accessed Parking: Parking for at least seventy five percent (75%) of lots in the development shall be provided in the rear half of the lot
and accessed from a rear alley.
(5) Shared Or Clustered Driveways: Driveways shall be paired so that there is a single curb cut providing access to two (2) houses, and the total
width for the paired driveway is not more than eighteen feet (18'). Alternatively, driveways may be clustered (but need not share the same curb
cut) so that there is at least thirty six feet (36') of uninterrupted curb between each pair of clustered driveways.
2. Building Design Elements: At least two (2) of the following elements shall be provided:
a. Variable Garage Entries: The development plan shall include provisions for variable location of garage entries. At least thirty five percent (35%) of
the lots shall have garages that are side loaded, set at least five feet (5') behind the primary facade of the building or set entirely in the rear half of
the lot in a detached garage.
b. Porches: All single-family dwellings, attached or detached, shall have a covered front porch with a minimum dimension of four feet (4') and a
minimum size of thirty two (32) square feet.
c. Architectural Diversity: Projects with up to twenty (20) lots shall have a minimum of three (3) unique elevations. Projects of between twenty one
(21) and one hundred (100) lots shall have a minimum of four (4) unique elevations. Projects of one hundred (100) or more lots shall have a
minimum of five (5) unique elevations.
3. Open Space: A minimum total open space area (including, but not limited to, private yards, porches, balconies, and patios) of three hundred (300)
square feet shall be provided on each lot. Also required are common open space areas of two hundred (200) square feet per lot that provide usable
and accessible open space for the recreation and outdoor enjoyment of the development's residents and their guests. To qualify as common open
space, the area(s) shall be centrally located, have a minimum usable width of twenty five feet (25'), and be at least fifty percent (50%) open to the
sky and the common open space is not located on the lot served, but serves multiple lots. The requirement for common open space may be waived
subject to the following conditions:
a. The design accommodates five hundred (500) square feet of private open space on each individual lot,
b. The minimum dimension of the private open space is ten feet (10'), and
c. The subdivision is located within one-fourth (1/4) mile of a park, school, or other available open space.
4. Required Findings:
a. The lot size and project density are consistent with the general plan;
b. The lots and associated development would not adversely affect adjoining uses;
c. Additional site and building design elements are in evidence; and
d. The lot size is acceptable considering site topography, public street access, availability of utilities, existing neighborhood characteristics, including
the average density of surrounding development. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 202. DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
202.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the downtown districts are to:
A. Maintain a thriving, vibrant downtown compatible with surrounding land uses.
B. Foster the location of cultural and civic uses and public open space to maintain downtown as the civic core of the city.
C. Provide for a range of commercial and retail services that add to a diversified economic base.
D. Allow mixed uses to create a more vibrant community and offer additional opportunities for housing for residents requiring convenient access to
community services and less dependency on auto transportation.
E. Ensure that development is visually attractive and pedestrian friendly.
F. Preserve and enhance the pedestrian oriented environment of the downtown area.
G. Ensure that potential development and redevelopment is integrated into the downtown and supports the vitality of the area.
Additional purposes of each district within the downtown districts:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 325/636
DR-N downtown retail - north of Olive Avenue: Maintain the pedestrian and transit oriented environment of retail, restaurants, services, and
government offices in the heart of Porterville's downtown, focused on Main Street. Maintain the traditional downtown character, with buildings built
immediately adjacent to the sidewalk, active commercial uses on the ground floor, ample on street parking, and a visually attractive streetscape with
trees, historic streetlights, benches, and other pedestrian amenities.
DR-S downtown retail - south of Olive Avenue: Create an attractive commercial corridor that provides a welcoming gateway at the southern entrance to
downtown. Buildings should line the street, with street trees along the entire length of the street, and small landscaped front yards between the
buildings and the sidewalk.
DR-D downtown retail - D Street Corridor: Provide for a mix of medium scale retail and service uses in a manner compatible with the downtown
pedestrian environment. Buildings should line the street, with deep landscaped front yards and rows of trees.
D-MX downtown mixed use: Create a mixed use area that attracts businesses and residents to locate downtown, and provides a transition area
between commercial areas and residential neighborhoods. Allow a mix of commercial, service, office, and residential uses that do not adversely impact
one another in a significant way. Create an attractive streetscape of buildings that line the street, with landscaping and trees tailored to the width and
the existing design character of the street.
D-PO downtown professional office: Encourage the adaptive reuse of existing buildings with office and professional uses, and infill of new office
buildings, in order to provide convenient services to local residents and businesses, complement nearby retail development, and maintain the historic
residential character of the area. Maintain the pattern of small lots, historic residential building forms, landscaped front yards, and street trees in planter
strips.
D-PS downtown public and semipublic: Provide areas for larger scale public facilities that serve the community, with a focus on integrating
development into the downtown. Encourage land uses and design features that enhance the vitality, character and quality of life of the downtown and
surrounding residential areas. Ensure that the traditional block pattern of downtown is maintained. Incorporate public streets and pedestrian walkways
that connect these larger scale projects to downtown streets and walkways. Design streets with attractive landscaped front yards and street trees,
consistent with the character of existing and adjoining streets.
DRM-2 downtown medium density residential: Encourage a variety of housing types, such as small lot single-family homes, detached zero lot line
developments, duplexes, townhouses, and garden apartments with a maximum residential density of 16.5 units per acre in the downtown area.
Encourage housing in downtown to provide opportunities for residents to live in close proximity to community services and retail establishments, and to
help support the vitality of downtown businesses. Maintain the existing character of buildings that front the street, landscaped front yards, and street
trees.
DRM-3 downtown high density residential: Facilitate the development of attached homes, two- to four-plexes, and apartment or condominium buildings
with a maximum residential density of 33.0 units per acre in downtown, to create a more vibrant community and offer additional opportunities for
housing for residents requiring convenient access to community services and less dependency on auto transportation. Maintain the existing character
of buildings that front the street, landscaped front yards, and street trees.
D-GC downtown general commercial: Provide areas for retail, service, and heavier commercial uses that meet local and community needs in a manner
complementary to the adjacent downtown pedestrian oriented environment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1854 - CANNABIS LAND USES AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES. Go to new
ordinance.
202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
Table 202.02 of this section prescribes the land use regulations for downtown districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter
designations as follows:
"P" designates permitted uses.
"C" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
"(#)" numbers in parentheses refer to specific limitations listed at the end of the table.
"-" designates uses that are not permitted.
Use classifications are defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the zoning
administrator shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Use classifications and subclassifications not
listed in the table or not found to be substantially similar to the uses below are prohibited. The table also notes additional use regulations that apply to
various uses. Section numbers in the right hand column refer to other sections of this chapter.
TABLE 202.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS - DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Use Classification
DR-N
DR-S
DR-D
D-MX
DRM-
2
DRM-
3
D-PO
D-GC
D-PS Additional Regulations
Residential use classifications:
Single-family dwelling:
Attached P(1) - - - P P - - -
Multi-family residential P(1) P(2) - P P P P(1) - -
Family daycare home:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 326/636
Small P P - P P P P - -
Large - - - P P P - - - Section 301.07, "Family
Daycare Home, Large"
Group residential - - - P(3) P P - - -
Mixed use development C Section 203.04,
"Supplemental
Regulations"
Residential care facilities, limited P P - P P P P - -
Single room occupancy hotels - - - C(1) - - - - - Section 301.18, "Single
Room Occupancy Hotels"
Public and semipublic use classifications:
Clubs and lodges C(4) P P P - - P(5) P - Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Colleges and trade schools, public or
private
C(5) C C C - - C C P
Community center - - - C - - - - P
Cultural institutions C(5) C C C - - P C P
Daycare centers C C C C C C P - C
Elderly and long term care - - - - P P P - -
Government offices P P P - - - P - P
Instructional services P(5) P P P - - P P P
Park and recreation facilities, public P P P P P P P P P
Religious facilities - - - C C C - - -
Residential care facilities, general - - - - C C - - - Section 301.15,
"Residential Care
Facilities, General"
Schools, public or private P(4) P P P - - - - P
Social service facilities - - - C C C - - - Section 301.19, "Social
Service Facilities"
Commercial use classifications:
Animal care, sales, and services:
Kennels - - C - - - - C -
Pet stores M(6)
P(6) P(6) M(6)
- - - P(6) -
Veterinary services, small - - C - - - - P -
Artists' studios P P P P - - - P -
Automobile/vehicle sales and services:
Automobile/vehicle rentals - - - - - - - P -
Automobile/vehicle sales and leasing - C C(7) - - - - P -
Automobile/vehicle service and repair,
major
- - C - - - - C - Section 301.04,
"Automobile/Vehicle
Service And Repair, Major
And Minor"
Automobile/vehicle service and repair,
minor
- C(7) C(7) - - - - P - Section 301.04,
"Automobile/Vehicle
Service And Repair, Major
And Minor"
Automobile/vehicle washing - - - - - - - C - Section 301.05, "Auto
Service Stations And Car
Washing"
Service station - - - - - - - C - Section 301.05, "Auto
Service Stations And Car
Washing"
Banks and financial institutions:
Banks and credit unions P(8) P(8) P P(8) - - P(8) P -
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 327/636
Building materials and services - - - - - - - P(9) -
Business services P(10)
P(10)
P(10)
P(10)
- - P P -
Commercial entertainment and recreation:
Cinema/theaters C C C C - - - C - Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Downtown entertainment - - C C - - - C C Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Small scale C C C C - - - C - Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Eating, drinking, and smoking
establishments:
Bars/nightclubs/
lounges
C C C C - - - C - Sections 300.08, "Outdoor
Seating"; and 301.02,
"Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Coffee shops/cafes P(8) P(8) P(8) P(8) - - P(8) P(8) P(8,13)
Section 300.08, "Outdoor
Seating"
Restaurants P(8) P(8) P(8) P(8) - - P(8) P(8) P(8,13)
Sections 300.08, "Outdoor
Seating"; and 301.02,
"Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Tobacco bars C C C C - - - C -
Food and beverage retail sales, less than
5,000 square feet
P P P P - - P(11)
P P(11) Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Food and beverage retail sales, more than
5,000 to 50,000 square feet
P P P P - - - - - Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Hotels and motels C C C C - - - C -
Maintenance and repair services less than
1,500 square feet
- - - - - - - P(12)
-
Medical facilities:
Medical clinic - P P P - - P P P
Professional/medical P(13)
P P P - - P P P
Mixed use development C Section 203.04,
"Supplemental
Regulations"
Nurseries and garden centers - C C C - - - P -
Offices:
General offices P(13)
P P P - - P P P
Walk-in clientele P P P P - - P P P
Parking, public or private P P P P P P P P P
Personal services P P P P - - P P -
Retail sales, less than 50,000 square feet P P P P - - P(11)
P -
Retail sales, more than 50,000 square feet
C C C C - - - C -
Industrial use classifications:
Handicraft/custom manufacturing - - - - - - - P -
Industry, limited - - - - - - - C -
Recycling facilities:
Recycling collection facility - C - - - - - C C Section 301.14, "Recycling
Facilities"
Reverse vending machine - P P P - - - P P Section 301.14, "Recycling
Facilities"
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 328/636
Transportation, communication, and utilities
use classifications:
Communication facilities:
Antenna and transmission towers,
camouflage facilities
P P P P - - P P P Section 301.20,
"Telecommunication
Facilities"
Antenna and transmission towers,
noncamouflage facilities
C(14)
C(14)
C(14)
C(14)
- - C(14)
C(14)
C(14) Section 301.20,
"Telecommunication
Facilities"
Broadcasting facility - M M M - - - M - Section 301.20,
"Telecommunication
Facilities"
Call center - - - - - - P(5) P(5) P
Recording studio - - P(6) P(6) - - - P(6) -
Transportation passenger terminals P(15)
P(15)
P(15)
- - - - - -
Utilities, minor P P P P P P P P P
Other applicable types:
Accessory uses and structures P P P P P P P P P Section 301.01,
"Accessory Uses And
Structures"
Home occupations P P P P P P - - - Section 301.09, "Home
Occupations"
Second dwelling unit - - - - P P - - - Section 301.16, "Second
Dwelling Units"
Nonconforming use Article 307, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Lots"
Temporary use Section 301.21, "Temporary Uses"
Notes:
Specific Limitations:
(1)Residential units allowed only on upper floors unless approved with a conditional use permit. Common ancillary areas are allowed on the
ground floor except on Main Street.
(2)On Main Street, residential units are allowed only on upper floors unless approved with a conditional use permit.
(3)Limited to no more than 2 rooms in a dwelling rented to not more than a total of 4 persons and meals are not provided to more than 4
boarders.
(4)Allowed only on upper floors and limited to 5,000 square feet in size.
(5)Limited to 5,000 square feet in size.
(6)Provided that such use shall be completely enclosed in a building of soundproof construction.
(7)Limited to uses conducted wholly within a building enclosed on all sides including the display, storage, repair, and reconditioning of vehicles.
(8)Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
(9)Bulk storage of sand, gravel, or cement is not allowed.
(10)Wholesale services are not allowed.
(11)Permitted only as accessory to a primary use.
(12)No outdoor operations or outdoor storage is allowed.
(13)Limited to 25 percent of ground floor area unless additional floor area is approved with a conditional use permit. No square footage limitation
on upper floors.
(14)Shall not be located within 300 feet of any R district.
(15)Not allowed on Main Street. No repair or storage of vehicles is allowed.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 329/636
202.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
Table 202.03 of this section prescribes the development standards for downtown districts. Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand column.
Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this chapter, while individual letters refer to notes that directly follow the table.
TABLE 202.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS
Standard DR-N DR-S
DRD
D-MX
DRM-
2 DRM-3 D-PO
D-GC
D-PS
Additional
Standards
Lot, density,
and block
standards:
Minimum lot
area (sq. ft.)
- - - - 6,000
6,000 6,000 6,000
6,000
Minimum lot
width (ft.)
- - - - 60 60 60 60 60
Minimum lot
depth (ft.)
- - - - 75 75 75 75 75
Minimum
density
(dwelling
units/acre)
- - - 15 - - - - -
Maximum
density
(dwelling
units/net acre)
No maximum, FAR applies to
combined residential and
nonresidential
- 41.0 16.5 33.0 - - -
Maximum
block
dimension (ft.)
Dimension: 500; 600 with mid block pedestrianway Subsection
202.04B,
"Maximum
Block Length"
Building form,
location, and
street design:
Maximum
height (ft.)
50 on corner lots and lots over 2 acres;
40 on all other lots
40; 50
with CUP
35 40; 50 on
corner lots
30; 40 with CUP * 50 on corner
lots and lots
over 2 acres;
* 40 on interior
lots
Section
300.06,
"Heights And
Height
Exceptions"
Minimum
height (ft.)
Main St.: 28 - - - - - - - -
Minimum yards
(ft.):
Front (Main
St. frontage
is always
considered
the front of
the lot)
0 min.; 10 max.
Shall be paved on
Main St. with tile,
stone, brick,
concrete, or
comparable
material
Commercial:
15 for
buildings, 10
for parking.
Main St. and
Olive St.: 10
min., 20
max.
Residential:
15
10
min.;
20
max.
D
St.:
15
0; 10 on
Main St.
or ground
floor
residential
20 15 15 min.; 25 max.
10 20 * Subsection
202.04I,
"Building
Projections";
* Unless
otherwise
stated, shall
be
landscaped in
accord with
article 303,
"Landscaping"
Interior side
* Commercial: 0
* Residential: Where residential is allowed, every unit
shall have at least 1 window with a minimum of 15 ft.
of clear separation from another building or wall
1 - 2 stories: 5
3 or more stories: 10
5 0 20 Subsection
202.04I,
"Building
Projections"
Street side
or rear on a
street
frontage
East of 2nd St.: 10;
Otherwise: 0 min.;
10 max.
10 10 0; 10 if on
Main St.
and for
ground
floor
residential
10 10 15 10 20 * Subsection
202.04I,
"Building
Projections";
and
* Unless
otherwise
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 330/636
stated, shall
be
landscaped in
accord with
article 303,
"Landscaping"
Transitional
- street side
5 15 15 15 15 15 (c)
Rear, not on
a street
frontage
* Commercial: 0
* Residential: Where residential is allowed, every unit
shall have at least 1 window with a minimum of 15 ft.
of clear separation from another building or wall
10 10 0, 5 from alley 0 20 Subsection
202.04I,
"Building
Projections"
Maximum floor
area ratio, all
uses
3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 - - 0.50 1.0 0.25(a)
Maximum
building
coverage (% of
lot)
- - - - 50 60 - - 50
Minimum
percent of
building at
setback line
- 50(b) 50(b)
50(b) - - - - -
Parking:
Maximum curb
cut per lot or
street frontage
1, none on Main
St.
1, unless more are required by the city for public
services
1 1, unless more
are required
by the city for
public services
Subsection
202.04D,
"Parking"
Maximum curb
cut width (ft.)
20 20 20 20 20 20 10 20 20
Landscaped
setback
between
parking and
street (ft.)
5 5; 10 on
Main,
Orange, and
C Streets
5; 10
on D
St.
5; 10 on
Main St.
10 10 10 5 10 Article 303,
"Landscaping"
Setback of
parking from
buildings (ft.)
5 5 5 5 10; 5 may be
occupied by a
pedestrian walkway
paved with tile,
stone, brick,
concrete, or
comparable material
5, may be
occupied by a
pedestrian
walkway with tile,
stone, brick,
concrete, or
comparable
material
5 10
Parking lot
location
standards
apply
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Subsection
202.04D,
"Parking"
Open space
and
landscaping:
Usable open
space (sq. ft.
per residential
unit)
75 75 - 100 150, 50 of which
shall be private
- - - Subsection
202.04E,
"Open Space"
Additional
standards:
Supplemental
regulations
apply
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Section
202.04,
"Supplemental
Regulations"
Notes:
Additional Development Regulations:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 331/636
(a) Determining FAR: When determining FAR in the D-PS district, meeting rooms, cafeteria facilities, and conference facilities are excluded from
floor area.
(b) Retail Stores Or Shopping Centers: The percent of building at setback line requirement may be waived with conditional use permit approval
for retail stores or shopping centers with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or greater when the city council finds that alternative features
have been incorporated into the project to achieve pedestrian orientation and to accommodate pedestrians and bicycle access.
(c) Transitional Standards: When a site is adjacent to an R district, the following standards apply:
(1) Buildings exceeding 20 feet in height must be set back 5 feet from the interior side and rear property line; buildings exceeding 25 feet in
height shall be stepped back 1 additional foot for every foot of height above 25 feet.
(2) The maximum height within 40 feet of an R district boundary is 35 feet. The maximum height within 50 feet of an R district boundary is 40
feet.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
202.04: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. Design Guidelines: All development shall comply with the downtown design guidelines adopted by resolution.
B. Maximum Block Length: Block length in the downtown districts are limited to five hundred feet (500'), measured from curb edge to curb edge. A block
length of up to six hundred feet (600') shall only be allowed when a mid block pedestrian connection is provided.
C. Street Preservation: Existing streets in downtown shall be preserved. Public right of way shall not be eliminated or abandoned unless substantial public
benefits are provided such as a new park.
D. Parking: Parking shall be provided and maintained according to the general standards of article 304, "On Site Parking And Loading", of this chapter, as
well as the standards of this subsection.
1. Parking Location:
a. Parking shall be located at the rear of the site or at the side of the building.
b. Parking shall not be located between a public street and a building except for double frontage lots. Parking shall only be located between a public
street and a building in the rear of a double frontage lot where no other alternative exists.
c. The parking location requirements may be waived with conditional use permit approval for retail stores or shopping centers with a gross floor area
of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater when the city council finds that alternative features have been incorporated into the project to
achieve pedestrian orientation and to accommodate pedestrians and bicycle access.
2. Parking Lot Access:
a. Access shall be provided from a side street or alley when they are available.
b. Commercial parking lot access shall not be provided from a residential street where alternate access is available.
c. Wherever possible, parking entrances shall share curb cuts in order to minimize the overall number of curb cuts.
3. Residential Parking:
a. Garages or other enclosed or covered parking facilities for use by residents shall not be a significant visible feature from the public street or from
adjacent bikeways, sidewalks or other pedestrian amenities.
b. Residential parking shall be clearly signed and reserved for the residents.
E. Open Space:
1. Open Space; Residential Uses: Private and common open space areas shall be provided in multi-family developments in accordance with this
subsection. Private areas typically consist of balconies, decks, patios, and fenced yards. Common areas typically consist of landscaped areas,
patios, swimming pools, barbecue areas, playgrounds, trees, bushes, ground cover, and turf.
a. Minimum Dimensions: Open space shall have the following minimum dimensions in order to count toward open space requirements:
(1) Open space located on the ground level (e.g., common areas, decks, patios): Ten feet (10').
(2) Open space located above ground level (e.g., balconies): Five feet (5').
b. Usability: A surface shall be provided that allows convenient use for outdoor living and/or recreation. Such surface shall be a combination of lawn,
garden, flagstone, wood planking, concrete, or other serviceable, dust free surfacing. Slope shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
c. Accessibility:
(1) Private open space: The space shall be accessible to only one residential unit by a doorway to a habitable room or hallway.
(2) Common open space: The space shall be accessible to all the residential units on the lot.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 332/636
d. Existing Buildings: If the project involves the renovation of an existing building and it is not feasible to provide outdoor open space, open space
shall be provided in interior common areas such as a community or fitness room.
2. Open Space; Commercial Uses: Commercial developments on lots greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet shall provide a plaza or
outdoor dining area which provides public seating and is accessible from the public sidewalk.
a. Minimum Size: Three hundred (300) square feet for lots between fifteen thousand (15,000) and thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size; six
hundred (600) square feet for lots thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in size or larger.
b. Minimum Dimensions: Twelve feet (12').
c. Parking Lot Buffering: The required public area shall be separated from any parking area with a minimum five foot (5') wide landscaped buffer area
and screened with a decorative wall or berm 2.5 to 3.5 feet high.
F. On Site Pedestrian Walkways: In the D-PO district, all front yards shall contain a continuous front walk connecting the public sidewalk to the front
entrance steps of the building. In all other districts, on site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided according to the following standards:
1. Internal Connections: A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on site automobile and bicycle parking
areas, and to any on site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.
2. To Street Network: An on site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. Such walkway
shall be the shortest practical distance between the main entry and sidewalk.
3. To Neighbors: Direct and convenient access shall be provided from commercial and mixed use projects to adjoining neighborhood residential and
commercial streets. These connections shall remain accessible at all times, and not be gated.
4. Pedestrian Walkway Design:
a. Walkways shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and shall be paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.
b. Fifteen (15) gallon shade trees shall be planted along walkways at least thirty feet (30') on center.
c. Walkways shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least 0.25 foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness.
d. Primary pedestrian routes and access points shall be clearly differentiated from driveways, parking aisles, and parking and loading spaces through
the use of elevation changes, a different paving material, or similar method.
e. Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised curb
at least four inches (4") high, bollards, or other physical barrier.
G. Public Improvements: Any new commercial or multi-family buildings or structural alterations and additions to commercial or multi-family buildings with a
combined building permit valuation of seventeen thousand five hundred forty four dollars ($17,544.00), adjusted annually based on "Engineering News
Records" analysis, over a two (2) year period, shall provide public improvements between the building and the curb in accordance with the following:
1. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided if none already exist or if the existing sidewalks are in poor condition.
2. Street Furniture: Trash receptacles, benches, bike racks, and other street furniture from a list maintained by the city planning department shall be
provided.
3. Streetlights: Pedestrian scaled streetlights (12 to 18 feet tall), including attachments from which banners may be hung, from a list maintained by the
city planning department shall be provided.
4. Street Trees: Shade trees shall be planted at least thirty feet (30') on center. Tree guards shall be provided. Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15)
gallons in size. A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the required trees shall be twenty four inch (24") box size or larger.
5. Sidewalk Shade: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the sidewalk shall be shaded by a double row of trees, or a building projection (awning,
overhang, or pedestrian shade structure) on one side and a street tree on the other side. In areas where one hundred percent (100%) of the building
is to be at the property line, this requirement can only be met by a building projection on one side and a street tree on the other side. If trees are
used, the required amount of shading must be achieved within fifteen (15) years.
FIGURE 202.04G5: SIDEWALK SHADE
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 333/636
H. Fences And Freestanding Walls:
1. Maximum Height:
a. Within Or Along Required Yards: No solid fence or freestanding wall within or along the exterior boundary of a required yard shall exceed a height
of three and one-half feet (3.5'). Open or lattice type fences, or hedges, shall not exceed a height of four feet (4').
b. Outside Required Yards: Solid fences or freestanding wall located outside of required yards shall be no higher than six feet (6') in height.
2. Design And Materials: Fencing visible from a street shall be treated as an integral part of the architecture, with materials, colors, and detailing drawn
from the building they surround or adjoin. Colors shall match city color specifications.
a. Prohibition On Hazardous Fencing Materials: The use of barbed wire, razor wire, ultra barrier, electrified, and other hazardous fencing is not
permitted.
b. Prohibition On Chainlink Fencing: Use of chainlink fencing or like material is not permitted in front or street facing yards, and is permitted only in
rear and interior side yards that do not abut public and semipublic land uses.
c. Limitation On Concrete Block: Plain, concrete block or slump stone is not permitted as a fencing material. Smooth faced or "precision" concrete
block shall be finished with stucco and capped with a decorative cap. Decorative block is an acceptable fencing material.
3. Visibility At Intersections: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, fences and walls shall comply with the visibility standards contained in
section 300.16, "Visibility At Driveways And Intersections (Sight Distance)", of this chapter.
I. Building Projections:
1. Front Porches And Building Entrances: Front porches and building entrance structures may encroach up to ten feet (10') into front and side yards
facing the street for up to forty percent (40%) of the lot frontage.
2. Architectural Projections: Bay windows, balconies, and other architectural features such as chimneys may project into required yards up to three feet
(3').
3. Building Projections Into The Public Right Of Way: Building projections may encroach into the public right of way up to three feet (3') for the purpose
of providing shade over the sidewalk, provided they are no closer than twelve feet (12') from sidewalk grade. The maximum width of any projection is
ten feet (10').
FIGURE 202.04I3: PROJECTIONS INTO RIGHT OF WAY
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 334/636
4. Awnings And Overhangs: Awnings, overhangs, and pedestrian shade structures, may encroach into the public right of way up to eight feet (8') for the
purpose of providing shade over the sidewalk, provided they are at least ten feet (10') above sidewalk grade. Awnings and canopies shall comply
with the downtown design guidelines adopted by resolution.
FIGURE 202.04I4: AWNINGS AND OVERHANGS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 335/636
J. Building Design:
1. Commercial Building Design:
a. Ground Floor Windows: Facades facing streets, plazas, and courtyards shall be lined with windows. Where blank walls are necessary, they shall
be on side or interior facades not facing streets. Exterior walls facing an adjacent public street, or facing onto a park, plaza, or other public outdoor
space shall include windows, doors, or other openings for at least fifty percent (50%) of the building wall area located between two and one-half
(2.5) and seven feet (7') above the elevation of the sidewalk.
FIGURE 202.04J1a: GROUND FLOOR WINDOWS
b. Limits On Blank Walls: No wall shall run in a continuous plane for more than twenty feet (20') without an opening on Main Street and Olive
Avenue, and for more than thirty feet (30') on other streets. Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 336/636
into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active spaces, or into window displays that are at least three feet (3') deep.
FIGURE 202.04J1b: LIMITS ON BLANK WALLS
c. Wall Plane Articulation: Windows, doors, columns, and other features shall be recessed or project forward from the wall plane, such that there is a
minimum two inch (2") recess of the window plane from the wall plane, a minimum four inch (4") projection from the window plane and outer edge
of trim, and a total of at least nine inches (9") from the window plane to the outermost plane of a wall, column, or other articulation feature.
FIGURE 202.04J1c: WALL PLANE ARTICULATION
d. Building Articulation: Commercial building facades shall include building projections or recesses, doorway and window trim, and other details that
provide architectural articulation and design interest.
e. Exterior Building Materials And Colors:
(1) A unified palette of materials and colors shall be used on all sides of buildings regardless of orientation.
(2) Exterior building materials shall be brick, stucco, concrete block, painted wood clapboard, painted metal clapboard or other quality, durable
materials approved by the zoning administrator.
(3) The building base (bulkhead) shall be tile, stone, brick, concrete, or other comparable durable material; stucco is prohibited.
(4) The exterior use of slump block, board and batten, dark reflective glass, galvanized metal, and wood or composition shingles is prohibited.
Colors shall reflect the historic character of downtown. Fluorescent paints, blues, purple, bright red or orange, pink, and bright green are
prohibited on Main Street.
f. Building Entrances:
(1) Buildings shall be oriented to face public streets.
(2) Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets, and the primary building entrances shall be located on a public street.
(3) Building entrances shall be emphasized with special architectural and landscape treatments.
(4) Rear entry doors, door frames, door hardware, signs and lighting fixtures shall match types utilized on the front facade and/or that are
appropriate to the parent building's historic period.
(5) In mixed use developments, entrances to residential units shall be physically separated from the entrance to the permitted commercial use and
clearly marked with a physical feature such as a recess or projection incorporated into the building or appropriately scaled element applied to the
facade.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 337/636
2. Residential Building Design:
a. Residential Architectural Articulation: All multiple-family residential buildings and mixed use buildings that include residential uses shall include
adequate design features to create visual variety and avoid a large scale and bulky appearance. Long facades shall be broken up into smaller
modules. This requirement can be met by using two (2) or more of the following methods:
(1) Facade Articulation: All street facing facades have at least one horizontal or vertical projection or recess at least four feet (4') in depth, or two
(2) projections or recesses at least two and one-half feet (2.5') in depth, for every twenty five (25) horizontal feet of wall. If located on a building
with two (2) or more stories, the articulated elements shall be greater than one story in height, and may be grouped rather than evenly spaced in
twenty five foot (25') modules. Building entrances and front porches and projections into required yards such as stoops, bays, overhangs,
fireplaces, and trellises may count toward meeting this requirement.
FIGURE 202.04J2a(1): FACADE ARTICULATION
(2) Variable Roof Form: Variable roof forms incorporated into the building design, and no more than two (2) side by side units are covered by one
unarticulated roof. Articulations may be accomplished by changing roof height, offsets, and direction of slope, and by introducing elements such
as dormers, towers, or parapets.
(3) Facade Detailing And Materials: All visible building facades incorporate details, such as window trim, window recesses, cornices, changes in
materials or other design elements, in an integrated composition. Each side of a building that is visible from a public right of way shall be
designed with a complementary level of detailing and quality of materials.
(4) Use Of Balconies, Bay Windows, And Other Such Projections Or Recesses: The building incorporates balconies, bay windows, entry porches
or other projections and recesses in a pattern that creates architectural interest across the length of the facade.
b. Residential Building Facade And Entrances: The following standards apply to residential buildings and mixed use projects that include residential
uses:
(1) Orientation: All units located along public rights of way shall have the primary entrance facing this right of way. Exceptions to this requirement
shall only be approved for projects where multiple-family housing is located on four (4) lane streets carrying high traffic volumes and/or streets
that do not allow on street parking. In such cases, the project shall be oriented around courtyards.
(2) Street Facing Facades: Street facing facades of residential buildings shall be designed as front facades and shall include stoops, porches,
recessed windows, and bay windows or balconies.
(3) Projection Or Recess: Building entrances shall have a roofed projection (such as a porch) or recess with a minimum depth of at least five feet
(5') and minimum area of fifty (50) square feet. Alternative designs that create a welcoming entry feature facing the street, such as a trellis or
landscaped courtyard entry, may be approved.
(4) Entrances: Provide at least one building entrance for every one hundred feet (100') of street frontage.
K. Mechanical Equipment: Mechanical equipment, including rooftop mechanical equipment, shall be screened from view from eye level at public streets,
and the screening shall be designed as an integral component of the architectural design.
L. Utilities Screening: Utility meters and related equipment shall be located only on the side or rear facade of buildings and shall be integrated into the
building architecture through painting or other means.
M. Building Security: Components of building security shall be integrated into the building's design and be effective but not obtrusive in accordance with
the following standards:
1. Security doors shall not encroach into the public right of way, in either an opened or closed position.
2. Lighting shall be provided at all entryways to the building and in any alcoves or other features of the building which impede the ability for visual
surveillance of the building and its public areas.
3. Where security grilles are required or otherwise provided, they shall be painted to match the trim colors of the building. Unobtrusive roll down grilles
with thin vertical and horizontal elements are preferred; heavy steel and accordion fold grates are discouraged.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 338/636
4. Grilles, security doors, and other security devices designed for nighttime security shall not be readily visible to the public during business hours or
when they are in an open position. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 203. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
203.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the commercial districts are to:
A. Provide for a full range of commercial uses.
B. Strengthen the city's economic base and provide employment opportunities for residents of the city.
C. Ensure the provision of services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities.
D. Identify appropriate standards for new development.
Additional purposes of each commercial district:
CN neighborhood commercial: To encourage convenience and neighborhood shopping areas providing day to day retail goods and services and to
prohibit auto oriented uses in order to maintain a pedestrian environment. This district also provides office space for local neighborhoods. The
maximum FAR is 0.30.
CR retail centers: To maintain areas for regional shopping centers located at major circulation intersections. Large format or "big box" retail and auto
sales as well as travel related services, such as hotels and gas stations are allowed. The maximum FAR is 0.35.
CG general and service commercial: To provide areas for retail and service uses that meet local and regional demand. Examples of allowable uses
include: equipment rental and repair, commercial print shops, auto sales, storage facilities, and wholesale businesses, and specialized retail not
normally found in shopping centers. Accessory office uses related to the primary commercial use are also allowed. The maximum FAR is 0.40.
CMX commercial mixed use: To provide areas for either horizontal or vertical mixed use development consisting of commercial, service, office, and
residential uses. Buildings more than one story are strongly encouraged. The maximum FAR is 2.0 and the maximum residential density is 30.0 units
per acre. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
203.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
Table 203.02 of this section prescribes the land use regulations for commercial districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter
designations as follows:
"P" designates permitted uses.
"C" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
"M" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a minor conditional use permit by the city council.
"(#)" numbers in parentheses refer to specific limitations listed at the end of the table.
"-" designates uses that are not permitted.
Use classifications are defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the zoning
administrator shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Use classifications and subclassifications not
listed in the table or not found to be substantially similar to the uses below are prohibited. The table also notes additional use regulations that apply to
various uses. Section numbers in the right hand column refer to other sections of this chapter.
TABLE 203.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS -
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Use Classifications CN CR CG
CMX
Additional Regulations
Residential uses:
Multi-family residential - - - P(1)
Family daycare home:
Small - - - P
Large - - - P Section 301.07, "Family Daycare Home, Large"
Group residential - - - P(2)
Residential care facilities, limited - - - P
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 339/636
Public and semipublic uses:
Clubs and lodges C - P P Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Colleges and trade schools, public or private - C C C
Community centers P - - C
Cultural institutions C - C C
Daycare centers C - - C
Instructional services P - P P
Park and recreation facilities, public P - P P
Religious facilities C C C C
Residential care facilities, general - - - C Section 301.15, "Residential Care Facilities, General"
Social service facilities - P P C Section 301.19, "Social Service Facilities"
Commercial uses:
Animal care, sales and services:
Kennels M(4) - M(4) -
Pet stores M(4) M(4) P(4) -
Veterinary services, small - - P(4) -
Artists' studios P - P P
Automobile/vehicle sales and services:
Automobile/vehicle rentals - P P -
Automobile/vehicle sales and leasing - C P -
Automobile/vehicle service and repair, major - - P - Section 301.04, "Automobile/
Vehicle Service And Repair, Major And Minor"
Automobile/vehicle service and repair, minor - P P - Section 301.04, "Automobile/
Vehicle Service And Repair, Major And Minor"
Automobile/vehicle washing - C P - Section 301.05, "Auto Service Stations And Car Washing"
Large vehicle and equipment sales, service and
rental
- - C - Section 301.04, "Automobile/
Vehicle Service And Repair, Major And Minor"
Service station C(3) C C C Section 301.05, "Auto Service Stations And Car Washing"
Banks and financial institutions:
Banks and credit unions P(5) P P P
Check cashing businesses - P P P
Building materials and services - P(6) P(6) -
Business services P(3,7)
P P P
Commercial entertainment and recreation:
Cinema/theaters - P P C Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Large scale - - C(8) - Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Small scale - P(19)
P(19)
C Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Eating, drinking, and smoking establishments:
Bars/nightclubs/lounges - C C C Sections 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"; and 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Coffee shops/cafes P(5) P P P Section 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"
Restaurants, less than 3,000 square feet P(5) P P P Sections 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"; and 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Restaurants, greater than 3,000 square feet C(5) P P P Sections 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"; and 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Tobacco bars - M M M
Food and beverage retail sales P(9) P P P(9) Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 340/636
Funeral parlors and mortuaries - C P -
Hotels and motels - C C C
Light fleet based services - - P -
Maintenance and repair services P(10)
P(10)
P P(10)
Medical facilities:
Medical clinic - P(12)
P P(12)
Professional/medical - P(12)
P P(12)
Mixed use development C Section 203.04, "Supplemental Regulations"
Nurseries and garden centers - P P P
Offices:
General offices P(11)
P(12)
P P
Walk-in clientele P(13)
P(12)
P P(13)
Parking, public or private P(14)
P P P(14)
Personal services P P P P
Retail sales:
Less than 50,000 square feet P P P P
50,000 square feet or more - C C -
Swap meet - C C -
Wholesaling and distribution - - P -
Industrial uses:
Construction and material yards - - C - Section 300.09, "Outdoor Storage"
Handicraft/custom manufacturing - P(15)
P -
Industry, limited - - P -
Recycling facilities:
Recycling collection facility - C P - Section 301.14, "Recycling Facilities"
Recycling processing facility - - C - Section 301.14, "Recycling Facilities"
Reverse vending machine P P P P Section 301.14, "Recycling Facilities"
Warehousing and storage:
Chemical, mineral, and explosives storage - - C -
Indoor warehousing and storage - - P -
Personal storage - C P C Section 301.13, "Personal Storage Facilities"
Transportation, communication, and utilities uses:
Communication facilities:
Antenna and transmission towers, camouflage
facilities
P P P P Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Antenna and transmission towers,
noncamouflage facilities
M(16)
M(16)
M(16)
M(16)
Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Broadcasting facility - M M - Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Call center - P(3) P -
Recording studio - P(4) P(4) -
Freight/truck terminals and warehouses - - C -
Transportation passenger terminals - P P -
Utilities, minor P P P P
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 341/636
Agricultural and extractive uses:
Crop cultivation, commercial M M M M Section 301.06, "Crop Cultivation"
Other applicable types:
Accessory uses and structures P P P P Section 301.01, "Accessory Uses And Structures"
Animal keeping - - - P
Caretaker unit - P(18)
P(18)
P(18)
Home occupations - - - P Section 301.09, "Home Occupations"
Nonconforming use Article 307, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Lots"
Temporary use Section 301.21, "Temporary Uses"
Notes:
Specific Limitations:
(1)Multi-family residential is permitted in conjunction with allowable nonresidential uses.
(2)Limited to no more than 2 rooms in a dwelling rented to not more than a total of 4 persons and meals are not provided to more than 4
boarders.
(3)Limited to establishments with a gross floor area of 5,000 square feet or less.
(4)Provided that such use shall be completely enclosed in a building of soundproof construction.
(5)Drive-through facilities are prohibited.
(6)Bulk storage of sand, gravel or cement is not allowed.
(7)Wholesale services are not allowed.
(8)Campgrounds are prohibited.
(9)Limited to establishments with a gross floor area less than 50,000 square feet.
(10)Outdoor work and outdoor storage is prohibited.
(11)General offices shall not be located on the ground floor.
(12)Minor conditional use permit approval is required for office, business, or professional uses greater than 5,000 square feet in size per lot or
integrated commercial development.
(13)Limited to establishments with a gross floor area less than 1,500 square feet.
(14)Limited to parking areas for exclusive use of occupants, employees and patrons of the uses, buildings, stores, and businesses located in
that zone.
(15)Limited to establishments with a gross floor area less than 2,000 square feet.
(16)Prohibited within 300 feet of any R district.
(17)Limited to radio or television studios.
(18)Limited to 1 dwelling for a caretaker or watchman and his immediate family, necessary and incidental to a use located in such zone.
(19) Minor conditional use permit approval is required for indoor shooting ranges.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1818, 10-21-2014; Ord. 1825, 9-1-2015)
203.03: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
Table 203.03 of this section prescribes the development standards for the commercial districts. Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand
column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this chapter, while individual letters refer to notes that directly follow the table.
TABLE 203.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Standard CN CR CG
CMX
Additional Standards
Lot and density standards:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 342/636
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 6,000 5,000
5,000
5,000
(a)
Minimum lot width (ft.) 60 60 60 60 (a)
Minimum lot depth (ft.) 75 75 75 75 (a)
Maximum density (units/net acre) n/a n/a n/a 30.0 Subsection 203.04B, "Mixed Use Standards"
Minimum area per unit (sq. ft.) n/a n/a n/a 800
Building form and location:
Maximum height (ft.) 35 50 50 50 (b); and section 300.06, "Heights And Height Exceptions"
Minimum yards (ft.): Section 300.16, "Visibility At Driveways And Intersections (Sight
Distance)"
Front 5 min., 10
max.
5 5 5 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Interior side 0 0 0 0 (b); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Street side 5 min., 10
max.
5 5 5 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Rear 0 0 0 0 (b); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Transitional - street side 5 min., 15
max.
15 15 15 (b)
Maximum floor area ratio 0.30 0.35 0.40 2.0
Percent of building at setback or
property line
70 n/a n/a n/a
Additional standards:
Usable open space (sq. ft. per unit) n/a n/a n/a 150 Subsection 203.04B, "Mixed Use Standards"
Notes:
Additional Development Standards:
(a) Exceptions To Minimum Lot Size, Width, And Depth: An exception to the minimum lot size, width and depth may be allowed with a
conditional use permit if a master plan for the site is submitted concurrently with the subdivision application. The plan shall indicate proposed
land uses, building footprints, driveways, fire lanes, parking areas, landscaped areas, buffer yards, and other site features. The city council must
find that the proposed subdivision will create lots that are adequately sized, shaped, and oriented to meet or exceed all requirements for yards,
buffer yards, parking, landscaping, fire lanes, and other requirements of this chapter.
(b) Transitional Standards: Where a site is adjacent to an R district, the following standards apply:
(1)Buildings exceeding 20 feet in height must be set back 5 feet from the interior side and rear property line; buildings exceeding 25 feet in
height shall be stepped back 1 additional foot for every foot of height above 25 feet.
(2) The maximum height within 40 feet of an R district boundary is 35 feet. The maximum height within 50 feet of an R district boundary is 40
feet.
FIGURE 203.03(b)(2): COMMERCIAL
DISTRICT TRANSITIONAL STANDARDS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 343/636
(c) Increased Yard For Certain Institutional Uses: Any building erected or used for a school, government, or other institutional use mentioned
elsewhere in this chapter, shall be located at least 15 feet from an R district, notwithstanding any lesser requirement in the district where located,
provided such building shall not be required to be located more than 5 feet from any lot line adjacent to any alley. The city council may waive this
requirement for accessory buildings to provide reasonable accommodation.
(d) Articulated Facades: Buildings shall provide adequate architectural articulation and detail to avoid a bulky and "boxlike" appearance. The
building facade shall be articulated with measures such as indentation in plane, change of materials in a complementary manner, sensitive
composition and juxtaposition of openings and solid wall and/or building frame, and projecting elements, such as awnings or marquees, to
provide shade and shelter.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
203.04: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. Pedestrian Orientation: Pedestrian oriented design shall be provided in the CN and CMX districts according to the following standards:
1. Pedestrian Oriented Design: The following design elements at ground floor street frontage level shall be incorporated into the design of the structure
in order to provide pedestrian orientation:
a. Ground Floor Windows: Exterior walls facing an adjacent public street, or facing onto a park, plaza, or other public outdoor space shall include
windows, doors, or other openings for at least fifty percent (50%) of the building wall area located between two and one-half (2.5) and seven feet
(7') above the elevation of the sidewalk. No wall may run in a continuous plane for more than twenty feet (20') without an opening. Openings
fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing and provide views into work areas, display areas, sales areas, lobbies, or similar active
spaces, or into window displays that are at least three feet (3') deep.
b. Entrances: All ground floor tenant spaces with at least twenty five feet (25') of frontage facing a public or private street shall have at least one
building entrance oriented to the adjacent street. Such an entrance shall open directly to the outside and shall not require a pedestrian to first pass
through a garage, parking lot or loading area to gain access.
c. Signage: Signage shall be integrated with the design of the building and oriented and scaled to the pedestrian.
d. Other Pedestrian Oriented Design Elements: Other pedestrian oriented design elements such as street furniture or other seating surfaces on
private property and other design amenities scaled to the pedestrian such as awnings, drinking fountains, arcades, colonnades, plazas,
noncommercial community bulletin boards, public or private art, and alternative paving materials shall be provided in areas of pedestrian access.
Compliance may also be demonstrated by pedestrian oriented design elements that are provided off site.
FIGURE 203.04A1: PEDESTRIAN ORIENTED DESIGN
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 344/636
2. Pedestrian Access: On site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided according to the following standards:
a. Internal Connections: A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on site automobile and bicycle
parking areas, and to any on site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.
b. To Street Network: An on site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. Such
walkway shall be the shortest practical distance between the main entry and sidewalk.
c. To Neighbors: Direct and convenient access shall be provided from commercial and mixed use projects to adjoining neighborhood residential and
commercial streets. These connections shall remain accessible at all times, and not be gated.
d. Pedestrian Walkway Design:
(1) Walkways shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and shall be paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.
(2) Fifteen (15) gallon shade trees shall be planted along walkways at least thirty feet (30') on center.
(3) Walkways shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least 0.25 foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness.
(4) Primary pedestrian routes and access points shall be clearly differentiated from driveways, parking aisles, and parking and loading spaces
through the use of elevation changes, a different paving material, or similar method.
(5) Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised
curb at least four inches (4") high, bollards, or other physical barrier.
FIGURE 203.04A2 PEDESTRIAN ACCESS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 345/636
3. Driveway Restrictions; Location Of Parking:
a. Access: Access shall be provided from a side street or alley wherever possible. Access shall not be provided from a residential street where
alternate access is available.
b. Location Of Parking: Parking areas shall be located at the rear of the site or at the side of the building, except for drop off areas which may be
located at the primary entry.
FIGURE 203.04A3b: LOCATION OF PARKING
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 346/636
B. Mixed Use Standards: In the CMX district, residential uses may be permitted if all of the following conditions are met:
1. Location Of Residential Units: Residential units are permitted at the side, rear and/or above the commercial uses.
2. Residential Building Entry And Orientation Requirements:
a. Entrances to residential units shall be physically separated from the entrance to the permitted commercial uses and clearly marked with a physical
feature incorporated into the building or an appropriately scaled element applied to the facade.
b. Garages or other enclosed or covered parking facilities for use by residents shall not be a significantly visible feature from the public street or from
adjacent bikeways, sidewalks or other pedestrian amenities. Residential parking shall be clearly signed and reserved for the residents.
3. Usable Open Space: A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of usable open space is required per residential unit and may be provided as
common or private open space on balconies or patios.
4. Side And Rear Yard Setback Requirements For Residential Units: In order to provide light and air for residential units in mixed use buildings, the
following minimum setbacks apply for any interior side or rear yard. In any case in which an interior yard is also adjacent to an R district boundary,
the greater of the following setbacks shall apply:
a. Five feet (5') for any wall with windows.
b. Ten feet (10') for any wall with bedroom or kitchen windows.
c. Fifteen feet (15') for any wall with living room or other primary windows.
FIGURE 203.04B4: SIDE AND REAR YARD SETBACK
REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL UNITS IN CMX DISTRICT
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 347/636
C. Commercial Centers: Commercial centers containing four (4) or more establishments in the commercial use classification are subject to the following
standards and criteria for approval:
1. Standards:
a. Entry Plazas/Passenger Loading Areas: A plaza shall be provided at the entry to each anchor tenant that provides for pedestrian circulation and
loading and unloading.
b. Pedestrian Walkways: A system of pedestrian walkways at least five feet (5') wide and paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable
material shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on site automobile and bicycle parking areas, to any on site open space areas and to
transit stops. Sidewalk "bulb outs" or bus "pullouts" may be required at potential bus stops serving large scale commercial development to provide
adequate waiting areas for transit users and safety for passing motorists.
c. Parking Setback From Buildings: Parking areas must be separated from the front and side exterior walls of on site buildings by walkways at least
five feet (5') in width, as well as a planter area at least five feet (5') in width, two feet (2') of which shall be low growing plants to allow for vehicle
overhang.
FIGURE 203.04C1c: PARKING SETBACK FROM BUILDINGS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 348/636
d. Location Of Loading And Service Areas: Loading docks may only be located to the side and rear of buildings and shall be screened from view
from adjacent public streets. Loading and service areas shall be located a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') from any residential district.
FIGURE 203.04C1d: LOCATION OF
LOADING AND SERVICE AREAS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 349/636
e. Open Space: Outdoor space for the use of customers and visitors shall be provided on any commercial center site with fifty thousand (50,000)
square feet or more of floor area.
(1) Minimum Area: Public space shall be provided at a rate of five (5) square feet per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, up to fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet.
(2) Location: Such public space shall be visible from a public street, or from on site areas normally frequented by customers, and shall be
accessible during business hours. Areas within required setbacks may count toward the public space requirement. Areas designated for
customers to wait for cabs may be combined with required public space areas if they meet all other requirements of this subsection.
(3) Amenities: On site public space shall include benches or other seating, and the ground surface shall be landscaped or surfaced with high
quality paving materials. Amenities shall be included that enhance the comfort, aesthetics, or usability of the space, including, but not limited to,
trees and other landscaping, shade structures, drinking fountains, water features, public art, or performance areas.
2. Design Criteria: In order to receive permit approval for a commercial center, the review authority shall find that all of the following criteria have been
met:
a. Integrated Theme: Buildings and structures will exhibit an integrated architectural theme that includes similar or complementary materials, colors,
and design details.
b. Site Entrance: Community scale commercial developments (10 acres or larger) are developed with at least one major driveway entrance feature
that provides an organizing element to the site design. Major driveway entrances include such features as a landscaped entry corridor or a divided
median drive separated by a landscaped center dividing island.
c. Building Entrances: Building entrances to anchor tenants and other large stores are prominent and inviting. The architectural details of building
entrances are integrated with the overall building design in terms of materials, scale, proportion, and design elements.
d. Four Sided Architecture: Buildings include a complementary level of design detail on all facades.
e. Pad Developments: Freestanding pad developments, if included in the development, are integrated into the site design in terms of parking lot
layout, on site vehicular and pedestrian circulation routes, landscaping, and building design. Internal cross access is provided between pad
developments and the surrounding commercial center. Building scale, materials, colors, and design details are complementary to the surrounding
center.
f. Drive-Through Facilities: Drive-through lanes for restaurants, banks, pharmacies, and other uses, where included, are integrated with the overall
site layout in such a way as to provide safe, efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation. Adequate vehicular stacking or queuing spaces are
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 350/636
provided to avoid waiting vehicles from blocking drive aisles. Drive-through facilities are located so as to minimize the visual impact from the right
of way and to provide adequate screening from internal uses.
g. Vehicular Circulation: Safe, convenient vehicular circulation will be provided within the development through an appropriate system of internal
vehicular circulation routes based on a hierarchy of drive aisles and cross routes. Vehicular and pedestrian conflicts will be minimized. Where
pedestrian circulation routes cross vehicular traffic aisles and driveways within a development, there are clearly delineated crosswalks that include
clear sight lines, adequate warning signage for both vehicles and pedestrians, adequate lighting, and protective barrier posts or similar features for
separation at walkway entrances.
h. Pedestrian Safety And Amenities: Safe and convenient pedestrian access will be provided through a continuous system of walkways that connects
on site buildings to one another, to automobile and bicycle parking areas, to any on site open space areas or pedestrian amenities, and to the
adjacent public right of way. Pedestrian facilities will create an attractive, quality environment with integrated landscaping, shading, lighting, surface
treatment, and other amenities.
i. Bicycle Parking: Adequate, safe, and convenient bicycle parking facilities are provided. Short term bicycle parking spaces for the use of customers
and visitors are located close to building entrances, easily identifiable, visible to those passing by and separate from pedestrian circulation areas.
Long term bicycle parking for the use of employees will provide a high degree of security and safety through the use of bicycle lockers, designated
areas within buildings, or outside areas with constant visual monitoring.
j. Entry Plazas: Entry plazas and passenger loading areas, where required, include unique, decorative paving materials, adequate seating areas,
provision of adequate shade from the summer sun, and attractive landscaping including trees or raised planters.
k. Transit Facilities: Transit facilities, where included, are developed with effective shading from the summer sun, comfortable seating, attractive
landscaping, decorative paving, public art features and efficient pedestrian routes to adjacent development.
l. Lighting: A combination of attractively designed and located lighting fixtures, including low pole lights, ground mounted fixtures, light bollards, and
architectural lighting is used to provide interesting compositions for outdoor lighting, as well as a safe, secure environment.
m. Shade Areas: Pedestrian areas, such as walkways, building entrances, and gathering areas, are adequately shaded from the summer sun
through such techniques as the careful placement of trees and landscaping, trellis structures, projecting canopies, covered walkways, arcades,
porticoes, building orientation, and similar techniques. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 204. EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
204.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the employment districts are to:
A. Provide appropriate areas of the city where employment uses can locate and operate without significant conflicts with other land uses.
B. Strengthen the city's economic base and provide employment opportunities for residents of the city.
C. Ensure the provision of services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities.
Additional purposes of each employment district:
PO professional office: To allow for areas of office complex development, including professional and medical offices, as well as research and
development activities. Small restaurants, support services, and convenience retail. The maximum FAR is 0.50.
IP industrial park: To provide areas for a mix of light industrial, secondary office, bulk retail, and service uses. This district allows for uses such as
warehouse, personal storage (ministorage), distribution centers, research and development, wholesale, and office space with limited customer access.
This district also allows for other uses, such as commercial recreation, small scale retail, and service uses serving local employees and visitors as
secondary uses. The maximum FAR is 0.40.
IG general industrial: To provide areas for businesses that have potential to create adverse visual, noise, or other impacts to adjoining public and
residential properties. This district allows for uses such as warehousing, manufacturing, food processing, distribution, with support commercial services
and ancillary office space. No retail uses are allowed. The maximum FAR is 0.60.
IA airport industrial: To provide areas for the municipal airport and for related businesses that have the potential to create adverse visual, noise, or
other impacts to adjoining public and residential properties. Small scale retail and service uses serving local employees and visitors are permitted as
secondary uses. This designation allows for a maximum FAR of 0.60. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1854 - CANNABIS LAND USES AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES. Go to new
ordinance.
204.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
Table 204.02 of this section prescribes the land use regulations for employment districts. The regulations for each district are established by letter
designations as follows:
"P" designates permitted uses.
"C" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
"M" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a minor conditional use permit by the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 351/636
"(#)" numbers in parentheses refer to specific limitations listed at the end of the table.
"-" designates uses that are not permitted.
Use classifications are defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the zoning
administrator shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Use classifications and subclassifications not
listed in the table or not found to be substantially similar to the uses below are prohibited. The table also notes additional use regulations that apply to
various uses. Section numbers in the right hand column refer to other sections of this chapter.
TABLE 204.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS - EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Use Classification PO IP IG IA Additional Regulations
Public and semipublic uses:
Colleges and trade schools, public or private C P - -
Correctional facility - P P -
Cultural institutions P - - -
Daycare centers P P(1)
- -
Elderly and long term care P - - -
Instructional services P P - P
Residential care facilities, general C - - - Section 301.15, "Residential
Care Facilities, General"
Schools, public or private P - - -
Commercial uses:
Aircraft sales, services, and storage - - - P
Animal care, sales and services:
Kennels - M M -
Veterinary services - P P -
Automobile/vehicle sales and services:
Automobile/vehicle service and repair, major - P P - Section 301.04, "Automobile/
Vehicle Service And Repair,
Major And Minor"
Automobile/vehicle service and repair, minor - P P - Section 301.04, "Automobile/
Vehicle Service And Repair,
Major And Minor"
Automobile/vehicle washing - P P - Section 301.05, "Auto Service
Stations And Car Washing"
Large vehicle and equipment sales, service, and rental - C P -
Service station - C C - Section 301.05, "Auto Service
Stations And Car Washing"
Towing and impound - C P - Section 300.09, "Outdoor
Storage"
Banks and financial institutions:
Banks and credit unions P P(1)
P(1)
P(1)
Check cashing businesses P - - -
Building materials and services - P P -
Business services P P(1)
P(1)
-
Commercial entertainment and recreation:
Large scale - C C C Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Small scale - C - - Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Eating, drinking, and smoking establishments:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 352/636
Coffee shops/cafes P(2)
P(1)
P(1)
P Section 300.08, "Outdoor
Seating"
Restaurants P(2)
P(1)
P(1)
P Sections 300.08, "Outdoor
Seating"; and 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Food and beverage retail sales P(2)
P(1)
P(1)
- Section 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Funeral parlors and mortuaries - P P -
Hotels and motels - C C -
Light fleet based services - P P -
Maintenance and repair services - P P -
Medical facilities:
Hospital P - - -
Medical clinic P - - -
Professional/medical P - - -
Offices:
General offices P P P P
Walk-in clientele P - - -
Parking, public or private P(3)
P P -
Personal services P(2)
P(1)
- -
Retail sales P(2)
P(2)
P(2)
-
Salvage and wrecking: - C C C Section 300.09, "Outdoor
Storage"
Salvage and wrecking conducted wholly within a building - P P P Section 300.09, "Outdoor
Storage"
Sexually oriented business - P P - Section 301.17, "Sexually
Oriented Businesses"
Wholesaling and distribution - P P P
Industrial uses:
Construction and material yards - P P - Section 300.09, "Outdoor
Storage"
Handicraft/custom manufacturing - P P P
Industry, general: - P P P
Alcohol manufacture - C(4)
C -
Hazardous waste management facilities - C(5)
C -
Manufacture, processing, or treatment of materials which may be obnoxious,
offensive or hazardous to health and safety of persons and property
- - C -
Industry, limited - P P P
Recycling facilities:
Recycling collection facility - - P - Section 301.14, "Recycling
Facilities"
Recycling processing facility - - P - Section 301.14, "Recycling
Facilities"
Warehousing and storage:
Chemical, mineral, and explosives storage - C C C
Indoor warehousing and storage - P P P
Personal storage - P P P Section 301.13, "Personal
Storage Facilities"
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 353/636
Transportation, communication, and utilities uses:
Communication facilities:
Antenna and transmission towers, camouflage facilities P P P P Section 301.20,
"Telecommunication Facilities"
Antenna and transmission towers, noncamouflage facilities M(7)
M(7)
M(7)
M(7)
Section 301.20,
"Telecommunication Facilities"
Broadcasting facility - P P P Section 301.20,
"Telecommunication Facilities"
Call center P(2)
P P -
Freight/truck terminals and warehouses - P P P
Heliports - C C C
Transportation passenger terminals - P P P
Utilities, major: - P P P
Renewable energy facility C C C
Solid waste collection, treatment, and disposal - - P C
Utilities, minor P P P P
Agricultural and extractive uses:
Crop cultivation, commercial M P P M Section 301.06, "Crop
Cultivation"
Crop cultivation, noncommercial - P P -
Mining and quarrying - - C(6)
-
Other applicable types:
Accessory uses and structures P P P P Section 301.01, "Accessory Uses
And Structures"
Additional uses - - - P(9)
Caretaker unit - P(8)
P(8)
-
Nonconforming use Article 307, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Lots"
Temporary use Section 301.21, "Temporary Uses"
Notes:
Specific Limitations:
(1) Permitted only as an accessory use that supports industrial uses, business and office parks, and corporate offices.
(2) Permitted only as an accessory to a primary office and limited to establishments with a gross floor area less than 5,000 square feet in size.
(3) Limited to parking areas for exclusive use of occupants, employees and patrons of the uses, buildings, stores, and businesses located in that
zone.
(4) Alcohol manufacture must be located more than 500 feet from the nearest residential, or commercial zoning designation as shown on the
official zoning map.
(5) On site hazardous waste management facilities must be accessory and incidental to a primary use.
(6) In areas designated as mineral resource zones in the general plan.
(7) Prohibited within 300 feet of any R district.
(8) For agricultural employees, when located on farms or ranches containing more than 10 acres.
(9) Additional uses may be allowed with city council approval of a conditional use permit.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1818, 10-21-2014)
204.03: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 354/636
Table 204.03 of this section prescribes the development standards for the employment districts. Additional regulations are denoted in the right hand
column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this chapter, while individual letters refer to notes that directly follow the table.
TABLE 204.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - EMPLOYMENT DISTRICTS
Standard PO IP IG IA Additional Standards
Lot and density
standards:
Minimum lot area
(sq. ft.)
6,000
20,000 10,000 10,000 (a)
Minimum lot
width (ft.)
60 100 100 100 (a)
Minimum lot
depth (ft.)
75 100 75 75 (a)
Building form and
location:
Maximum height
(ft.)
50 75 75 35 (b); section 300.06, "Heights And Height Exceptions"; and article
500, "Airport Environs (AE) Overlay District"
Minimum yards
(ft.):
Front 10 25; 30 on
highway
0; 30 on arterial,
collector, or highway
20; 30 on
highway
Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Interior side 5 0 0 10 (c); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Street side 5 (b)
25; 30 on
highway
0; 30 on arterial,
collector, or highway
10; 30 on
highway
(d); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Rear 0 10 0 10 (b) and (c); and section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Transitional -
street side
15 15 15 15 (b)
Maximum floor
area ratio
0.50 0.40 0.60 0.60
Notes:
Additional Development Standards:
(a) Exceptions To Minimum Lot Size, Width, And Depth: An exception to the minimum lot size, width, and depth may be allowed with a
conditional use permit if a master plan for the site is submitted concurrently with the subdivision application. The plan shall indicate proposed
land uses, building footprints, driveways, fire lanes, parking areas, landscaped areas, buffer yards, and other site features. The city council must
find that the proposed subdivision will create lots that are adequately sized, shaped, and oriented to meet or exceed all requirements for yards,
buffer yards, parking, landscaping, fire lanes, and other requirements of this chapter.
(b) Transitional Standards: Where a site is adjacent to an R district, the following standards apply:
(1) Buildings exceeding 20 feet in height must be set back 5 feet from the interior side and rear property line; buildings exceeding 25 feet in
height shall be stepped back 1 additional foot for every foot of height above 25 feet.
(2) The maximum height within 40 feet of an R district boundary is 35 feet. The maximum height within 50 feet of an R district boundary is 40
feet.
FIGURE 204.03(b)(2): EMPLOYMENT DISTRICT TRANSITIONAL STANDARDS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 355/636
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 356/636
(c) Increased Yard For Certain Institutional Uses: Any building erected or used for a school, government, or other institutional use mentioned
elsewhere in this chapter, shall be located at least 15 feet from an R district, notwithstanding any lesser requirement in the district where
located, provided such building shall not be required to be located more than 5 feet from any lot line adjacent to any alley. The city council
may waive this requirement for accessory buildings to provide reasonable accommodation.
(d) Street Side Yard; Reversed Corner Lots: Reversed corner lots shall have a minimum street side yard width of 12 feet or the required front
yard requirement of the lot in the rear (key lot), whichever is less. No accessory structure shall project beyond the extension of the required
front yard line of the lot in the rear (key lot).
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
204.04: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. Setbacks And Screening Requirements:
1. Setback And Screening From Highways: Any site that is fully or partially located within two hundred feet (200') of State Route 65 or State Route 190
shall provide a landscaped area at least thirty feet (30') deep between the highway right of way and any building or parking area for the length of the
site frontage facing toward the highway. At least two (2) 15-gallon trees shall be provided for every twenty five feet (25') of site frontage toward the
highway. The zoning administrator may approve a modification to this standard where existing development patterns make it infeasible to provide a
landscaped area thirty feet (30') deep.
2. Parking Setback And Screening From Public Right Of Way: The following requirements apply on all street frontages in the PO district. In the IP and
IG districts, they apply only to frontages on arterial or collector streets.
a. Landscaped Setback Of Parking From Right Of Way: Any parking area located between a building and right of way must be set back a minimum
of seventeen feet (17') from the street facing lot line, and the setback area must be landscaped. Two feet (2') of the landscaped setback shall be
low growing plants to allow for vehicle overhang.
b. Screening Of Parking Areas: Any parking area located between a building and right of way, or within fifty feet (50') of and visible from a right of
way, must be screened by a wall or berm at least two and one-half feet (2.5') high. A screening wall meeting this requirement shall be composed of
brick, stone, stucco, or other quality durable material approved by the zoning administrator, and shall include a decorative cap or top finish as well
as edge detail at wall ends. Plain concrete blocks are not allowed as a screening wall material unless capped and finished with stucco or other
material approved by the zoning administrator.
3. Landscaped Setback Of Parking From On Site Buildings: In the PO district, parking spaces must be set back at least twelve feet (12') from any
building wall, and the area between parking and building must be landscaped. Two feet (2') of the landscaped setback shall be low growing plants to
allow for vehicle overhang. Up to five feet (5') of this required landscape area may be occupied by a paved pedestrian walkway.
FIGURE 204.04A: PARKING SETBACKS AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
B. Pedestrian Orientation: Pedestrian oriented design shall be provided in the PO district according to the following standards:
1. Pedestrian Oriented Design: The following design elements at ground floor street frontage level shall be incorporated into the design of the structure
in order to provide pedestrian orientation.
a. Articulated Facades: Buildings shall provide adequate architectural articulation and detail to avoid a bulky and "boxlike" appearance. The building
facade at ground floor street frontage level shall be articulated with measures such as indentation in plane, change of materials in a
complementary manner, sensitive composition and juxtaposition of openings and solid wall and/or building frame, and projecting elements, such as
awnings or marquees, to provide shade and shelter.
b. Entrances: All ground floor tenant spaces with at least twenty five feet (25') of frontage facing a public or private street shall have at least one
building entrance oriented to the adjacent street. Such an entrance shall open directly to the outside and shall not require a pedestrian to first pass
through a garage, parking lot or loading area to gain access.
c. Signage: Signage shall be integrated with the design of the building and oriented and scaled to the pedestrian, where applicable.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 357/636
d. Other Pedestrian Oriented Design Elements: Other pedestrian oriented design elements such as street furniture or other seating surfaces on
private property and other design amenities scaled to the pedestrian such as awnings, drinking fountains, arcades, colonnades, plazas,
noncommercial community bulletin boards, public or private art, and alternative paving materials may be provided in areas of pedestrian access.
Compliance may also be demonstrated by pedestrian oriented design elements that are provided off site.
2. Pedestrian Access: On site pedestrian circulation and access shall be provided according to the following standards:
a. Internal Connections: A system of pedestrian walkways shall connect all buildings on a site to each other, to on site automobile and bicycle
parking areas, and to any on site open space areas or pedestrian amenities.
b. To Street Network: An on site walkway shall connect the primary building entry or entries to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. Such
walkway shall be the shortest practical distance between the main entry and sidewalk.
c. To Neighbors: Direct and convenient access shall be provided from commercial and mixed use projects to adjoining neighborhood residential and
commercial streets. These connections shall remain accessible at all times, and not be gated.
d. Pedestrian Walkway Design:
(1) Walkways shall be a minimum of five feet (5') wide and shall be paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or comparable material.
(2) Fifteen (15) gallon shade trees shall be planted along walkways at least thirty feet (30') on center.
(3) Walkways shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least 0.25 foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness.
(4) Primary pedestrian routes and access points shall be clearly differentiated from driveways, parking aisles, and parking and loading spaces
through the use of elevation changes, a different paving material, or similar method.
Where a required walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised or separated from the auto travel lane by a raised
curb at least four inches (4") high, bollards, or other physical barrier.
3. Driveway Restrictions; Location Of Parking:
a. Access: Access shall be provided from a side street or alley wherever possible. Access shall not be provided from a residential street where
alternate access is available.
b. Location Of Parking: Parking areas shall be located at the rear of the site or at the side of the building, except for drop off areas which may be
located at the primary entry.
FIGURE 204.04B3b: LOCATION OF PARKING
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 358/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 205. PUBLIC AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
205.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the public and open space districts are to:
A. Provide areas for educational facilities, cultural and institutional uses, health services, parks and recreation, general government operations, airports,
utility and public service needs, and other similar and related supporting uses.
B. Ensure the provision of services and facilities needed to accommodate planned population densities, employment intensities, and traffic regulation.
Additional purposes of each public and open space district:
PS public and semipublic: To provide areas for needed public facilities, including, but not limited to, recycling centers, sewage treatment ponds, police
and fire stations, and schools, colleges, vocational training facilities, school administrative offices, fairgrounds, and similar facilities. This designation is
intended for lands owned by public entities, including city hall, county buildings, and the hospital. This designation allows for a maximum FAR of 0.25.
REC commercial recreation: To provide areas for private commercial recreation uses where patrons usually pay to participate. Allowable uses include
campgrounds, off road vehicle complexes, and other recreation areas that are privately owned and where patrons usually pay to participate. The
maximum FAR is 0.10.
PK parks and public recreation facilities: To maintain areas for public parks and recreation sites and facilities on city owned properties. The maximum
FAR is 0.10. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
205.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
Table 205.02 of this section prescribes the land use regulations for public and open space districts. The regulations for each district are established by
letter designations as follows:
"P" designates permitted uses.
"C" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a conditional use permit by the city council.
"M" designates use classifications that are permitted after review and approval of a minor conditional use permit by the city council.
"(#)" numbers in parentheses refer to specific limitations listed at the end of the table.
"-" designates uses that are not permitted.
Use classifications are defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter. In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the zoning
administrator shall assign the land use or activity to a classification that is substantially similar in character. Use classifications and subclassifications not
listed in the table or not found to be substantially similar to the uses below are prohibited. The table also notes additional use regulations that apply to
various uses. Section numbers in the right hand column refer to other sections of this chapter.
TABLE 205.02: LAND USE REGULATIONS - PUBLIC
AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
Use Classification PS
REC
PK Additional Regulations
Public and semipublic use classifications:
Airport P - -
Cemeteries C - -
Clubs and lodges - P(1)
P(1)
College and trade schools, public or private P - -
Community center P - P
Correctional facility P - -
Cultural institutions P - P
Government offices P - -
Instructional services P - -
Park and recreation facilities, public P P P
Public safety facilities P - -
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 359/636
Religious facilities C - -
Schools, public or private P - -
Commercial use classifications:
Aircraft sales, services, and storage P(2)
- -
Commercial entertainment and recreation:
Large scale P C P Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Small scale P(6)
P(6)
P(6)
Section 301.02, "Alcoholic Beverage Sales"
Eating, drinking, and smoking establishments:
Coffee shops/cafes P(3)
P(1)
P(1)
Section 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"
Restaurants P(3)
- - Sections 300.08, "Outdoor Seating"; and 301.02, "Alcoholic
Beverage Sales"
Medical facilities:
Hospital P - -
Recycling facilities:
Recycling collection facility P - -
Recycling processing facility P - -
Retail sales:
Swap meet C - -
Transportation, communication, and utilities use
classifications:
Communication facilities:
Antenna and transmission towers, camouflage
facilities
P P P Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Antenna and transmission towers, noncamouflage
facilities
M(4)
M(4)
M(4)
Section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities"
Heliports P(5)
- -
Utilities, major: C - -
Solid waste collection, treatment, and disposal P - -
Utilities, minor P P P
Agricultural and extractive uses:
Crop cultivation, commercial M M M Section 301.06, "Crop Cultivation"
Other applicable types:
Accessory uses and structures P P P Section 301.01, "Accessory Uses And Structures"
Nonconforming use Article 307, "Nonconforming Uses, Structures, And Lots"
Temporary use Section 301.21, "Temporary Uses"
Notes:
Specific Limitations:
(1)Limited to facilities associated with park and recreational facilities.
(2) Limited to facilities associated with an airport.
(3)Limited to cafes and restaurants accessory to cultural institutions.
(4)Prohibited within 300 feet of any R district.
(5)Permitted only as accessory to a hospital or public airport.
(6) Minor conditional use permit approval is required for indoor shooting ranges.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 360/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1825, 9-1-2015)
205.03: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
Table 205.03 of this section prescribes the development standards for the public and open space districts. Additional regulations are denoted in the right
hand column. Section numbers in this column refer to other sections of this chapter, while individual letters refer to notes that directly follow the table.
TABLE 205.03: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - PUBLIC
AND OPEN SPACE DISTRICTS
Standard PS REC PK Additional Standards
Lot and density standards:
Minimum lot area (sq. ft.) 87,120
(2 acres)
10,000 10,000
Minimum lot width (ft.) 100 100 100
Minimum lot depth (ft.) 100 75 75
Building form and location:
Maximum height (ft.) 75 35 25 (a); and section 300.06, "Heights And Height Exceptions"
Minimum yards (ft.):
Front 20 0 0 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Interior side 10 0 0 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Street side 10 0 0 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Rear 10 0 0 Section 300.01, "Building Projections Into Yards"
Transitional - street side 15 15 15 (b)
Maximum floor area ratio 0.25 (b) 0.10 0.10
Notes:
Additional Development Regulations:
(a) Transitional Standards: Where a site is adjacent to an R district, the following standards apply:
(1) Buildings exceeding 20 feet in height must be set back 5 feet from the interior side and rear property line; buildings exceeding 25 feet in
height shall be stepped back 1 additional foot for every foot of height above 25 feet.
(2) The maximum height within 40 feet of an R district boundary is 35 feet. The maximum height within 50 feet of an R district boundary is 40
feet.
FIGURE 205.03(a)(2): PUBLIC AND OPEN SPACE
DISTRICT TRANSITIONAL STANDARDS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 361/636
(b) Determining FAR: When determining FAR in the PS district, medical laboratories, operating rooms, meeting rooms, conference facilities,
cafeteria facilities, and recreational facilities are excluded from floor area.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 206. RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT
206.01: PURPOSE:
The residential neighborhood (RN) district is intended to implement the neighborhood centers shown on the general plan land use diagram and guide the
design of new residential neighborhoods. More specifically, these standards are intended to accomplish the following purposes:
A. Create compact neighborhoods with a defined, mixed use center including public open space, a school or other community facilities, and neighborhood
commercial.
B. Create neighborhood centers with a mix of retail, civic, and service oriented uses to support local transit and provide places for social interaction for
neighborhood residents.
C. Create a street system that is well aligned with and connected to streets in adjacent neighborhoods and allows residents to walk, bike, or drive directly
and safely to parks, schools, and neighborhood shopping via a continuous system of streets, sidewalks, and bike routes.
D. Provide a variety of housing types, designs, and lot sizes to serve the range of household types and incomes in Porterville, and give each home
individuality. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
206.02: ESTABLISHMENT:
An RN district may be established within the potential RN district areas shown on the zoning map by zoning map amendment according to the procedures
of article 608, "Amendments To Zoning Map And Text", of this chapter, and the standards of this article. The minimum area of an RN district shall be eighty
(80) acres. The city council may approve an RN district for smaller areas, but not less than forty (40) acres, upon finding that an RN district of eighty (80)
acres or more is infeasible. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
206.03: MASTER PLAN REQUIRED:
An application for a rezoning to an RN district shall include a master plan. The master plan shall be accepted and processed concurrently, in the same
manner as a conditional use permit application, pursuant to articles 601, "Common Procedures", and 604, "Conditional Use Permits", of this chapter,
although additional information is required to be submitted in order to determine that the intent of this chapter and the general plan will be fulfilled.
A. Required Elements: An application for a master plan in the RN district shall include the following elements in addition to any application requirements
established by the zoning administrator:
1. Land Uses: The location of proposed land uses and a summary of the total land area dedicated to each use. Schools shall be located as shown on
the general plan land use diagram unless an alternative site has been mutually agreed upon by the city and the applicable school district. Other land
uses shall be allocated and distributed within the plan area according to the standards of section 206.04, "Land Use Mix And Distribution Within A
Residential Neighborhood", of this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 362/636
2. Street System:
a. Location of major and minor arterial streets, parkways and minor and collector streets, and proposed spacing of intersections.
b. Proposed street alignments in relation to existing and planned streets on all abutting properties.
c. Cross sections or equivalent information that indicates the elements (travel lanes, parking lanes, bike lanes, planter strips, sidewalks, sound walls,
street tree spacing) and dimensions of elements to be included in each street type within the plan area.
d. Any proposed traffic calming facilities.
3. Pedestrian And Bike Network: A system of bicycle and pedestrian routes that provide access to all parts of the plan area. All proposed mid block
pedestrian connections or connections from the ends of cul-de-sacs to streets and parks shall be delineated.
4. Utilities: Location of main utility lines that must be extended into the project area to accommodate the proposed land uses and densities. The plan
also must show utility placement in relation to street trees. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
206.04: LAND USE MIX AND DISTRIBUTION WITHIN A RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD:
The land uses within an RN district shall be allocated and distributed according to the standards of this section.
A. Residential Uses And Parks:
1. Consistency With General Plan: Land uses shall reflect the required land use mix in the general plan land use diagram. Adjustments to the locations
of land uses indicated on the general plan land use diagram may be approved, as long as the total allocation of each use within each plan area is
consistent with the proportions indicated on the diagram. Where such locational adjustments are proposed, the standards of this section provide a
guide for the minimum allocation of land uses within residential neighborhoods.
2. Residential Uses: Residential uses shall be provided at densities consistent with the general plan designation(s) for the site. A minimum of twenty
percent (20%) of the units within each master plan must be small lot (4,500 square feet or smaller lot size) detached homes, townhouse, or multifamily
units within walking distance (1/4 mile) of the neighborhood center.
3. Public Parks: Land for public parks must be provided at a ratio of five (5) acres per one thousand (1,000) residents, or in-lieu fees must be paid as
established by the city. Parks shall be consistent with any adopted parks or open space master plan for the city. The allocation of types of parks shall
be as follows:
a. A minimum of three and one-half (3.5) acres of neighborhood parks per one thousand (1,000) residents; and
b. A minimum of one and one-half (1.5) acres of community parks per one thousand (1,000) residents.
4. Park Location: At least one public park must be located within one-fourth (1/4) mile, via a direct pedestrian route, of eighty percent (80%) of all
homes within the master plan area.
B. Nonresidential Uses: At least four percent (4%) of gross land area must be designated for nonresidential uses, including public and semipublic uses
and/or neighborhood serving commercial uses.
C. Neighborhood Centers: All master plan areas of one hundred sixty (160) acres or more must include a defined, centrally located, neighborhood center
composed of a mix of retail, civic, and service oriented uses, unless an existing or approved neighborhood center is located within one-fourth (1/4) mile,
via a direct pedestrian route, of eighty percent (80%) of all homes within the master plan area. At minimum, neighborhood centers shall include:
1. Retail And Service Commercial Uses: Retail and service commercial uses oriented to serving the needs of local residents.
2. Public Plaza, Square, Or Commons:
a. Size: Minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
b. Dimensions: Minimum horizontal dimension of fifty feet (50').
c. Street Access: Bordered by public streets on at least one side.
d. Required Amenities: Public plazas, squares, and commons shall include street furniture and other amenities such as gazebos, fountains, statuary,
flagpoles, kiosks, and benches. At least one linear foot of seating area shall be provided for each thirty (30) square feet of plaza area. Seating may
include wooden benches, steps, seating walls, and retaining walls where the seating area is between sixteen inches (16") and thirty inches (30")
above grade.
e. Surface And Planting: Public plazas, squares, and commons shall include paved walkways, and may include paved plaza areas. Landscaped
areas and pervious surfaces that provide stormwater infiltration shall also be included.
f. Schools: School sites shall be provided as shown on the general plan land use diagram. Where locational adjustments are proposed, the applicant
shall consult with the school district, community development department, and the parks and leisure services department prior to submission of a
master plan. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
206.05: PARK DESIGN STANDARDS:
A. Minimum Park Size: Neighborhood parks must be a minimum of two (2) acres in size. Community parks must be a minimum of ten (10) acres in size.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 363/636
B. Park Frontage And Accessibility: A minimum of sixty percent (60%) of the perimeter of any public park must abut a street. Where it is not feasible to
locate residences across the street from and facing the park, frequent pedestrian access to the park must be provided at the ends of cul-de-sacs.
C. Landscaped Area: At least fifty percent (50%) of the horizontal area of any park shall consist of landscaped pervious surfaces such as turf, live
plantings, gravel, sand, and bark. No more than fifty percent (50%) of the area of a neighborhood park may be paved.
D. Detention Basins: Drainage detention basins may be located within parks; however, all parks shall include open turf area above the basin flood line for
playing fields and active recreation areas. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
206.06: STREET/TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
A. Continuous Street System: All streets and alleys must connect to other streets and alleys to form a continuous vehicular and pedestrian network within
the plan area and to adjacent development. The use of gates or other preventative barriers is not permitted on public streets.
B. Connection To Adjacent Areas: Streets shall be aligned with existing and planned arterial and collector streets in adjacent neighborhoods in such a way
that a continuous street pattern is created. Where a new residential subdivision occurs adjacent to undeveloped land within the urban development
boundary, stubs must be provided for future connections to the edge of the property line. Where street stubs exist on adjacent properties, new streets
within a new residential subdivision shall be connected to these stubs.
C. Dead End Streets: Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets shall be prohibited in residential areas except where necessary to give access to or permit
satisfactory future development of adjoining land. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets shall be avoided in all other areas. If cul-de-sacs and dead end
streets cannot be avoided, the maximum length shall be six hundred feet (600'). Cul-de-sacs longer than three hundred feet (300') shall have
pedestrian paths connecting them to parks and adjacent streets.
D. Intersections: A minimum of three (3) collector streets shall intersect each one mile length of arterial street. Pedestrian facilities shall be provided at all
signalized intersections.
E. Maximum Block Length: Blocks shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length, unless existing adjacent property alignment, topographic, or traffic
conditions justify a variation. Pedestrian connections consisting of a paved walkway at least five feet (5') wide within a ten foot (10') landscape right of
way must be provided no more than three hundred fifty feet (350') apart for any blocks over six hundred feet (600').
F. Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be provided along both sides of the street.
G. Pedestrian And Bicycle Paths: Continuous and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access shall be provided from every home within a plan area to the
nearest neighborhood center, school, and park.
H. Traffic Calming: Traffic calming street design or devices shall be included as needed to ensure that designated speed limits are not exceeded.
I. Street Trees: Street trees shall be provided on all public street frontages. Fifteen (15) gallon trees shall be planted in a linear fashion within planter strips
between the curb and sidewalk, at least thirty feet (30') on center. Each master plan shall indicate the type and location of proposed street trees and
how utility placement will accommodate street tree placement. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
206.07: VARIETY IN HOUSING DESIGN:
No more than three (3) homes within each block face may be designed to have the same front elevation. There must be two (2) distinguishing and
obviously different characteristics, such as building envelope, front porch, window pattern, or roof shape, between the front elevations of homes within a
single block. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 207. PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT
207.01: PURPOSE:
The purposes of the planned development (PD) district are to:
A. Establish a procedure for development on large lots of land in order to reduce or eliminate the rigidity, delays, and conflicts that otherwise would result
from application of zoning standards and procedures designed primarily for small lots.
B. Ensure orderly and thorough planning and review procedures that will result in quality urban design.
C. Promote variety and avoid monotony in large developments by allowing greater freedom in selecting the means to provide access, light, open space,
and amenities.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 364/636
D. Ensure allocation and improvement of common open space in residential areas, and provide for maintenance of the open space at the expense of
those directly benefiting from it.
E. Facilitate the assembly of properties that might otherwise be developed in unrelated increments to the detriment of surrounding neighborhoods.
F. Provide for the integration and administration of specific plans, adopted pursuant to state law into the city's land use regulations. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.02: ZONING MAP DESIGNATION:
A PD district shall be noted on the zoning map by the designation "PD". (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.03: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
No use other than an existing use is permitted in a PD district except in accord with a valid PD plan or specific plan. Any permitted or conditional use
authorized by this chapter may be included in an approved PD plan or an adopted specific plan consistent with the general plan land use designation(s) for
the property. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.04: DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS:
A. Minimum Area: The minimum area of a PD district shall be four (4) contiguous acres. The city council may approve a PD district that contains less than
four (4) acres, but at least two and one-half (2.5) acres, upon a finding that special site characteristics exist and that the proposed development will
result in specific public benefits, in addition to the findings required by section 207.06, "Required Findings", of this article.
B. Residential Unit Density: Except where a density bonus is granted in compliance with the city's density bonus regulations for affordable housing and
childcare (article 302, "Affordable Housing Density Bonus And Other Incentives", of this chapter), the total number of dwelling units in a PD plan shall
not exceed the maximum number permitted by the general plan density for the total area of the planned development designated for residential use.
C. Performance Standards: The performance standards prescribed by article 306, "Performance Standards", of this chapter apply.
D. Other Development Regulations: Other development regulations shall be as prescribed by the PD plan. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.05: PROCEDURES:
A. City Council Review: A PD district must be adopted by the city council as an amendment to the zoning map, according to the procedures of article 608,
"Amendments To Zoning Map And Text", of this chapter. An application for rezoning to a PD district shall include a specific plan or PD plan. The PD
plan shall be accepted and processed concurrently, in the same manner as a conditional use permit application, pursuant to articles 601, "Common
Procedures", and 604, "Conditional Use Permits", of this chapter, although additional information is required to be submitted in order to determine that
the intent of this chapter and the general plan will be fulfilled.
B. Initiation: An amendment to reclassify property to PD shall be initiated by a property owner or authorized agent or the city council. If initiated by a
property owner or authorized agent and the property is not under a single ownership, all owners must join the application, and a map showing the
extent of ownership shall be submitted with the application.
C. Preapplication Procedure: Prior to submitting an application for approval of a PD, the applicant may schedule a preapplication review conference with
the project review committee to discuss the general acceptability of the proposal, possible problems that may be encountered, and the need for any
interagency coordination. Such preliminary consultations shall be relative to a conceptual development plan submitted by the applicant.
D. Applications: Applications for a PD shall be in the form established by the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by the required information
and plan submittals and the required fee. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.06: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
A PD plan and rezoning shall only be approved if all of the following findings are made:
A. The proposed development is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, including the density and intensity limitations that apply;
B. The site for the proposed development is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the proposed uses and all setbacks, open spaces, walls and
fences, parking area, loading areas, landscape, and other features required;
C. Adequate transportation facilities and public services exist or will be provided in accord with the conditions of development plan approval, to serve the
proposed development; and the approval of the proposed development will not result in a reduction of traffic levels of service or public services so as to
be a detriment to public health, safety, or welfare;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 365/636
D. The proposed development will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding land uses and will be compatible with the existing and planned
land use character of the surrounding area;
E. The improvements required and the manner of development adequately address all natural and manmade hazards associated with the proposed
development and the project site, including, but not limited to, flood, fire, and seismic or soils hazards; and
F. The proposed development provides a more efficient use of the land and superior architecture and site design compared to that which could be
achieved through the application of the zoning district regulations that otherwise would apply. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.07: CONDITIONS:
In approving a PD plan and rezoning, the city council may impose reasonable conditions deemed necessary to:
A. Ensure that the proposal conforms in all significant respects with the general plan and with any other applicable plans or policies that the city has
adopted;
B. Achieve the general purposes of this chapter or the specific purpose of the zoning district in which the project is located;
C. Achieve the findings listed in section 207.06, "Required Findings", of this article; or
D. Mitigate any potentially significant impacts identified as a result of review conducted in compliance with the requirements of the California environmental
quality act. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.08: EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL:
A. Expiration:
1. PD Plan: A PD plan shall be effective on the same date as the ordinance creating the PD district for which it was approved and shall expire two (2)
years after the effective date unless actions specified in the conditions of approval have been taken, or a building permit has been issued and
construction diligently pursued. An approved PD plan may specify a development staging program exceeding two (2) years.
2. Tentative Map: Where a tentative map has been approved in conjunction with a PD plan, the PD plan shall expire upon the expiration of the tentative
map.
3. Phased Development: In the event that the applicant intends to develop the project in phases, and the city council approves phased development,
the PD plan shall remain in effect so long as not more than one year lapses between the end of one phase and the beginning of the next phase
unless the PD plan is renewed pursuant to subsection B of this section. If the PD plan is not renewed and more than one year lapses between the
end of one phase and the beginning of the next phase, the PD plan shall expire.
B. Renewal: An approved PD plan may be renewed for a period approved by the city council after a duly noticed public hearing. Application for renewal
shall be made in writing prior to expiration of the original approval. The city council may renew a PD plan if it finds the renewal consistent with the
purposes of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.09: AMENDMENTS OF APPROVED PLANS:
A. Changed Plans: Amendments to a PD district or PD plan or specific plan may be requested by the applicant or its successors. Amendments to the
approved plan shall be classified as major or minor amendments. Upon receipt of an amendment application, the zoning administrator shall determine
if the proposed amendment constitutes a major or minor amendment.
B. Major Amendments: Major amendments to an approved PD district or PD plan or specific plan shall be considered by the city council at a duly noticed
public hearing. An amendment will be deemed major if it involves one or more of the following changes:
1. A change in the boundary of the PD district;
2. An increase or decrease in the number of dwelling units for the PD district that is greater than the maximum or less than the minimum stated in the
PD plan or specific plan;
3. An increase or decrease in the floor area for any nonresidential land use that results in the floor area exceeding the minimum or maximum stated in
the PD plan or specific plan;
4. Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden public facilities and utilities infrastructure as determined by the city
engineer;
5. Any change in land use or density that is likely to negatively impact or burden circulation adjacent to the PD district or to the overall major street
system, as determined by the city engineer; or
6. Any other proposed change to the PD plan or specific plan or the conditions of approval that substantively alters one or more of its components as
determined by the zoning administrator.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 366/636
C. Minor Amendments: Amendments not meeting one or more of the criteria listed in subsection B of this section shall be considered minor if they are
consistent with and would not change any original condition of approval. Minor amendments may be approved by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1801,
12-3-2013)
207.10: STATUS OF SPECIFIC PLAN:
A specific plan adopted by resolution of the city council shall be administered as prescribed by the council, consistent with Government Code section
65450. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
207.11: DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW:
Plans for a project in a PD district shall be accepted for planning and building permits or subdivisions only if they are consistent with an approved PD plan
or specific plan and any conditions of approval. No project may be approved and no building permit issued unless the project, alteration or use is
consistent with an approved PD plan or specific plan. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
Chapter Series 300
ADDITIONAL USE AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 300. GENERAL SITE REGULATIONS
300.01: BUILDING PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS:
Building projections may extend into required yards, subject to the following standards:
A. Maximum Projection Allowed: Notwithstanding any other subsection of this section, no projection may extend closer than three feet (3') to an interior lot
line. No projection may extend into a public utility easement.
B. Architectural Projections: Cornices, canopies, eaves, sills, buttresses or similar architectural features, chimneys and fireplaces not exceeding eight feet
(8') in width, cantilevered bay windows not exceeding ten feet (10') in width, and planting boxes shall not extend closer than three feet (3') to any side
or rear lot line or three feet (3') into any front yard unless further restricted by the building code.
FIGURE 300.01B: ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTIONS
C. Fire Escapes: Fire escapes, required by law, ordinance, or regulations of a public agency may project up to four feet (4') into any yard.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 367/636
D. Stairways, Stair Landings, And Balconies: Stairways, stair landings, and balconies that service above the first floor level of the building may project up
to three feet (3') into any yard, provided that all such structures shall be open, unenclosed and without roofs, except for lattice type guard railings.
Structural supports for stairways and landings may be enclosed.
E. Decks, Porches, And Stairs: Uncovered decks, porches and stairs less than two and one-half feet (2.5') above ground elevation may project in any yard
consistent with the building code. Uncovered decks, porches, and stairs higher than two and one-half feet (2.5') servicing the first floor level of the
building may project no more than three feet (3') into the front, side, and rear yards, and no closer than three feet (3') to a property line.
F. Depressed Ramps Or Stairways And Supporting Structures: When designed to permit access to parts of buildings below average ground level, may
extend into any required yard not more than three feet (3').
G. Ramps And Similar Structures For Disabled Person's Accommodation: Up to the entire yard where it is the only feasible location to provide a
reasonable accommodation consistent with the Americans with disabilities act. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.02: DEVELOPMENT ON SUBSTANDARD LOTS:
A legally created lot having a width or area less than required for the base district in which it is located may be occupied by a permitted or conditional use if
it has a width of twenty five feet (25') or more and an area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or more, provided that on the effective date of
regulations that made it substandard, it was in single ownership separate from any abutting lot. No substandard lot shall be further reduced in area or
width, and a substandard lot shall be subject to the same yard and density requirements as a standard lot except as otherwise provided. A maximum of
one dwelling unit may be located on a substandard lot that meets the requirement of this section. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.03: FENCES AND FREESTANDING WALLS:
A. Maximum Height:
1. Front Yards: No solid fence or freestanding wall within or along the exterior boundary of the required front yard shall exceed a height of three and
one-half feet (3.5'). Open or lattice type fences that are at least fifty percent (50%) open, or hedges, shall not exceed a height of four feet (4').
2. Side And Rear Yards: No fence or freestanding wall within or along the exterior boundary of the required side or rear yards shall exceed a height of
six feet (6'). The zoning administrator may allow a fence or wall up to eight feet (8') in height to be located along the exterior boundary of the required
side or rear yard subject to the issuance of a building permit.
3. Decorative Features: One entry gateway, trellis, or other entry structure is permitted in the required front or street facing side yard of each lot,
provided that the maximum height or width of the structure does not exceed ten feet (10'). Such decorative feature shall not have any solid
obstruction that exceeds two feet (2') in diameter between the height of three (3) and ten feet (10').
FIGURE 300.03: FENCES AND FREESTANDING WALLS
B. Design And Materials: Fencing visible from a street shall be treated as an integral part of the architecture, with materials, colors, and detailing drawn
from the building they surround or adjoin.
1. Prohibition On Hazardous Fencing Materials: The use of barbed wire, razor wire, ultra barrier, electrified, and other hazardous fencing is not
permitted. An exception to this standard may be approved for sites in the AC district where needed for livestock or ranch operations.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 368/636
2. Limitation On Chainlink Fencing: Use of chainlink fencing is not permitted in front or street facing side yards, and is permitted only in rear and interior
side yards that do not abut public and quasi-public land uses. This standard does not apply to sites in the residential, IA or IG districts.
C. Visibility At Intersections: Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, fences and walls shall comply with the visibility standards contained in
section 300.16, "Visibility At Driveways And Intersections (Sight Distance)", of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.04: GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS AND INCENTIVES:
A. Applicability: All applicable projects are subject to compliance with the California green building standards code (CALGreen). Projects meeting the
following thresholds shall exceed energy efficiency by an additional fifteen percent (15%):
1. City buildings of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of new gross floor area;
2. Nonresidential buildings of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or more of new gross floor area;
3. Tenant improvements of twenty five thousand (25,000) square feet or more of gross floor area that involve mechanical, electrical, and plumbing
work; and
4. Mixed use projects and multi-family residential projects that include a residential building that has four (4) stories in height, or more, of new
construction. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.05: HABITAT CONSERVATION:
New development shall be located to protect and preserve areas in which plant and/or animal life or its habitats are either rare or especially valuable
because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which would easily be disturbed or degraded by human activities and development. The
provisions of this section apply to discretionary development projects proposed within or adjacent to (within 300 feet of the boundary of) sensitive habitat
areas designated in the general plan.
A. Site Design: Sensitive habitat areas shall be protected by any of the following means: 1) avoidance; 2) on site mitigation; 3) off site mitigation; and 4)
purchase of mitigation credits.
B. Biological Report: A discretionary development application for a project on a site located within or adjacent to (within 300 feet of the boundary of)
sensitive habitat areas designated in the general plan shall also include a report commissioned by the city that contains the following:
1. An evaluation of the impact the development may have on the habitat, and whether the development will be consistent with the biological
continuance of the habitat. Maximum feasible mitigation measures to protect the resource shall be identified and a program for monitoring and
evaluating the effectiveness of the mitigation measures shall be included.
2. Conditions of approval recommendations for the restoration of damaged habitats, where feasible.
C. Required Findings: Approval of a development permit for a project within or adjacent to identified habitat areas shall not occur unless the applicable
review body first finds that:
1. There will be no significant negative impact on the identified sensitive habitat and the proposed use will be consistent with the biological continuance
of the habitat.
2. The proposed use will not significantly disrupt the habitat.
3. Adequate mitigation measures are required to mitigate impacts to significant biological resources.
4. There has been "no net loss" of wetlands and vernal pools. Disturbed wetlands and vernal pools have been replaced.
5. Where feasible, damaged habitats will be restored as a condition of development approval. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.06: HEIGHTS AND HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS:
A. Maximum Height Of Structures: The height of structures shall not exceed the standards established by the applicable zoning district of this chapter.
1. Increased Height Limit For Projections: Chimneys not over six feet (6') in width, silos, cupolas, flagpoles, monuments, gas storage holders, radio and
other towers, water tanks, church steeples, fire and parapet walls, roof furniture, and similar structures covering not more than twenty percent (20%)
of the top floor roof area to which they are accessory, may exceed maximum permitted height standards by eight feet (8'). Exceptions may be
granted with the approval of a conditional use permit.
FIGURE 300.06: INCREASED HEIGHT LIMIT FOR PROJECTIONS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 369/636
2. Airport Environs Overlay District: Airport related towers may exceed the maximum permitted height standard in the IA and PS districts.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, there shall be no exceptions to the specified height limits within the airport environs (AE) overlay
district, unless authorized by approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.07: LIGHTING AND ILLUMINATION:
A. Purpose: This section is intended to minimize outdoor artificial light that may have a detrimental effect on the environment, astronomical research,
amateur astronomy, and enjoyment of the night sky. These provisions are also intended to reduce the unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties
and the use of energy.
B. Applicability: Outdoor light fixtures installed after the effective date hereof and maintained upon private property within nonresidential districts shall
comply with the requirements of this section.
C. Exemptions: The following types of lighting fixtures are exempt from the requirements of this section:
1. Prior Installation: All light fixtures installed prior to the effective date hereof, unless fifty percent (50%) or more of the light fixtures on the premises
are replaced.
2. Fossil Fuels: All light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels.
3. Low Lumens: All light fixtures with an initial total lamp sources lumens of four thousand fifty (4,050) or less.
4. Construction And Emergency Lighting: All construction or emergency lighting fixtures, provided they are temporary and are discontinued immediately
upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency.
D. Maximum Height: Lighting fixtures shall not exceed the maximum heights specified in table 300.07A of this section.
TABLE 300.07A: MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF LIGHTING FIXTURES
District Maximum Height
Residential districts 16 feet
CN, PO 16 feet
CMX, downtown districts 16 feet within 100 feet of any street frontage; 20 feet in any other location
PS 20 feet within 100 feet of any street frontage; 25 feet in any other location
CR, CG, IP, IG, IA 40 feet
REC, PK 50 feet1
Note:
1. Sports field lighting shall be defined per project.
E. Shielding: All lighting fixtures shall be shielded in accordance with table 300.07B of this section so as not to produce obtrusive glare onto the public right
of way or adjoining properties. All luminaries shall meet the most recently adopted criteria of the Illuminating Engineering Society Of North America
(IESNA) for "cutoff" or "full cutoff" luminaries, as illustrated in figure 300.07 of this section.
TABLE 300.07B: REQUIREMENTS FOR SHIELDING AND FILTERING
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 370/636
Fixture Lamp Type Shielding Required
Filtering
Required
Low pressure sodium1 None None
High pressure sodium Fully None
Metal halide Fully Yes4
Fluorescent Fully5 Yes2
Quartz3 Fully None
Incandescent greater than 100W Fully None
Incandescent 100W or less None None
Mercury vapor Not permitted
Fossil fuel None None
Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, or krypton None None
Other sources As approved by the zoning administrator
Notes:
1. This is the preferred light source to minimize undesirable light into the night sky affecting astronomical observations.
2. Warm white natural lamps are preferred to minimize detrimental effects.
3. For the purposes of this article, quartz lamps shall not be considered an incandescent light source.
4. Most glass, acrylic, or translucent enclosures satisfy these filter requirements.
5. Outdoor signs constructed of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within do not require shielding.
FIGURE 300.07: LIGHT FIXTURE SHIELDING
F. Multi-Family Residential Illumination: Aisles, passageways, and pedestrian recesses related to and within the building complex shall be illuminated with
an intensity of at least 0.25 foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Lighting devices shall be protected by weather and vandal
resistant covers.
G. Pedestrian Oriented Lighting: In the downtown, CN, CR, and CMX districts, exterior lighting shall be provided for a secure nighttime pedestrian
environment at building entrances, on site pedestrian walkways, public sidewalks and open areas with a safe level of illumination with an intensity of at
least 0.25 foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness. The zoning administrator may require additional lighting for bars, nightclubs,
and lounges or other entertainment venues in order to provide a safe level of illumination.
H. Prohibitions And Requirements For Protection And Shielding:
1. Recreational Facility: No public or private outdoor recreational facility shall be illuminated after eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., except to conclude any
recreational or sporting event or other activity conducted at a ballpark, outdoor amphitheater, area, or similar facility in progress prior to eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M.
2. Outdoor Building And Landscaping: The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building or landscaping is prohibited, except with incandescent
fixtures with lamps of one hundred (100) watts or less.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 371/636
3. Outdoor Signs: Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure and shall be shielded according
to table 300.07B of this section.
I. Alternate Materials And Methods Of Installation: Design, material, or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this section may be approved by
the zoning administrator provided the proposed design, material, or method complies with the intent of these provisions. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.08: OUTDOOR SEATING:
Eating and drinking establishments with outdoor seating areas shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Location: Outdoor seating areas may be permitted in downtown districts on any public sidewalk, provided a minimum of six feet (6') of public sidewalk
remains unobstructed for pedestrian uses. Outdoor seating areas may be permitted in other zone districts as long as they do not conflict with required
pedestrian walkways, parking, landscaping or loading areas.
B. Conditional Use Permit: A conditional use permit is required when the outdoor seating area is located immediately abutting the property line of a
residential district, and contains more than five (5) tables or seating for fifteen (15) customers.
C. Barriers: The use of barriers around the outdoor seating area may be permitted, provided they are in a manner acceptable to the city and the design is
approved by the zoning administrator. Barriers will be required for uses involving the sale of alcoholic beverages as approved with a conditional use
permit.
D. Hours Of Operation: The hours of operation for an outdoor seating area shall be limited to the hours of operation of the associated eating and drinking
establishment.
E. Refuse Storage Area: No structure or enclosure to accommodate the storage of trash or garbage shall be erected or placed on, adjacent to, or separate
from an outdoor seating area on the public sidewalk or right of way. Refuse areas shall be in compliance with section 300.13, "Trash And Refuse
Collection Areas", of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.09: OUTDOOR STORAGE:
Outdoor storage of goods, materials, machines, equipment, and vehicles or parts outside of a building for more than seventy two (72) hours shall conform
to the standards of this section. The regulations of this section do not apply to temporary storage of construction materials reasonably required for
construction work on the premises pursuant to a valid building permit.
A. Permitted Locations: Table 300.09 of this section states the districts where outdoor storage is permitted and prohibited.
TABLE 300.09: OUTDOOR STORAGE
REGULATIONS BY DISTRICT AND LOCATION
Base District Permissibility Of Outdoor Storage
Agriculture/rural/conservation
districts
Permitted if associated with a permitted agricultural use.
Residential, downtown, CN, and
CMX districts
Not permitted. (All storage shall be within an enclosed building.)
CR, CG, PO, IP, IA, PS, and PK
districts
Not permitted in front or street facing side yards. Permitted in interior side and rear yards, or outside of required
yards, subject to the standards of this section.
IG Permitted anywhere on a lot, subject to the standards of this section.
B. Screening: Screening of outdoor storage areas shall comply with the following standards:
1. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened so as not to be visible from any public street or freeway; residential district; or publicly accessible open
space area, parking area, access driveway, or similar thoroughfare.
2. Screening walls and fences shall be architecturally compatible with the main structure on the site and shall not have barbed wire or razor wire visible
from any street or public access.
3. No screening wall or fence shall be located within a required landscape planter along the street frontage.
4. If located on a lot line or in a required yard, screening walls and fences shall not exceed the maximum fence height in required yards; in other areas,
they shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height, unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator to adequately screen material. No stored goods
may exceed the height of the screening wall or fence.
C. Surfacing:
1. Outdoor storage areas shall be paved. This requirement does not apply to outdoor storage associated with a permitted agricultural use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 372/636
2. A waiver or exception may be granted to allow outdoor storage of nonhazardous materials on other surfacing only if the following findings can be
made:
a. The proposed surfacing is appropriate, as determined by the city engineer, to the type of product displayed; and
b. The proposed surfacing will conform to all applicable federal and state air and water quality standards. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.10: SCREENING:
A. Screening Of Mechanical Equipment: All mechanical and electrical equipment and antennas shall be screened or incorporated into the design of
buildings so as not to be visible from the street, freeway, or adjacent residential districts. Such equipment includes, but is not limited to, all roof
mounted equipment, utility meters, cable equipment, telephone entry boxes, backflow prevention devices, irrigation control valves, electrical
transformers and pull boxes. Screening devices shall be consistent with the exterior colors and materials of the buildings to which they are attached.
B. Roof Access Ladders And Fire Sprinkler Risers: Roof access ladders and fire sprinkler risers shall be located internally as allowed by the California
building code.
C. Parking Areas: Parking areas shall be screened from view from public streets and adjacent residential properties according to the following standards:
1. Height: Screening of parking lots from adjacent public streets shall be three feet (3') in height. Screening along interior lot lines that abut residential
districts shall be six feet (6') in height, except within the required front setback of the applicable zoning district, where screening shall be three feet
(3') in height.
2. Materials: Screening may consist of one or any combination of the methods listed below:
a. Walls: Low profile walls consisting of decorative concrete, stone, or masonry materials.
b. Fences: An open fence of wrought iron or similar material combined with plant materials to form an opaque screen. This option does not include
the use of chainlink or vinyl fencing.
c. Planting: Plant materials consisting of compact evergreen plants that form an opaque screen. Such plant materials shall achieve a minimum height
of two feet (2') within eighteen (18) months after initial installation.
d. Berms: Berms planted with grass, ground cover, or other low growing plant materials.
D. Drive-Throughs: Vehicle lanes for drive-throughs shall be screened from public streets to a height of three and one-half feet (3.5'). Screening devices
shall consist of walls and/or berms with supplemental plant materials.
E. Common Property Lines: A six foot (6') high wall shall be provided on the interior lot lines where any nonresidential use abuts a residential district or
residential use where there is no alley. Such screening wall shall be provided at the time of new construction or expansion of buildings, or changes
from one use classification to another nonresidential use classification.
1. Location: Screening walls shall follow the lot line of the lot to be screened, or shall be so arranged within the boundaries of the lot so as to
substantially hide from adjoining lots the building, facility, or activity required to be screened.
2. Height: The six foot (6') high screening wall shall step down to three and one-half feet (3.5') in height from the side property line intersecting the front
property line to a depth equal to the required front or side yard setback of the abutting residential use in order to provide for safe line of sight for
vehicular traffic. Wall height may be increased in height to accommodate adequate sound attenuation as required through the findings of an
acoustical analysis prepared by an acoustical professional. The design of such improvements shall be approved by the city engineer.
3. Materials: The screening wall shall be a masonry block wall. Block walls shall match the standard colors allowed in the city's graffiti abatement
program. The city engineer may approve new wall/fencing materials that become available in the future for use as an alternative to a masonry block
wall based on its proven comparable properties for durability, sound, light, and glare attenuation. Topography, berming, and other alternative
methods of mitigating the nuisance of noise and light might be considered at time of project review.
4. Timing: If the residential use develops prior to the nonresidential use, a six foot (6') high wood fence may be constructed. If the nonresidential use or
residential use develops adjacent to existing development the wall shall be constructed with the new development. Where a six foot (6') high wood
fence already exists, the masonry wall footing, when constructed, shall comply with city standards. The narrow offset portion of the masonry wall
footing shall abut the existing wood fence posts, or close thereto. The gap between the fence shall be sealed with a top rail approved by the city
engineer. A condition of approval may be imposed upon the developer of the nonresidential use to work with the adjacent property owner to eliminate
the abutting and parallel wood fence. Said wall shall be constructed concurrently with the nonresidential development. Those uses subject to a
conditional use permit may be evaluated to determine applicability of the wall requirement.
F. State Route: Where a residential use abuts state route rights of way or state route frontage road rights of way, screening according to the following shall
be installed along that frontage:
1. Height: An eight foot (8') high wall shall be provided unless an acoustical analysis prepared by an acoustical professional verifies that an appropriate
height greater or lesser than the eight feet (8') is warranted or, subject to the approval of any discretionary permit (i.e., conditional use permit, parcel
or subdivision map). The design of such improvements shall be approved by the city engineer.
2. Material: The screening wall shall be a masonry block wall constructed of decorative, split face block and brown in color per the approved colors
maintained in the community development department. The wall shall include decorative columns, spaced no more than sixty feet (60') apart, with
stone veneer. The entire wall, including the columns, shall be capped on top. The city engineer may approve new wall/fencing materials that become
available in the future for use as an alternative to a masonry block wall based on its proven comparable properties for durability, sound, light, and
glare attenuation. Topography, berming, and other alternative methods of mitigating the nuisance of noise and light may be considered at time of
project review.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 373/636
3. Landscaping: Landscaping shall be provided along these walls to include trees, shrubs, ground cover and vines in order to improve the aesthetics of
the wall and prevent graffiti. Adequate land and access shall be provided to install and maintain such landscaping, to the satisfaction of the parks and
leisure services director. Maintenance of wall landscaping shall be provided by the developer, or by an assessment district established for such
maintenance in perpetuity.
G. Adjacent To Residential Uses: The zoning administrator may require a block wall based on the site design of the parking or service area or where other
noise, light, and glare are oriented toward a residential use. The wall design shall be approved as part of the project by the city engineer to ensure that
adequate line of sight distance is provided. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.11: STREET DEDICATION, CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS, AND INSTALLATION OF CERTAIN PARKWAY
IMPROVEMENTS:
Public improvements shall be provided in compliance with the following standards to any property or lot where public improvements were never
constructed or installed to city standards, or where such public improvements for whatever cause have deteriorated to a condition that they no longer
adequately serve their intended purpose. An applicant for a conditional use permit or building permit shall be required to provide for said public
improvements along the frontage of such property as follows:
A. Right Of Way Dedication: Dedicate street right of way necessary to obtain the ultimate right of way width as required by ordinance or resolution of the
city council.
B. Curb, Gutter, And Sidewalk: Construct new, and/or repair existing curb, gutter, sidewalk and handicap ramp as required by the city engineer. If, due to
existing topographic or related conditions, the city engineer determines that it would be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants to construct
said curb, gutter and sidewalk at a later date, the applicant shall deposit to the city a cash amount equal to the city engineer's estimate of construction
cost, or execute an agreement as provided by section 20-40.5, "Deferred Construction; Cash Deposit; Lien Agreement", of the municipal code.
C. Street And Alley Pave Out: Construct street, and, if applicable, alley pave out, from the gutter lip in the case of streets, and from the property line in the
case of alleys, to the existing pavement in accordance with city standards. In cases where the street or alley is not paved, the construction required of
the applicant shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the width of the street or alley. If, due to existing topographic or related conditions, the city engineer
determines that it would be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants to construct said street or alley pave out at a later date, the applicant shall
deposit to the city a cash amount equal to the city engineer's estimate of construction cost, or execute an agreement as provided by section 20-40.5,
"Deferred Construction; Cash Deposit; Lien Agreement", of the municipal code.
1. Single-family dwellings or duplexes shall not be required to pay for any pave out costs that are over two feet (2') from the gutter lip or property line.
D. Utility Structures: Relocate existing utility structures, when required, to an area within the parkway to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
E. Parkway Trees: Provide for the installation of parkway trees as required by the director of parks and leisure services in accordance with city standards
pertaining to the type, size, spacing and placement of such trees; to the maintenance or extension of street tree themes when applicable; and, to the
time of installation when it is determined it would be in the best interest of the city to postpone the placement of trees required pursuant to this section.
F. Nonresidential Development: The following improvements shall be installed with all nonresidential development:
1. Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants to meet city standards for type, size and spacing in accordance with the requirements of the fire department, and to the
satisfaction of the city engineer. In lieu of installation, if otherwise required pursuant to the provisions of this section, the city may require payment of
a prorated fire hydrant fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to acknowledge the area of benefit served by same.
2. Streetlights: Streetlights as required by the city engineer at intersections, cul-de-sacs, crosswalks, curves, etc., to meet city standards for type,
illumination and spacing. In lieu of installation, if otherwise required pursuant to the provisions of this section, the city may require payment of a
prorated streetlight fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to acknowledge the area of benefit served by same.
3. Drainage Facilities: Drainage facilities as required by the city engineer to meet city standards. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.12: SWIMMING POOLS:
Swimming pools located in any zoning district shall not be located in the required front yard, required landscaped areas or closer than five feet (5') from the
water's edge to any lot line or building. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.13: TRASH AND REFUSE COLLECTION AREAS:
Solid waste and recycling container enclosures are required for new dwelling groups consisting of four (4) or more dwelling units and for all nonresidential
developments in accordance with the following standards:
A. Location: All enclosures shall comply with the California building and fire codes and shall meet the following requirements unless it is demonstrated that
they are infeasible as determined by the zoning administrator:
1. The solid waste and recycling storage area shall not be located within any required front yard, street side yard, or required landscaped area, or any
other area required by this chapter to be constructed or maintained unencumbered according to fire and other applicable building and public safety
codes.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 374/636
2. Solid waste and recycling areas shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites and located so as to reasonably equalize the
distance from the building spaces they serve. The number of required collection sites shall be determined by the public works department.
3. Solid waste and recycling storage areas shall be conveniently accessible to refuse trucks. Enclosures shall be located so that the trucks and
equipment used by the city of Porterville or its contractors have sufficient maneuvering areas and, if feasible, so that the collection equipment can
avoid backing. Project applicants are responsible for procuring current equipment size and turning radius from the city of Porterville or its contracted
solid waste and recycling collector(s).
B. Materials, Construction, And Design:
1. Minimum Height Of Screening: Solid waste and recycling storage areas located outside or on the exterior of any building shall be enclosed per city
standards for refuse and recycling enclosures.
2. Enclosure Material: Enclosure material shall be solid masonry or concrete tilt-up with decorated exterior surface finish compatible to the main
structure(s).
3. Gate Material: Gate material shall be decorative, solid, heavy gauge metal or a heavy gauge metal frame with a covering of a view obscuring
material. If not visible from a public street, public parking area, or residential area, the enclosure gates may be constructed of chainlink with wood or
plastic inserts.
4. Access To Enclosure From Residential Projects: Each solid waste and recycling enclosure serving a residential project shall be designed to allow
walk-in access without having to open the main enclosure gate.
5. Enclosure Pad: Pads shall be a minimum of six inch (6") thick concrete.
6. Protection For Enclosures: Concrete curbs or equivalent shall protect enclosures from adjacent vehicle parking and travelways.
7. Landscaping: The perimeter of the recycling and trash enclosure, except for areas used for access, shall be planted, if feasible, with drought
resistant landscaping, including a combination of shrubs and/or climbing evergreen vines.
8. Clear Zone: The area in front of all enclosure types shall be kept clear of obstructions, and shall be painted, striped, and marked "No Parking". (Ord.
1801, 12-3-2013)
300.14: TRUCK DOCKS, LOADING, AND SERVICE AREAS:
A. Minimum Distance From Residential Districts: Truck docks, loading, and service areas are not permitted within fifty feet (50') of an R district boundary,
unless noise mitigation and view obscuring screening is provided, as approved by the zoning administrator.
B. Screening: Truck docks, loading, and service areas located in any district shall be screened from any adjacent residential districts or uses. In all districts
except IA, IP and IG districts, these facilities shall be located at the interior side of buildings or on the rear of the site and be screened so as not to be
visible from public streets. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.15: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES:
All electrical, telephone, cable television, and similar distribution lines providing direct service to a development site shall be installed underground within
the site. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
300.16: VISIBILITY AT DRIVEWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS (SIGHT DISTANCE):
Visibility at driveways and intersections shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards. The city engineer may require extended or
reduced sight distance lengths where special conditions exist or will be created, as necessary to maintain adequate visibility.
A. Driveways: Visibility at a driveway crossing a street property line shall not be blocked above a maximum height of three feet (3') by vegetation or three
and one-half feet (3.5') by structures for a depth of twelve feet (12') as viewed from the edge of the curb face on either side of the driveway at a
distance of twelve feet (12'). Street trees that are pruned at least eight feet (8') above the established grade from top of curb so as not to obstruct clear
view by motor vehicle drivers are permitted.
FIGURE 300.16A: DRIVEWAY VISIBILITY
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 375/636
B. Controlled Intersections: A controlled intersection is one where a traffic signal or stop sign (all-way or minor street only) exists to control the flow and
ensure the safety of traffic. Visibility at controlled street intersections shall not be blocked above a maximum height (measured from intersection street
grades) of three feet (3') by vegetation or three and one-half feet (3.5') by structures, including, but not limited to, fences and walls. There shall be
corner cutoffs of all lots which abut an intersection of two (2) streets. These standard corner cutoffs are determined by intersection points located
twelve feet (12') from the edge of the curb face of each street and are the areas between these intersection points and the streets, one point being
twenty feet (20') from the curb face extension and the other a distance "D" from the intersection of the crossing street (see table 300.16, "Sight
Distance Standards", of this section). The corner cutoffs for left turns from a minor road, are determined by intersection points located three feet (3')
from the middle edge of the inside lane, and are the areas between these intersection points and the streets, one point being twenty feet (20') from the
curb extension and the other a distance "D" from the intersection of the crossing street (see table 300.16 of this section). No obstruction which limits
the visibility of persons operating vehicles on said streets shall be permitted in corner cutoff areas.
FIGURE 300.16B: VISIBILITY AT CONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS
C. Uncontrolled Intersections: An "uncontrolled intersection" is one where no traffic controls exist and is subject only to yielding from each street leg. Same
requirements as controlled intersections shall apply except that both intersecting streets shall require a distance "D" from the intersection of the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 376/636
crossing street to comply with the sight distance requirements in table 300.16, "Sight Distance Standards", of this section.
FIGURE 300.16C: VISIBILITY AT UNCONTROLLED INTERSECTIONS
TABLE 300.16: SIGHT DISTANCE STANDARDS
Design Speed
Controlled
Intersections
Sight Distance
Controlled Intersections,
Left Turn From Minor
Road Sight Distance
Uncontrolled
Intersections,
Sight Distance
15 mph 80' 105' 70'
20 mph 115' 145' 90'
25 mph 155' 195' 115'
30 mph 200' 245' 140'
35 mph 250' 305' 165'
40 mph 305' 365' 195'
45 mph 360' 430' 220'
50 mph 425' 500' 245'
55 mph 495' 580' 285'
60 mph 570' 660' 325'
Note: Design speed is based on road classification per AASHTO or Caltrans manuals.
Sources:
"A Policy On Geometric Design Of Highways And Streets", AASHTO, 2010.
"Highway Design Manual", Caltrans, 2011.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 301. STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES AND ACTIVITIES
301.01: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
An accessory use shall be secondary to a primary use and shall be allowed only in conjunction with a principal use or building to which it relates under the
same regulations as the main use in any zoning district. Accessory uses and structures are also subject to the development and site regulations found in
article 300, "General Site Regulations", of this series. Accessory structures shall be designed to be of similar/compatible architecture and materials as the
main buildings, and in addition shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards in the agricultural and residential
zone districts as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 377/636
A. Agricultural Accessory Structures: In the ARC districts, agricultural accessory uses and structures are allowed subject to the provisions of this section.
Agricultural accessory uses and structures include any uses that are customarily related to an agricultural use including stables, barns, pens and sheds
or other structures for the housing of such animals, feed, equipment, and tools.
1. Size: The maximum lot coverage allowed by the development standards shall not be exceeded.
2. Height: The agricultural accessory structure shall not exceed thirty five feet (35') in height unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Building Separation: Agricultural accessory structures shall be separated from any main building by a minimum of six feet (6').
4. Setbacks: Agricultural accessory structures shall meet all setback requirements of the main building.
B. Residential Accessory Structures: Residential accessory structures include any uses that are customarily related to a residence, including garages,
greenhouses, storage sheds, studios, workshops, detached covered decks (i.e., a patio structure), detached uncovered decks and patios two and onehalf
feet (2.5') in height or greater, and similar structures. Uncovered decks under two and one-half feet (2.5') in height, and fences are not subject to
the regulations in this section. Additional regulations for residential second units are located in section 301.16, "Second Dwelling Units", of this article.
1. Attached Structures: An attached structure is not, by definition, an accessory structure. A structure shall be considered attached to a main structure if
it is architecturally compatible with and made structurally a part of the main structure, including sharing a common wall or roofline with the main
structure. A structure attached with a breezeway connecting a door of the residence to a door of the detached structure, with a roof that is a minimum
of eight feet (8') in width and fifteen feet (15') in length, will be considered a part of the main structure for purposes of this chapter. An attached
structure shall comply with all requirements of this chapter applicable to the main structure, including, but not limited to, setback requirements and
height limits.
2. Number Of Structures: The number of detached accessory structures shall be limited to two (2) unless approved by the zoning administrator.
3. Size: The floor area of detached accessory structures shall not exceed a cumulative floor area of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet
unless approved by the zoning administrator. In reviewing a request for additional size, the zoning administrator may consider neighborhood
compatibility, overall lot coverage, relationship of the accessory structure to the main structure and use, and any circumstances unique to the
neighborhood. In no case shall the accessory building exceed the ground floor area of the main building and in no case shall the maximum lot
coverage allowed by the development standards be exceeded.
4. Height: The maximum height shall not exceed eighteen feet (18'). The zoning administrator may consider buildings exceeding eighteen feet (18') in
height that are stepped back one foot (1') from the required side and rear setback lines for every foot of height above eighteen feet (18') up to twenty
four feet (24').
5. Building Separation: Detached accessory structures requiring a building permit, with the exception of shade structures, shall be separated from any
main building by a minimum of six feet (6').
6. Setbacks: When located in the rear one-third (1/3) of a lot, detached accessory buildings shall not be located closer than four feet (4') to any rear
property line. In instances where the rear property line is coterminous with an alley right of way, the accessory building shall not be closer than one
foot (1') to such rear property line. Detached accessory buildings shall meet all other setback requirements of the main building. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
301.02: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES:
Conditional use permit approval is required for any use involving the sale of alcoholic beverages under an on-sale or off-sale license.
A. Liquor Stores: Liquor stores and other off-sale establishments that dedicate more than twenty five percent (25%) of the sale floor to sales of alcoholic
beverages for off premises consumption, but excluding full service grocery stores, shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the
following standards:
1. Location: In all areas outside the downtown districts, such establishment shall be located a minimum of five hundred feet (500') from any other such
establishment or any educational, religious, or cultural institution or public parks. The five hundred foot (500') separation requirement does not apply
in the downtown districts.
2. Litter: Trash receptacles shall be provided by entrances and exits from the building.
3. Pay Telephones And Vending Machines: External pay telephones and vending machines are prohibited. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.03: ANIMAL KEEPING2:
(Rep. by Ord. 1824, 6-16-2015)
301.04: AUTOMOBILE/VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MAJOR AND MINOR:
Major and minor automobile/vehicle service and repair uses shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Noise: All body and fender work, stereo installation and testing, or similar noise generating activity shall be conducted within an enclosed masonry or
similar building with sound attenuating construction to absorb noise. Air compressors and similar equipment shall be located inside a building.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 378/636
B. Litter: The premises shall be kept in an orderly condition at all times. No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled,
junked, or wrecked vehicles may be stored outside a building.
C. Work Areas: All work shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
D. Bay Doors: Bay doors shall not face a public right of way. On corner lots fronting two (2) or more streets with different classifications in the general plan,
bay doors shall face the street with the lower classification. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.05: AUTO SERVICE STATIONS AND CAR WASHING:
Service stations, automobile/vehicle washing facilities, and any other commercial use that includes fuel pumps for retail sales of gasoline shall be located,
developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Bay Doors: Bay doors shall not face a public right of way. On corner lots fronting two (2) or more streets with different classifications in the general plan,
bay doors shall face the street with the lower classification.
B. Pump Islands: Pump islands shall be located a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from any property line to the nearest edge of the pump island. A canopy or
roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to ten feet (10') within this distance.
C. Canopies And Roof Structures: Canopies and roof structures over a pump island, including associated signage, shall be designed as an integral design
element of a building's architecture and architecturally compatible, including materials, color and design details, with surrounding structures.
D. Washing Facilities: No building or structure shall be located within ten feet (10') of the property line or within twenty feet (20') of any interior lot line of a
residential use or an R district.
E. Signage: Where not otherwise accommodated in article 305, "Signs", of this series, service station signage needed to comply with the California
Business And Professions Code section 13532 can be approved by the zoning administrator.
F. Hours Of Operation: Automobile/vehicle washing facilities are limited to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) P.M., seven (7) days a week.
When abutting an R district, the hours of operation shall be eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M., seven (7) days a week unless modified
otherwise by a conditional use permit.
G. Application Review And Findings For Approval: In reviewing proposals, emphasis shall be placed on quality design of building materials and landscape
features. The following standards shall be incorporated:
1. The project shall be designed so that form and scale are harmonious and consistent with the character of the specific site, the adjacent uses and
structures, and the surrounding neighborhood.
2. The site design, including the location and number of driveways, shall promote safe and efficient on site and off site traffic circulation.
3. Service bay openings shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion on surrounding streets and properties.
4. Lighting shall be designed to be low profile, indirect or diffused, create a pleasing appearance, and avoid adverse impacts on surrounding uses.
H. Conditions Of Approval: Conditions of approval of a conditional use permit may address operational characteristics of the use; impose restrictions on
outdoor storage and display, location of pump islands, canopies and service bay openings; and/or require buffering, screening, lighting, planting areas,
or other site elements, in order to avoid adverse impacts on properties in the surrounding area.
I. Abandonment: Any service station shall in the case of abandonment or nonoperation of the primary use be dismantled and the site cleared within twelve
(12) months subsequent to the close of the last business day. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.06: CROP CULTIVATION:
Commercial crop cultivation is allowed as an interim use in zones designated in series 200 of this chapter. Land use regulations as identified in series 200
of this chapter and elsewhere in this chapter apply.
A. Purpose And Intent:
1. It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide opportunity for interim use of land within city limits until such time as the development market
supports the intended development of said lands.
2. Commercial crop cultivation can be allowed on an interim basis only where the impacts of an agricultural operation will not be detrimental to the
health, safety, peace, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area.
3. Crop cultivation allowed under the premises of this section is secondary to its availability for urban development and should be available for
development as an urban use when market conditions improve for such a use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 379/636
4. Use of a subject site for crop cultivation for an interim period does not result in the land being construed as an agricultural resource requiring
protection or preservation.
5. If residentially zoned, the land, regardless of the status of its agricultural use, will be considered in the city's housing element and the regional
housing needs assessment (RHNA) as available for residential use.
6. The key intent of this section is to limit the use to a time period that is appropriate to the type of agricultural crop to be planted, to allow sufficient time
for a reasonable profit to be realized while assuring that the use is interim in nature. At its discretion, the city council may set time periods to limit the
use to a specific amount of time.
7. This section shall not be construed to apply to animal confinement.
B. Development Standards: Commercial crop cultivation allowed by this section shall comply with the following standards:
1. The aerial application of fertilizers, pesticides, or other agricultural treatments is not allowed.
2. Prior to the application of pesticides, fungicides, or insecticides, notice will be given to all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the
parcel(s), and notice shall be posted on site along every one hundred feet (100') of street frontage. Notice shall be no smaller than ten inches by
twelve inches (10" x 12") and with the word "Notice" in 80-point font.
3. A minimum twenty foot (20') wide drive aisle clearance shall be maintained along all property boundaries.
4. The applicant/property owner shall not enter into a Williamson act contract or other agricultural preservation measure, whether for tax reduction or
other purposes.
5. A vector/rodent control plan shall be submitted and approved with the conditional use permit and implemented for the term of the agricultural use.
6. The applicant shall indemnify the city of Porterville to the satisfaction of the city attorney from and against any and all claims or legal recourse
resulting from the agricultural operation.
C. Considerations: The following factors will be considered on a project by project basis to determine if commercial crop cultivation is an appropriate use
for a particular site. The council may consider the following factors or others as may be appropriate, based on the location of the proposed use and its
proximity to urban uses and may consider limiting some crop types due to impacts of excessive noise, dust, vibration, odors or other effects on
surrounding uses.
1. No "right to farm" is conveyed or otherwise implied with the use.
2. The area to be farmed is of adequate size, dimension and topography to accommodate the proposed use.
3. The burning of agricultural waste/trimmings/etc., on the property will not create a public nuisance or a danger due to the close proximity of urban
uses.
4. On site sale of crops is allowed in accordance with subsection D, "Sale Of Agricultural Crops", of this section.
5. The use does not involve the installation of underground storage tanks.
6. Best management practices to reduce spray drift will be implemented.
7. Wells, as needed to serve the subject site, are subject to California department of public health services approval and review of the city engineer.
8. Irrigation water runoff, if any, can be contained on site.
9. Use of municipal water for irrigation is prohibited.
10. The area shall be groomed of weeds and agricultural waste regularly to reduce potential fire hazard, proliferation of pests, and unsightly conditions.
11. Equipment and vehicles related to the active farming operation of the site shall not be parked in the public right of way and vehicular circulation
related to the use shall occur on site.
12. The applicant shall remove all abandoned crops upon discontinuation of the use.
D. Sale Of Agricultural Crops: The on site sale of agricultural crops may be considered by the city council subject to the following criteria:
1. Sales from the site are seasonal in nature.
2. Sales are limited to those crops grown on site.
3. Sales booths have adequate parking and there is appropriate surfacing for the parking area and drive aisle.
4. There is safe access to and from the site from the right of way.
5. The sales booth conforms to all requirements of the California building code and the size of the booth is commensurate with the crop to be sold, the
size of the cultivation area and the length of the season, but shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet.
6. One 40-square foot sign is allowed as a wall sign or freestanding sign not greater than twelve feet (12') in height. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1830,
11-17-2015)
301.07: FAMILY DAYCARE HOME, LARGE:
Large family daycare homes shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 380/636
A. Location: Large family daycare homes shall be located at least three hundred feet (300') apart in all directions from any other large family daycare
home.
B. Hours Of Operation: Large family daycare homes shall operate only between the hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., Monday
through Friday. No outdoor play is allowed before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
C. Residency: The operator of a large family daycare home shall be a full time resident of the dwelling unit in which the facility is located.
D. Screening: A periphery wall, constructed of wood or masonry, shall be provided for purposes of securing outdoor play areas and screening the site and
shall achieve seventy five percent (75%) opacity. Chain metal fencing or barbed wire is prohibited.
E. Signs: No sign shall be publicly displayed on the premises relating to the large family daycare home.
F. Play Area: A minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet of play area is required. An additional seventy five (75) square feet is required for each child
in excess of ten (10), as shown by the maximum number of children which may be cared for at any time, pursuant to the license for such a facility. The
play area shall not be located in any required front or side yard.
G. Parking And Loading: An operator of a large family daycare home shall satisfy the following conditions:
1. Passenger Loading And Drop Off: A minimum of one additional improved off street drop off and pick up parking space shall be provided.
2. Traffic: Increased traffic due to the operation of any large family daycare home shall not cause traffic levels to exceed those levels customary in
residential neighborhoods. However, somewhat higher traffic levels during the morning and evening commute time is acceptable. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
301.08: HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES:
All hazardous waste management facilities, except household hazardous waste collection centers authorized by the city and the Tulare County health
department, shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following:
A. Application Content: Applications for hazardous waste management facilities shall include the following:
1. Site Plan: A detailed site plan depicting all buildings, land uses, storage areas, parking areas, and driveways internal and surrounding traffic
circulation. Occupancy type and rating for each building or structure shall be identified.
2. Best Management Practices: Demonstrate and certify that they are minimizing the generation of hazardous waste through the use of the best
available technology within their manufacturing, and/or product development processes. Applicants shall also demonstrate and certify that facilities
will be using the best available control technology in minimizing air emissions and processing hazardous waste. Such demonstration and certification
shall be provided prior to the issuance of any building permit or other land use entitlement.
3. Waste Characteristics And Capacity: Identify the amounts (in tons) and types of hazardous waste to be treated and stored; the duration of stored
waste on the facility site and the ultimate destination of the waste. The owner-operator shall make this information available on a quarterly basis to
the city of Porterville on an ongoing basis. If the application is for a transfer station the applicant shall identify the capacity of the facility to store each
type of waste stream, service area(s) of the facility and ultimate disposition of the waste.
4. Air Quality Analysis: An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts and proposed mitigation measures. The hazardous waste facility shall comply
with the rules and regulations of the San Joaquin Valley air pollution control district.
5. Risk Assessment: A risk assessment which analyzes, in detail, all probabilities of accidents or spills at the site (including transportation related), or
accidents from the point of origin to the facility, and any other risk assessment requested by either the city manager, zoning administrator, or the city
council. Such analyses shall identify mitigation measures to reduce the identified risks. The risk assessment shall identify the most probable routes
for transporting hazardous wastes to and from the facility.
6. Alternatives Analysis: All applications shall contain an analysis of alternative regional sites which shall be reviewed pursuant to the California
environmental quality act.
7. Emergency Response Plan: An emergency response plan that indicates at a minimum:
a. That the proposed plan is consistent with any and all applicable county and regional emergency response plans and all city, county, state and
federal regulatory requirements regarding emergency response procedure.
b. Detailed procedures to be employed at the time of emergency for each type of chemical substances utilized including contingency procedures.
c. Anticipated impacts on local fire, police, and medical services.
d. Names, home and business addresses, and home and business telephone numbers of all management personnel at the facility, if known, and a
detailed description of uncontrolled release and emergency situation reporting procedures.
8. Geotechnical Report: A geotechnical report providing complete analysis of on site soil conditions, fault hazards, underground water supplies, and
recommendations.
9. Flooding Information: An analysis of the potential of flooding on the site. Note residual repositories are prohibited in areas of special flood hazards as
depicted by FEMA flood hazard maps.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 381/636
10. Traffic Analysis: Applicants shall submit a traffic analysis which addresses, at a minimum, vehicle-truck trips, effects on nearby intersections, and
any special characteristics of the project site. Applicants shall also identify the most likely transportation routes within the city and the county.
11. Closure Plan: The owner/operator of a hazardous waste facility shall, prior to any local land use decision, submit to the fire department a written
closure plan approved by the California department of health services. All revisions to such closure plans shall also be submitted to the fire
department.
12. Safety: The owner/operator shall demonstrate that the separation between the hazardous waste facility and residential areas is adequate to protect
the health, safety, welfare, and property values of residents.
B. Monitoring: At minimum, hazardous waste facilities are subject to the following monitoring requirements:
1. Upon reasonable notice, and for the purpose of ensuring compliance with all standards, conditions, and other requirements which the city is
authorized to enforce under its police power, city officials or their designated representatives may enter the premises on which a hazardous waste
facility permit has been granted.
2. The owner/operator of a facility shall report quarterly to the fire chief the amount, type, and disposition of all wastes processed by the facility.
Included in the report shall be copies of all manifests showing the delivery and types of hazardous wastes and include a map showing the exact
location (coordinates and elevation) of quantities and types of materials placed in repositories or otherwise stored or disposed of on site.
3. The owner/operator of a hazardous waste facility shall immediately send copies of all complaints as to facility operations and copies of all inspection
reports made by other local, state or federal agencies to the fire chief and city engineer.
4. The owner/operator of all facilities shall prepare and submit an annual emergency response preparedness report to the fire department and all other
local emergency response agencies. Such report shall be signed by all management personnel at the facility and each person at the facility who has
emergency response responsibilities.
5. The owner/operator of all facilities shall submit an annual air, soil, and groundwater monitoring report to the city engineer.
C. Modifications: Any modifications of the types and quantities of hazardous waste to be managed at the facility which were not included in the approved
application for a conditional use permit shall be approved by the fire chief and city engineer before such modifications occur at the facility.
D. Contingency Plan: Every hazardous waste facility shall have a contingency operation plan approved by the California department of health services. A
copy of the contingency plan shall be maintained at the facility and sent to the police department, fire department, engineering division, and the county
department of environmental health.
E. Financial Assurance: Prior to issuance of an "occupancy permit" to begin the use of a hazardous waste facility, the applicant shall show proof that it has
met all of the financial responsibility requirements imposed by the California department of health services and any other federal or state agency.
F. Indemnification: The applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and render harmless the city, and its city council and all officers, employees and agents of
the city against and from all claims, actions and liabilities relating to the land use decision or arising out of the operation of the facility.
G. Enforcement: All costs of compliance with this section shall be borne by the owner/operator. The city may employ any and all methods permitted by law
to enforce this section.
H. Maintenance: The owner/operator shall keep all equipment and buildings in good repair and shall employ technological advances as may be required
by the California department of health services, San Joaquin Valley air pollution control district, or U.S. environmental protection agency.
I. Findings: The following findings shall be made in writing prior to making a land use decision which will allow the siting of a hazardous waste facility
project:
1. The project is consistent with the general plan.
2. The project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community.
3. The project will not significantly reduce incentives for waste minimization by hazardous waste generators.
4. There are adequate city services available to service the project.
5. The project has met or exceeded each requirement of this section.
6. All environmental impacts identified in an environmental impact report or negative declaration as part of the permit process in compliance with the
California environmental quality act have been adequately mitigated. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.09: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
Home occupations that are carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit for gainful employment are clearly incidental and subordinate to the use of the
structure for dwelling purposes and that do not change the residential character of the primary use, are allowed and shall be operated in compliance with
the following standards. Home occupations are subject to zoning conformance approval pursuant to article 602, "Zoning Conformance Review", of this
chapter.
A. Permitted Uses: Home occupations generally include, but are not limited to, the following uses:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 382/636
Cottage food operations.
Dressmaking, millinery, and other home sewing work.
Handicrafts such as weaving, leatherwork, and other arts and crafts.
Instructional classes, not exceeding two (2) students at one time.
Internet sales, mail order or direct sales provided no merchandise is sold on the premises.
Offices for personal services such as janitorial service, gardening service, office services, etc.
Professional offices.
B. Prohibited Uses: The following uses are not permitted as a home occupation:
Healing arts.
Repair, fix it or plumbing, welding or fabrication shops.
Spiritual advisory service (fortune telling).
The repair, reconditioning, servicing or manufacture of any internal combustion or diesel engine or of any motor vehicle, including automobiles, trucks,
motorcycles, or boats.
Uses that entail food handling, processing or packing, other than those permitted by cottage food operation.
Uses that entail the harboring, training, raising, or grooming of dogs, cats or other animals, on the premises.
C. Residential Use Is Primary Activity: The residential use remains the primary activity on the property.
D. Signs: No sign shall be publicly displayed on the premises relating to the home occupation or product thereof.
E. Employment: No person not residing on the premises may be employed at the site of the home occupation.
F. Sales: Sale of goods on the premises shall be limited to the products of the home occupations, and no other merchandise or goods shall be sold, kept or
displayed for the purposes of sale on the premises.
G. Activities Generated: The home occupation shall not attract or generate excessive auto or foot traffic, require additional off street parking spaces,
involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials or supplies to or from the premises, or exceed six (6) patrons or customers for any
calendar day.
H. Residential Purposes: No use of materials, mechanical equipment, utilities, or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for
residential purposes shall be permitted.
I. Storage: Storage related to the home occupation shall be confined to the dwelling or accessory building.
J. Change Of Residential Character Prohibited: No dwelling or accessory buildings shall be built, altered, finished, or decorated externally for the purposes
of conducting the home occupation in such a manner as to change the residential character and appearance of the dwelling, or in such a manner as to
cause the structure to be reasonably recognized as a place where a home occupation is conducted.
K. Covered Parking Spaces: No garage or accessory building shall be altered or used in such a manner that would reduce the number of covered parking
spaces required in the district in which it is located.
L. Vehicles: Not more than one vehicle of not more than one ton capacity used in connection with the home occupation shall be kept on the site. Any
trailer, wheeled equipment, or any vehicle displaying or advertising the home occupation shall not be visible from off the premises.
M. Power Equipment: The home occupation shall not involve the use of power equipment on the premises using motors exceeding one horsepower
combined capacity.
N. Performance Standards: No equipment or process shall be used which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, or electrical interference detectable
to the normal senses off the lot if the occupation is conducted in a single-family detached residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other
than a single-family detached residence. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible electrical interference in any radio or
television receiver off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
O. Mobile Businesses: Service oriented mobile businesses that provide services at the location of a client may function as a home based business, where
compliant with all other provisions of this section and subject to the following standards:
1. No business activities other than office activities occur on the premises. A client may not come to the home of the business to use the mobile unit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 383/636
2. The primary business activity involves provision of services that by their nature are intermittent and convenient to be provided at the home or
business of the client. Examples include: mobile notary, personal services, minor vehicle repair not involving engines as prohibited above (windshield
repair or battery replacement), computer maintenance and repair.
3. Sale of goods is permitted only as an accessory to the service oriented use, such as sale of a windshield when it is replaced, or a new hard drive
when it is required and installed as a part of a computer repair.
P. Yard Sales: More than two (2) yard sales per year, but not more than four (4) yard sales per year, may be permitted subject to issuance of a business
license and a home occupation permit subject to the following standards:
1. A seller's permit must be obtained through the state board of equalization prior to the date of the third yard sale.
2. The sales events must be compliant with the provisions of section 301.21 of this article. (Ord. 1820, 12-16-2014)
301.10: MANUFACTURED HOMES:
Manufactured homes shall be designed and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. General Requirements: Manufactured homes may be used for residential purposes subject to the provisions of this section. Manufactured homes may
also be used for temporary uses subject to the approval of a temporary use permit (see article 605, "Temporary Use Permits", of this chapter).
B. Design Criteria: A manufactured home shall be compatible in design and appearance with residential structures in the vicinity and shall meet the
following standards:
1. Foundation: A manufactured home shall be built on a permanent foundation system approved by the building official.
2. Date Of Construction: Each manufactured home shall have been manufactured within ten (10) years of the date of issuance of a permit to install the
manufactured home and shall be certified under the national manufactured home construction and safety act of 1974.
3. Skirting: The unit's skirting shall extend to the finished grade. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.11: MOBILE HOME PARKS:
Mobile home parks shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Maximum Density: The maximum density is as allowed by the base zoning district in which the mobile home park is located.
B. Access: Access to internal private streets is required for all mobile home lots or spaces within the mobile home park. Direct access from a mobile home
lot or spaces to a public street or alley is not permitted. All points of vehicular access to and from public streets shall be approved by the city engineer.
C. Internal Streets: All private internal streets within the mobile home park shall not be less than thirty feet (30') in width and shall be surfaced and
maintained with an all weather surface.
D. Parking: Each unit shall provide for at least two (2) vehicle parking spaces, one of which shall be covered.
E. Walls And Screening: Exterior boundaries of a mobile home park adjacent to a public street frontage shall be screened with a six foot (6') high solid wall
set back twenty feet (20') from the property line. Such walls shall be composed of decorative block, concrete panels or similar materials and include
architectural relief through variations in height, the use of architectural "caps", columns, or similar measures. Block walls shall match the standard
colors allowed in the city's graffiti abatement program.
F. Common Open Space: Recreation, or common open spaces, shall be provided for each mobile home park or subdivision in accordance with
subsections 201.04B4 and B5 of this chapter. An area of at least three hundred (300) square feet for each mobile home space shall be provided. This
open space may be used in more than one location, but no location shall contain less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in the aggregate. Each
recreational space shall be accessible to all of the mobile home spaces in the park, and shall not be used for any other purpose.
G. Landscaping: Landscaping, as prescribed in article 303, "Landscaping", of this series, is required for all common open space areas, exterior front and
street side yards, and common parking areas. A fifteen foot (15') landscaped buffer shall be provided along streets adjoining the park.
H. Certification: All mobile homes shall be certified under the national manufactured home construction and safety act of 1974. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.12: OUTDOOR RETAIL SALES/DISPLAY:
A. Outdoor Retail Sales/Display: Outdoor display of merchandise is allowed in association with an approved permanent use on the site, subject to zoning
administrator approval. Outdoor retail sales and display shall be located and operated in compliance with the following standards:
1. Displayed merchandise shall occupy a specifically approved and defined location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its
circulation. Displayed merchandise shall be located outside of any fire lane or fire accessway and shall not obstruct sight distances or otherwise
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 384/636
create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic. Displayed merchandise shall not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, private walkways or
required parking spaces.
2. Merchandise shall be located entirely on private property outside of required setbacks except in downtown districts, where outdoor display is allowed
on the sidewalk directly adjacent to property if a pedestrian walkway of at least six feet (6') is constantly maintained.
3. Display of merchandise shall not obstruct sight distances or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
4. The zoning administrator may require landscaping, screening, paving or other site improvements including the removal of obsolete or abandoned
facilities on nonconforming sites. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.13: PERSONAL STORAGE FACILITIES:
Personal storage facilities may be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Business Activity: All personal storage facilities shall be limited to the storage of inactive items such as furniture and files. No retail, repair, or other
commercial use shall be conducted out of the individual rental storage units. No activities other than rental of storage units and pick up and deposit of
storage shall be allowed on the premises. Examples of activities prohibited in said facilities include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Auctions, commercial wholesale or retail sales, or miscellaneous garage sales, excepting auctions required by law to comply with lien sale
requirements. During the course of said lien sales, customer vehicles shall not be allowed to obstruct travelways within the personal storage facility.
2. The servicing, repair, or fabrication of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawn mowers, appliances, or other similar equipment.
3. The operation of power tools, spray painting equipment, table saws, lathes, compressors, welding equipment, kilns, or other similar equipment.
4. Any use that is noxious or offensive because of odors, dust, noise, fumes, or vibrations.
B. Notice To Tenants: As part of the rental process, the facility manager shall inform all tenants of conditions restricting storage of hazardous materials and
limitation on the use of the storage units. These restrictions shall be included in rental contracts and posted at a conspicuous location within the front of
each rental unit.
C. Size Limitations: Total lot coverage by any and all structures shall be limited to fifty percent (50%) of the total lot area.
D. Circulation: Driveway aisles shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20') wide.
E. Landscaping: A landscaped buffer with a minimum inside dimension of six feet (6') shall be provided along the front and street property lines, except for
vehicular circulation openings. Additional landscaping may be required where necessary to prevent visual impacts on adjacent properties. All
landscaped areas shall be bound by a concrete curb at least six inches (6") wide and six inches (6") high and shall be permanently maintained in
compliance with article 303, "Landscaping", of this series.
F. Fencing: A six foot (6') high solid wall shall be provided around the perimeter of the development at locations where the solid facades of the storage
structures do not provide a perimeter barrier. Such walls shall be composed of decorative block, concrete panels or similar materials and include
architectural relief through variations in height, the use of architectural "caps", columns, or similar measures. Block walls shall match the standard
colors allowed in the city's graffiti abatement program.
G. Open Storage: Open storage, outside an enclosed building, shall be limited to vehicles and trailers and screened from public view by building facades
or solid fences.
H. Outdoor Lighting: All outdoor lights shall be shielded to direct light and glare only onto the personal storage premises and may be of sufficient intensity
to discourage vandalism and theft. Said lighting and glare shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from all adjoining property.
I. Portable Storage Buildings: Movable storage buildings shall be allowed if they are constructed to appear as conventional storage buildings or are located
in an area completely screened from public view and adhere to all applicable building and fire codes. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.14: RECYCLING FACILITIES:
Recycling facilities shall be located and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Reverse Vending Machines:
1. Accessory Use: Reverse vending machines shall be installed as an accessory use to a permitted or conditionally permitted primary use on the same
site.
2. Location: Machines shall be located adjacent to the entrance of the commercial host use and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.
3. Identification: Machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone
number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.
4. Signs: Machines shall have a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet exclusive of operating instructions.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 385/636
5. Lighting: Machines shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation between dawn and dusk.
6. Trash Receptacle: Machines shall provide a forty (40) gallon garbage can for nonrecyclable materials located adjacent to the reverse vending
machine.
B. Recycling Collection Facilities:
1. Size: Recycling collection facilities shall not exceed a footprint of three hundred fifty (350) square feet or include more than three (3) parking spaces
(not including space periodically needed for the removal or exchange of materials or containers).
2. Equipment: No power driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines, may be used.
3. Location: Facilities shall not abut a residential district.
4. Setback: Facilities shall be set back at least ten feet (10') from any street line and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.
5. Containers: Containers shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof material(s) and secured from unauthorized removal of material and
have capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected in the collection schedule.
6. Identification: Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of accepted material, the name and telephone number of the facility operator
and the hours of operation.
7. Signs: Signs shall be a maximum of twenty percent (20%) per side of facility or container or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is larger. In the case
of a wheeled facility, the side is measured from the pavement to the top of the container. The zoning administrator may authorize increases in the
number, size and nature of additional signs.
8. Parking: Patrons and the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the main use unless a parking
study shows available capacity during recycling facility operation.
9. Site Maintenance: Sites shall be maintained clean, sanitary, and free of litter and any other undesirable materials.
C. Recycling Processing Facility:
1. Location: Facilities shall not abut a residential district or use.
2. Screening: The facility shall be screened from public rights of way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure.
3. Outdoor Storage: Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage
shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls.
4. Identification: Facilities shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and hours of operation. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
301.15: RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES, GENERAL:
Residential care facilities shall be located, developed and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Location: Minimum distance from other residential care facilities shall be three hundred feet (300').
B. Screening: A minimum six foot (6') high solid wall or fence shall be provided for purposes of securing outdoor recreational areas and screening the site.
Chain metal fencing and barbed wire are prohibited.
C. Licensing: Residential care facilities shall be licensed and certified by the state of California and shall be operated according to all applicable state and
local regulations. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.16: SECOND DWELLING UNITS:
A second dwelling unit, in addition to the first single-family dwelling unit on a single-family residential lot, shall be located, developed, and operated in
compliance with subsection 301.01B, "Residential Accessory Structures", of this article and the following standards:
A. Location: Second units may be established on any lot in any R district where a primary single-family dwelling has been previously established or is
proposed to be established in conjunction with construction of a second unit. Only one second unit is permitted per primary single-family dwelling on
the same lot. The primary unit shall meet all city codes including the height, setback, lot coverage, parking, and other zoning requirements. Any
nonconforming structures shall be brought into conformance prior to construction of second unit.
B. Development Standards: Second units shall conform to the height, setbacks, lot coverage and other zoning requirements of the zoning district in which
the site is located, the following development standards, other requirements of this development ordinance, and other applicable city codes.
Applications for a second dwelling shall include: 1) location map and site plan drawn to scale showing existing and proposed structures and additions,
orientation and dimension of lot and structure(s) on the lot, and adjacent streets, access and parking, and 2) a floor plan of existing and proposed
structures.
1. Type Of Unit: The second unit shall provide separate, independent living quarters for one family. The second unit may be attached, detached, or
located within the living areas of the primary dwelling unit on the lot, subject to the standards of this section. An existing single-family dwelling may
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 386/636
be converted into two (2) dwelling units.
2. Maximum Floor Area: The total area of floor space of a detached second unit shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. The
floor area of an attached second unit shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the living area or the minimum area of an efficiency unit as described in
section 17958.1 of the California Health And Safety Code, whichever is greater.
3. Architectural Compatibility: The entrance to an attached second unit shall be separate from the entrance to the first unit and shall be installed in a
manner as to negate an obvious indication of two (2) units in the same structure. A second unit shall be designed and constructed so as to blend with
and complement the existing single-family unit in terms of height, roofing, siding materials and color.
4. Parking: In addition to parking required for the existing residence, an additional one covered space for efficiency units and one bedroom units, two
(2) covered parking spaces for two (2), three (3), and four (4) bedroom units, and one parking space per bedroom thereafter shall be provided.
Access to parking for the primary and second unit shall be provided via a paved driveway in compliance with city codes and shall be fully accessible
to the parking areas.
C. Use Limitation: Either the primary or secondary unit may be for rental purposes and neither unit may be sold separately.
D. Deed Restrictions: Before obtaining a building permit, the property owner shall file with the county recorder a declaration or agreement of restrictions
which has been approved by the city attorney as to its form and content, containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by
the owner stating that:
1. The second dwelling unit shall be considered legal only so long as either the primary residence or the second dwelling is occupied by the owner of
the property.
2. The second dwelling cannot be sold separately.
3. The restrictions shall be binding upon any successor in ownership of the property. The city may enforce these provisions at the cost of the owner,
and enforcement may include legal action against the property owner.
E. Conversion Of An Existing House To A Second Unit: In cases where an existing single-family residence is one thousand two hundred (1,200) square
feet or less, the zoning administrator may approve the construction of one additional residence which is intended to be the primary residence on the
property. The existing residence, which is intended to become the lawful second unit, shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter, including
the second dwelling size limitations. The primary residence shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the applicable zoning district and
other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.17: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A. Purpose And Intent:
1. It is the purpose and intent of this section to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the city, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of
this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this section to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials
protected by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this section to condone or legitimatize the distribution of obscene material.
2. One of the important purposes of the regulations set forth in this section is to discourage and to minimize the opportunity for criminal conduct. As
such, nothing in this section shall permit or be interpreted to permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which is specifically prohibited under the
following California Penal Code sections:
a. Receipt of money for placement of person for purposes of cohabitation (Penal Code section 266d);
b. Purchase of person for purposes of prostitution or placement of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code section 266e);
c. Sale of person for immoral purposes (Penal Code section 266f);
d. Pimping (Penal Code section 266h);
e. Pandering (Penal Code section 266i);
f. Lewd or obscene conduct (Penal Code section 314);
g. Houses of ill fame (Penal Code section 315);
h. Disorderly houses which disturb the immediate neighborhood (Penal Code section 316);
i. Places of prostitution (Penal Code section 317); and
j. Place of prostitution; place of lewdness; place used as bathhouse permitting conduct capable of transmitting AIDS (Penal Code section 11225).
3. Nothing in this section shall permit, or be interpreted to permit any use, conduct, and/or activity which violates any federal, state or local law or
regulation.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this section, certain terms and words are defined as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 387/636
EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary,
wage or other compensation by the operation of said business.
ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
1. The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business;
2. The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any of the "sexually oriented businesses" defined in this
section;
3. The addition of any of the "sexually oriented businesses" defined in this section to any other existing sexually oriented business;
4. The relocation of any such sexually oriented business; or
5. The substantial enlargement of any such sexually oriented business.
NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY: 1. The appearance or display of human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or the areola or nipple
of the female breast; or
2. A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of the
female breast.
OPERATOR: Means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that requires a license and/or permit that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well
as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity.
PUBLIC BUILDING REGULARLY FREQUENTED BY CHILDREN: Any building owned, leased or held by the United States, the state, the county, the
city, any special district, school district, or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States, which building is used as a
library, community center, children's center, or any other use having special attraction to children, or which building is often visited by children for
social activities unaccompanied by their parents or other adult custodian.
PUBLIC PARK OR RECREATION AREA: Public land which has been designated for park or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a
park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, open space wilderness areas, or similar public
land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of the city park and recreation authorities.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is primarily used for religious worship and related religious
activities, as identified on the latest equalized tax roll.
SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility including, but not limited to, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools,
primary schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation
schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School includes the school grounds, but does not include the facilities used
primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areolae of the female breasts, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SENSITIVE USE: Any cemetery; religious institution; school; public building regularly frequented by children; public park; or boys' club, girls' club, or
similar youth organization.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES (ADULT ORIENTED BUSINESSES): Those businesses defined as follows:
Adult Arcade: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar
machines, or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are regularly available or used to show films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store Or Adult Video Store: A commercial establishment which: 1) has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock in trade; or 2) derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues; or 3) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior floor or
display space; or 4) devotes a significant or substantial portion of its business activities or employees' time, or advertising, to the sale, rental or
viewing for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 388/636
3. An establishment may have other significant or substantial business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of
materials, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult bookstore, adult
novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishments from being categorized as an
adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store so long as one of its significant or substantial business purposes is offering for sale or
rental, for some form of consideration, the specified materials which depict or describe specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities.
Adult Cabaret: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, "bottle club", or similar commercial establishment, which regularly features: 1) live performances which
are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas, or by specified sexual activities; or 2) films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
Adult Model Studio: Any place where a person who displays specified anatomical areas or who engages in specified sexual activities is provided
for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons. This term does not include a modeling class operated by a proprietary school, licensed by the state of California; a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; by a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure which has no sign visible
from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing, where in order to participate in a
class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class, and where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which: 1) offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, and which
regularly provides or makes available to patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
which advertises the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public right of way, or by means of any
off premises advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or 2) offers a sleeping
room for rent for a period of time less than ten (10) hours; or 3) allows a tenant or occupant to rent or subrent the sleeping room for a time period
of less than ten (10) hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic
reproductions depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live
performances which are characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Regularly Features Or Regularly Shown: With respect to an adult cabaret, adult theater, or adult motion picture theater means a regular and
substantial course of conduct. The fact that a live performance or film which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities is exhibited on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more
occasions within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one hundred eighty (180) day period, shall to the extent permitted
by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.
Significant Or Substantial Portion: Such a percentage of its activities, space allocation, revenues, advertising targeting, stock in trade, floor or
display space, business receipts, revenues, or other business undertakings as to indicate to a reasonable person that a sexually oriented portion
of the business is one of its important activities, though not necessarily its only or even primary activity; for this purpose, evidence that twenty five
percent (25%) or more of its revenue is derived from such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that twenty five percent (25%) or more of its
interior floor space or display space is devoted to such sexually oriented activities or materials, or that twenty five percent (25%) or more of its
actual stock in trade regularly displayed and immediately available for use, rental, purchase, viewing or perusal is comprised of such sexually
oriented materials, all as defined in this subsection, shall be evidence that a "significant or substantial portion" of the business is devoted to such
uses.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this section, means and includes any of the following:
1. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areolae; or
2. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this section, means and includes any of the following:
1. The fondling or other intentional touching of buttocks for purpose of sexual arousal, or fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals,
pubic region, anus, or female breasts;
2. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
3. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
4. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
5. Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections 1 through 4 of this definition.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 389/636
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An increase in the floor areas occupied by the business as the floor
areas existed on the effective date hereof.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and includes any of the following:
1. The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
2. The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
C. Establishment And Classification Of Businesses Regulated: The establishment of any sexually oriented business shall be permitted only in those
particular specified districts where such uses are permitted, and shall be subject to the following restrictions: No person shall cause or permit the
establishment of any "sexually oriented businesses", as defined in subsection B of this section, within six hundred feet (600') of another such business
or within one thousand feet (1,000') of any sensitive use. These limitations apply to sexually oriented businesses classified as follows:
1. Adult arcade.
2. Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store.
3. Adult cabaret.
4. Adult model studio.
5. Adult motel.
6. Adult motion picture theater.
7. Adult theater.
D. Measurement Of Distance: Distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses or between a sexually oriented business and a sensitive use
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from property line to property line.
E. Location Of Sexually Oriented Business: Sexually oriented businesses shall be allowed only in districts in which such uses are specifically permitted.
Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in the municipal code. In addition,
any sexually oriented business shall be subject to the following restrictions:
1. The person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the permitted districts.
2. The person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of any
sensitive use.
3. A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within six hundred feet (600') of another
such business, which will include, any adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, or adult modeling studio.
F. Nonconforming Uses:
1. Permitted To Continue: Any sexually oriented business operating on the effective date hereof that is in violation of subsections C through E of this
section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming uses shall be governed by the provisions of this code. If two (2) or more
sexually oriented businesses are within six hundred feet (600') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business
which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business(es) is
nonconforming.
G. Injunction: A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without having a valid permit due to location restrictions is
subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for the misdemeanor punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or one hundred
eighty (180) days' imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment. If an injunction is sought and granted, the sexually oriented business shall be
obligated to pay the city attorney fees and costs of the city, at the discretion of the court.
H. Exception For Certain Nude Modeling: It is a defense to prosecution under this section if a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling
class operated:
1. By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of California; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
3. In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.18: SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOTELS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 390/636
Single room occupancy (SRO) hotels shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Maximum Occupancy: Each SRO living unit shall be designed to accommodate a maximum of two (2) persons.
B. Minimum Size: An SRO living unit shall have at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area, excluding closet and bathroom. No individual unit
may exceed four hundred (400) square feet.
C. Minimum Width: An SRO of one room shall not be less than twelve feet (12') in width.
D. Entrances: All SRO units shall be independently accessible from a single main entry, excluding emergency and other service support exits.
E. Cooking Facilities: Cooking facilities shall be provided either in individual units or in a community kitchen. Where cooking is in individual SRO units,
SRO units shall have a sink with hot and cold water; a counter with dedicated electrical outlets and a microwave oven or properly engineered cooktop
unit pursuant to building code requirements; a refrigerator; and cabinets for storage. Where cooking facilities are in a community kitchen, the
community kitchen shall be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and designed to provide a minimum of two (2) linear feet of counter space
for fifty percent (50%) of the maximum number of tenants.
F. Bathrooms: SRO units shall have individual bathrooms containing a sink, a toilet, and a shower or bath per housing and building code requirements.
Units may have only one sink by the cooking area and may omit the bathroom sink.
G. Lobby/Meeting Area: Each SRO building shall provide ample ground floor entry area that provides a central focus for tenant social interaction and
meetings. The lobby/meeting area shall be designed to accommodate at least twenty five percent (25%) of the tenants at one time using an average of
fifteen (15) square feet per person and a minimum four hundred (400) square feet for up to fifty (50) SRO units, excluding janitorial storage, laundry
facilities, and hallways.
H. Ground Floor Use: Ground floor area next to public rights of way shall be dedicated for public use such as lobby/meeting areas or resident serving
commercial uses. No SRO units shall be on the street level adjacent to the public rights of way. If any SRO units are at ground level, they shall face into
a private open area such as an interior courtyard.
I. Management Plan: A management plan shall be submitted with the permit application for all SRO projects. At minimum, the management plan shall
include the following:
1. Security/Safety: Proposed security and safety features such as lighting, security cameras, defensible space, central access, and user surveillance;
2. Management Policies: Management policies including desk service, visitation rights, occupancy restrictions, and use of cooking appliance;
3. Rental Procedures: All rental procedures, including weekly and monthly tenancy requirements;
4. Staffing And Services: Information regarding all support services, such as job referral and social programs; and
5. Maintenance: Maintenance provisions, including sidewalk cleaning and litter control, recycling programs, general upkeep, and the use of durable
materials. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.19: SOCIAL SERVICE FACILITIES:
Social service facilities shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the following standards:
A. Location: Social service facilities are not allowed on Main Street.
B. Minimum Standards: All social services facilities shall provide: adequate and accessible sanitary facilities, including lavatories, restrooms and refuse
containers; sufficient patron seating facilities for dining, whether indoor or outdoor; effective screening devices such as landscaping and masonry
fences in conjunction with outdoor activity areas; a plan of operation, including, but not limited to, patron access requirements, hours of operation,
security measures, litter control, and noise attenuation. Evidence of compliance with all building and fire safety regulations and any other measures
determined by the city council to be necessary and appropriate to ensure compatibility of the proposed use or uses with the surrounding area shall be
provided with permit applications. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.20: TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
A. Purpose: The specific purposes of this article are to:
1. Permit the siting, construction, operation and maintenance of wireless telecommunications towers and antennas within the city's boundaries;
2. Protect and promote the public health, safety, general welfare and quality of life within the city by regulating the siting of wireless telecommunications
towers and antennas, while preserving the rights of wireless telecommunications providers;
3. Establish guidelines for the governance of wireless telecommunications facilities which recognize the unique land use distribution, topography, and
aesthetics of the community;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 391/636
4. Protect residential areas and land uses from visual blight, safety impacts associated with attractive nuisance, and degradation of residential
character;
5. Promote the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
6. Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
7. Establish the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of single use towers;
8. Locate towers and antennas in areas where the overall impact on the community is minimal, now and in the future; to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging
techniques;
9. Enhance the ability of providers of wireless telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently;
10. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures;
11. Create and preserve telecommunication facilities that will serve as an important and effective part of the city's emergency response network; and
12. Promote fair and effective wireless telecommunication services and ensure that a broad range of competitive telecommunications services with
high quality telecommunications infrastructure are available to serve the community.
B. Applicability: Towers and antennas shall be regulated and permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or permitted as essential services,
public utilities, or private utilities. This article shall apply, to the fullest extent allowed by and consistent with applicable federal, state, and California
public utility laws and regulations, to all new wireless towers and facilities, including towers and antennas proposed to be located on private or public
property, except for the following:
1. Amateur Radio Station Operators: Any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under the height limitation of the relevant district and is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator.
2. Receive Only Antennas: A single ground or building mounted receive only radio or television antenna not exceeding the maximum height permitted
by this chapter, including any mast, or a receive only radio or television satellite dish antenna, subject to the following restrictions:
a. Residential districts:
(1) Satellite Dish One Meter Or Less: A satellite dish that does not exceed one meter (1 m) in diameter or the height of the ridgeline of the primary
structure on the same parcel, and is for the sole use of a resident occupying the parcel.
(2) Satellite Dish Greater Than One Meter: A satellite dish that is greater than one meter (1 m) in diameter, is not located within a required front or
street side yard, and is screened from view from any public right of way and adjoining property.
(3) Antennas: An antenna that is mounted on any existing building or other structure that does not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height, and is for
the sole use of a resident occupying the parcel.
b. Commercial and employment districts:
(1) Satellite Dish Two Meters Or Less: A satellite dish that does not exceed two meters (2 m) in diameter so long as the location does not reduce
required parking, diminish pedestrian or vehicular access, or require removal of landscaping maintained as a condition of project approval.
(2) Satellite Dish Greater Than Two Meters: A satellite dish that is greater than two meters (2 m) in diameter that is not located within a required
front yard or street side yard and is screened from view from any public right of way and adjoining property.
(3) Mounted Antennas: An antenna that is mounted on any existing building or other structure when the overall height of the antenna and its
supporting tower, pole or mast does not exceed a height of thirty feet (30') or twenty five feet (25') if located within twenty feet (20') of a
residential district.
(4) Freestanding Antennas: A freestanding antenna and its supporting tower, pole, or mast that complies with all applicable setbacks when the
overall height of the antenna and its supporting structure does not exceed a height of thirty feet (30') or twenty five feet (25') if located within
twenty feet (20') of a residential district.
(5) Undergrounding Required: All wires and/or cables necessary for operation of an antenna shall be placed underground or attached flush with
the surface of the building or the structure of the antenna.
3. Preexisting Towers Or Antennas: Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas in full compliance with applicable regulations in effect at the time of
construction shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article.
4. Public Safety Broadcasting: Any noncommercial satellite dish antenna utilized for public safety broadcasting.
C. General Requirements:
1. Permit Requirements:
a. Camouflage facilities: Permitted by right in all districts.
b. Collocated facilities: Permitted by right when proposed to be collocated on a facility that was subject to a discretionary permit issued on or after
January 1, 2007, and that contemplated collocation.
c. Noncamouflage facilities: Allowed subject to conditional use permit approval when located at least three hundred feet (300') from any R district.
2. State Or Federal Requirements: All towers and antennas shall meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FCC, the FAA, and any other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 392/636
the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by
the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
3. Building Codes And Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the
Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes
and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty
(30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
4. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan: The city encourages the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers
and/or antenna sites. Applications for multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process, in compliance with the permit streamlining act.
D. Minimum Application Requirements: In addition to meeting the standard application submittal requirements for permits specified in article 601,
"Common Procedures", of this chapter, applications for wireless telecommunications facilities pursuant to this article shall include the following:
1. Inventory Of Existing Sites: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide to the zoning administrator an inventory of its existing towers,
antennas, or sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within the city limits or urban area boundary (UAB), including specific information
about the location, height, and design of each tower. The zoning administrator may share such information with other applicants applying for
administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the
city, provided, however, that the zoning administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
2. Copies Of Licenses: Copies of all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the federal communications commission (FCC), the California
public utilities commission (PUC), and any other federal or state government with authority to regulate telecommunications facilities including
documentation of compliance with all conditions imposed in conjunction with such licenses or approvals.
3. Certification Of Compliance: Written certification of compliance with all applicable FCC requirements and standards.
4. Site Plan: Site plan and elevations drawn to scale. Elevations shall include all structures on which facilities are proposed to be located.
5. Screening Description: Description of proposed approach for screening all facilities from public view including plans for installation and maintenance
of landscaping and sample exterior materials and colors.
6. Property Authorization: Written authorization from the landowner in the event the applicant does not own the subject property.
7. Additional Information: Any other information the zoning administrator deems necessary in order to process the application in compliance with the
requirements of this article. This may include, but is not limited to, a visual analysis of the proposed project.
E. Location And Siting:
1. Location Preference: Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located in the following order of preference:
a. Integrated into building/structure design (camouflage sites).
b. Collocated with other major wireless telecommunication facilities.
c. On existing structures such as buildings, communication towers, or utility facilities not subject to the city's franchise agreements.
d. On existing signal, power, light or similar kinds of permanent poles.
e. In employment districts.
f. In commercial districts.
2. Screening: Wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located where the existing topography, vegetation, building or other structures provide the
greatest amount of screening. Where insufficient screening exists, applicants shall provide screening satisfactory to the zoning administrator, or as
otherwise required through the approval of a conditional use permit.
3. Minimize Visual Impact: Ground mounted wireless telecommunication facilities shall be located only in close proximity to existing aboveground
utilities, such as permanent electrical towers, light poles, trees of comparable heights, and in areas where they will not detract from the appearance
of the city.
4. Required Separation: For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures, from
the nearest point of the proposed major wireless telecommunication facility to the nearest point of another major wireless telecommunication facility.
For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in the city irrespective of
municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
a. Residential Districts: A facility shall not be located within a three hundred foot (300') radius of any R district.
b. Other Telecommunications Facilities: A facility shall not be located within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of another facility, unless appropriate
camouflage techniques have been used to minimize the visual impact of the facility to the extent feasible and mounting on a building or collocation
on an existing facility is not feasible.
c. Reduction In Required Separation: A reduction in the required separation between telecommunications facilities may be granted as a part of the
conditional use permit approval where technical evidence has been provided to substantiate the following findings:
(1) The granting of the reduction will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this chapter or the goals, policies, and objectives of the
adopted general plan;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 393/636
(2) The reduction is not requested exclusively on the basis of economic hardship to the applicant;
(3) The reduction is necessary and essential to providing the applicant's wireless service based on the technical constraints and the lack of other
available appropriately zoned land outside the radius; and
(4) Evidence has been submitted to the satisfaction of the city demonstrating that collocation on existing tower structures is not available or is not
technically feasible. Evidence may include a written statement from the service provider with the existing facility that collocation is not feasible.
F. General Development Requirements: The following standards apply to all telecommunications facilities:
1. Maximum Height: No antenna shall exceed one hundred feet (100') in height except for camouflage facilities on or within a structure such as a
steeple or flagpole, otherwise allowed to exceed one hundred feet (100') in height. Such antenna shall not exceed the height of the structure.
2. Setbacks: Telecommunications facilities and accessory structures shall comply with the required building setbacks for the zoning district in which the
facility is located, however, in no instance shall the facility (including antennas and equipment) be located closer than five feet (5') of any property
line.
3. Design Standards: All facilities shall be designed to minimize their visibility, prevent visual clutter, and reduce conflicts with surrounding land uses. A
visual analysis may be required as part of the conditional use permit review. All telecommunications facilities shall:
a. Utilize state of the art camouflage technology as appropriate to the site and type of facility. Where no camouflage technology is proposed for the
site, a detailed analysis as to why camouflage technology is physically and technically infeasible for the project shall be submitted with the
application.
b. Facilities that are not camouflage shall close mount all panel antennas.
c. Antennas and support structures, where utilized, shall be monopole type.
d. Monopole support structures shall not exceed four feet (4') in diameter unless technical evidence is provided showing that a larger diameter is
necessary to attain the proposed tower height and that the proposed tower height is necessary.
e. Wireless telecommunications facility support structures and antennas shall be painted a nonglossy color so as to minimize visual impacts from
surrounding properties.
f. All facilities shall be designed and located to minimize their visibility to the greatest extent feasible. All wireless telecommunications facilities
proposed for locations where they would be readily visible from the public right of way or from a residential district shall incorporate appropriate
techniques to disguise the facility and/or blend into the surrounding environment, to the extent feasible. Facilities shall be compatible in scale and
integrated architecturally with the design of surrounding buildings or the natural setting.
g. No telecommunications antenna or ancillary support equipment shall be located within the front setback except for facilities that are completely
subterranean.
h. Support structures and site area for wireless telecommunications antennas shall be designed and of adequate size to allow at least one additional
wireless service provider to collocate on the structure.
i. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. All objects affecting navigable airspace shall comply
with federal aviation regulation section 77 and shall be in conformance with the current land use designations for land within one mile of the
runway.
j. For the protection of emergency response personnel, each telecommunications facility shall have an on site emergency "kill switch" to deenergize
all RF related circuitry/componetry at the site. For collocation facilities, a single "kill switch" shall be installed that will deenergize all carriers at the
facility in the event of an emergency.
k. All proposed fencing shall be decorative and compatible with the adjacent buildings and properties within the surrounding area and shall be
designed to limit graffiti.
4. Signage: A permanent, weatherproof identification sign, approximately sixteen inches by thirty two inches (16" x 32") in size, shall be placed on the
gate of the fence surrounding the facility or, if there is no fence, on the facility itself. The sign shall identify the facility operator(s), provide the
operator's address, and specify a twenty four (24) hour telephone number at which the operator can be reached so as to facilitate emergency
services.
5. Landscaping: Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower shall provide a landscaping plan that covers as much of the parcel and lease area as
necessary to achieve the following:
a. Landscaping shall be provided to screen the facility from surrounding properties or rights of way.
b. All landscaping shall be installed with an irrigation system equipped with an automatic timer.
c. Street trees and other landscaping may be required for telecommunications facilities proposed on parcels lacking street frontage landscaping.
d. Landscaping shall include revegetation of any cut or fill slopes.
e. Where possible, existing plants and trees shall be used to the full extent possible for screening of the facility.
6. Noise And Traffic:
a. Backup generators shall only be operated during power outages and for testing and maintenance purposes. Testing and maintenance shall only
take place on weekdays between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.
b. Traffic shall be limited to no more than one round trip per day on an average annual basis once construction is complete, except for emergency
maintenance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 394/636
G. Required Findings: The city council may approve or approve with conditions any conditional use permit required under this article only after making the
following findings:
1. The proposed telecommunication facility will comply with all applicable state and federal standards and requirements;
2. The proposed telecommunication facility will conform with the specific purposes of this article and any special standards applicable to the proposed
facility;
3. The applicant has made good faith and reasonable efforts to locate a telecommunication facility on a support structure other than a new monopole or
lattice tower or to accomplish collocation.
4. To locate a telecommunication facility where it is readily visible from the habitable area of a dwelling unit within three hundred feet (300') or at any
location where it is visible from a public right of way, public park, or other public recreation or cultural facility, the decision making authority shall find
that:
a. It is not feasible to provide the service at another location or to incorporate additional measures such as a decrease in height, increase in setback,
change in design, relocation relative to other structures or natural features, that would further reduce its visibility; and
b. The proposed telecommunication facility provides an important link in applicant's service area build-out and is necessary to provide personal
wireless services to city residents.
c. It is not feasible to incorporate additional measures that would make the telecommunication facility not readily visible, meaning that a person with
normal vision can see the facility and distinguish it as an antenna or other component of a telecommunication facility.
5. The city council may waive or modify requirements of this article upon finding that strict compliance would result in noncompliance with applicable
federal or state law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
301.21: TEMPORARY USES:
A temporary use is intended to operate only for a limited period of time. Unless otherwise specified, temporary uses shall require a permit in accordance
with article 605, "Temporary Use Permits", of this chapter. Temporary uses shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the standards of
this section.
A. Carnivals, Fairs And Festival Events: Carnivals, fairs, and festival events in connection with an existing commercial use or in conjunction with an activity
of a civic organization, church, lodge, public or private school, or other such group or organization are permitted in accordance with the following
standards:
1. Location: Carnivals, fairs, and festival events are limited to areas within commercial or employment districts, or on property owned by a civic
organization, church, lodge or public or private school.
2. Time Limit: When located adjacent to or within an R district, the hours of operation shall be limited to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00)
P.M.
3. Duration: Carnivals, fairs, and festival events are limited to no more than ten (10) consecutive days four (4) times a year. A more limited duration
may be established through the temporary use permit process in order to prevent the use from becoming a nuisance with regard to the surrounding
neighborhood or the city as a whole.
4. Existing Parking: Where such a use is proposed within a developed parking lot, the available parking shall not be reduced to less than seventy five
percent (75%) of the minimum number of spaces required by article 304, "On Site Parking And Loading", of this series.
B. Garage Sales: A garage or yard sale may be permitted on any developed lot in an R district, in accordance with section 18-8.2 of the municipal code
and the following standards:
1. A garage sale event is limited to not more than three (3) consecutive days.
2. All merchandise to be sold shall be displayed on a private lot and not within the public right of way.
3. One sign not exceeding two feet by two feet (2' x 2') in size may be posted on the property where the sale is being held during the duration of the
sale only. No signs regarding such sale shall be posted on any property other than where the sale is held.
C. Model Homes: Model homes with sales offices and temporary information/sales trailers in new residential subdivisions are subject to the following
requirements. No temporary use permit is necessary for a model home.
1. Time Limits: A temporary information/sales trailer may be used during the construction of the model homes for a maximum period of six (6) months
or completion of the first phase, whichever occurs first.
2. Location Of Sales: Real estate sales conducted from a temporary sales office are limited to sales of lots within the subdivision.
3. Return To Residential Use: Prior to the sale of any of the model homes as a single-family residence, any portion used for commercial purposes will
be converted to its intended residential purpose.
4. Term Of Use: The model home may be established and operated for a term period of five (5) years or until completion of the sale of the lots or
residences, whichever comes first. One year extensions may be approved by the zoning administrator until the sale of all lots/residences is
completed.
D. Temporary And Seasonal Outdoor Sales: Temporary and seasonal outdoor sales may be permitted in accordance with the following standards:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 395/636
1. General Sales Events: Temporary outdoor sales, including, but not limited to, grand opening events, temporary automobile sales, and other special
sales events on private property in nonresidential districts shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Temporary outdoor sales shall be part of an existing business on the same site.
b. Temporary automobile sales are limited to the CR District and need not be in connection with an existing commercial use.
c. Sales events shall be conducted solely on private property and not encroach within the public right-of-way.
d. Temporary outdoor sales are limited to four (4) consecutive days six (6) times a year. No site shall be used for such an activity for more than ten
(10) days in any calendar month. A more limited duration may be established through the temporary use permit process in order to prevent the use
from becoming a nuisance with regard to the surrounding neighborhood or the City as a whole.
e. When located adjacent to an R district, the hours of operation shall be limited to eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
f. The entire area used for temporary outdoor sales, including display, sales, circulation, parking, etc., shall be paved per City standards.
g. Location of the displayed merchandise shall not disrupt the normal circulation of the site, nor encroach upon driveways, pedestrian walkways, or
required landscaped areas, or obstruct sight distances or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic.
h. Where such a use is proposed within a developed parking lot, the available parking shall not be reduced to less than seventy five percent (75%) of
the minimum number of spaces required by article 304, "On Site Parking And Loading", of this series.
2. Seasonal Sales: The annual sale of holiday related items such as Christmas trees, pumpkins and similar items is permitted in accordance with the
following standards:
a. Time Period: Seasonal sales associated with holidays are permitted up to a month preceding and one week following the holiday. Christmas tree
sales are permitted from Thanksgiving Day through December 31.
b. Goods, Signs And Temporary Structures: All items for sale, as well as signs and temporary structures, shall be removed within ten (10) days after
the end of sales, and the appearance of the site shall be returned to its original state.
3. Nonprofit Fundraising: Fundraising sales by a nonprofit organization are limited to seven (7) consecutive days twelve (12) times a year.
E. Long Term Special Events And Sales: Other special events, outdoor sales, and displays that exceed seven (7) consecutive days but not more than
three (3) months, may be permitted with Zoning Administrator approval and in accordance with the following standards:
1. Location: Events are limited to nonresidential districts.
2. Number Of Events: Long term special events and sales are limited to no more than two (2) per year.
3. Existing Business: Temporary outdoor sales shall be part of an existing business on the same site.
4. Signs: Outdoor uses may include the addition of one nonpermanent sign up to a maximum size of four (4) square feet in area, subject to article 305,
"Signs", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013; Ord. 1820, 12-16-2014)
301.22: TRANSITIONAL AND SUPPORTIVE HOUSING:
Transitional and supportive housing, as defined in sections 50675.2 and 50675.14, respectively, of the Health and Safety Code constitute a residential use
and are subject only to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same district. For example, if transitional housing is a
multi-family use proposed in the RM-1 District, it is subject only to the same restrictions as other multi-family uses in the RM-1 District. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1854 - CANNABIS LAND USES AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES. Go to new
ordinance.
301.23: CANNABIS CULTIVATION, USE AND COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES:
A. Purpose And Intent:
1. The City Council, based on evidence presented to it in the proceedings leading to the adoption of this chapter, hereby finds that the cultivation,
preparation, and distribution of cannabis in the City has caused and is causing ongoing impacts to the community. These impacts include increases
in various types of crime due to outdoor grows, damage to buildings containing indoor grows, including improper and dangerous electrical alterations
and use, inadequate ventilation leading to mold and mildew, increased frequency of home-invasion robberies and related crimes. Many of these
impacts have fallen disproportionately on residential neighborhoods, but nonetheless also negatively impact properties in the commercial districts.
These impacts have also created an increase in response costs, including Code enforcement, building, land use, fire, and police staff time and
expenses.
2. The City Council finds that the restrictions on personal cannabis cultivation, drying, harvesting, processing, smoking and use, and prohibitions on
commercial marijuana cultivation, marijuana processing, marijuana delivery, and marijuana dispensaries are necessary for the preservation and
protection of the public health, safety, and welfare for the City and its community. The City Council's prohibition of such activities is within the
authority conferred upon the City Council in its Charter and State law.
3. The purpose of this section is to restrict personal cannabis cultivation, drying, harvesting, processing, smoking, and use, consistent with permitted
local regulation under State law, and to expressly prohibit the establishment of commercial cannabis uses in the City.
B. Interpretation And Applicability:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 396/636
1. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, preclude a landlord from limiting or prohibiting cannabis cultivation, smoking or
other related activities by tenants.
2. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, burden any defense to criminal prosecution otherwise afforded by California law.
3. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, exempt any cannabis related activity from any and all applicable local and State
construction, electrical, plumbing, land use, or any other building or land use standards or permitting requirements.
4. Nothing in this section is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any cultivation, transportation, sale or other use of cannabis that is
otherwise prohibited under California law.
5. All cultivation activities within City limits shall be subject to the provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this Code, regardless of
whether the cultivation activities existed or occurred prior to adoption of this section. However, all holders of active cultivation permits (who are in full
compliance with said permits) issued under this former section 301.23 shall be allowed to continue to engage in the permitted activity until the
expiration of their permits. Furthermore, all holders of active cultivation permits, who are in full compliance with said permits, issued under former
section 301.23 of this article and due to expire in 2017, shall be allowed an additional one year permit expiring December 31, 2018, for twelve (12)
plants in compliance with former section 301.23 of this article.
C. Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A residential accessory structure shall include any uses that are customarily related to a residence, including garages,
greenhouses, storage sheds, studios, and workshops. Any accessory structure must be compliant with section 301.01 of this article and any other
applicable provisions of the Municipal Code.
CANNABIS (AND/OR MARIJUANA): Means any or all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis Indica, or Cannabis Ruderalis, whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin or separated resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin, including marijuana infused in foodstuff or any other ingestible or
consumable product containing marijuana. "Cannabis" or "marijuana" also includes cannabis that is used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes.
"Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. "Cannabis" also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and
Safety Code section 11018.5.
CANNABIS ACCESSORIES: Means any equipment, products, or materials of any kind which is intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, smoking, vaporizing, or containing cannabis, or for ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or cannabis
products into the human body.
CANNABIS (OR MARIJUANA) COLLECTIVE OR COOPERATIVE OR COLLECTIVE: Includes any group that is collectively or cooperatively cultivating
and distributing marijuana for medical purposes that is organized in the manner set forth in the August 2008 Guidelines for the Security and Non-
Diversion of Marijuana Grown for Medical Use, as may be amended from time to time, that was issued by the Office of the Attorney General for the
State of California, or for the purposes set forth in California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5 (Compassionate Use Act) of California Health
and Safety Code sections 11362.7 to 11362.83 (Medical Marijuana Program Act).
CANNABIS DISPENSARY: Means any business, office, store, facility, location, retail storefront or wholesale component of any establishment,
cooperative or collective that delivers, whether mobile or otherwise, dispenses, distributes, exchanges, transmits, transports, sells or provides cannabis
to any person for any reason, including members of any medical cannabis cooperative or collective.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: Means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including
but not limited to concentrated cannabis; or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY: Means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging,
labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis product for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes the activities of
any business licensed by the State or other government entity under division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of
State law regulating the licensing of cannabis businesses. It also includes cannabis dispensaries, cooperatives or collectives.
CONCENTRATED CANNABIS: Means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby
increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a concentrate.
CULTIVATION: Means any activity involving the growing, planting, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming, and includes processing of cannabis
when done for individual (noncommercial) purposes.
DELIVERY: Means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery" also includes the use by a retailer of any
technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
DISTRIBUTION: Means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between entities licensed under division 10 of the
California Business and Professions Code, as they may be amended from time to time.
MAUCRSA: Means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act as codified in division 10 of the California Business and
Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.
MANUFACTURE: Means to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a cannabis product.
PROCESSING: Means any method used to prepare cannabis or its byproducts for personal use or commercial retail and/or wholesale, including but
not limited to: drying, cleaning, curing, packaging, and extraction of active ingredients to create cannabis related products and concentrates.
D. Severability: If any part of this section is held to be invalid or inapplicable to any situation by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 397/636
E. Personal (Non-Commercial) Cultivation:
1. To the extent that the following activities are permitted by State law, nothing in this section shall prohibit a person twenty one (21) years of age or
older from:
a. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older, without
compensation whatsoever, not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis not in the form of concentrated cannabis;
b. Possessing, processing, purchasing, transporting, obtaining or giving away to persons twenty one (21) years of age or older, without
compensation whatsoever, up to eight grams (8 g) of cannabis in the form of concentrated cannabis;
c. Smoking or ingesting cannabis or cannabis products except as prohibited by California Health and Safety Code section 11362.3 (and as restricted
by this section);
d. Possessing, transporting, purchasing, obtaining, using, manufacturing, or giving away cannabis accessories to persons twenty one (21) years of
age or older without compensation whatsoever;
e. Engaging in the cultivation of six (6) or fewer live cannabis plants within a single private residence, or inside an accessory structure located upon
the grounds of a private residence, or if grown outdoors within a locked space that is not visible by normal, unaided vision from a public place or
from the surrounding properties; or
2. This section shall also prohibit any commercial cannabis activity that the City is otherwise required by State law to allow within its jurisdiction
pursuant to MAUCRSA.
3. The use of gas products or other volatile solvent (e.g., CO2, butane, etc.) for cannabis cultivation, processing or manufacture is prohibited;
4. There shall be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring at the property, from a public right-of-way;
5. No distribution of cannabis cultivated for personal use shall be allowed other than as otherwise authorized by this section, or required to be allowed
by law;
6. Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) watts;
7. The accessory structure(s) shall at all times meet the requirements of the latest adopted version of the California Building, Fire, Mechanical,
Electrical and Plumbing Codes (collectively California codes);
8. All electrical equipment used in the cultivation of medical cannabis, (e.g., lighting and ventilation) shall be plugged directly into a wall outlet or
otherwise hardwired and permits obtained pursuant to the California Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing or other State or local laws, rules and
regulations;
9. Prior to performing any work on electrical wiring/rewiring the applicant shall first obtain a building, mechanical and/or electrical permit from the
Building Division;
10. If required by California Building or Fire Code, the wall(s) adjacent to the cultivation area shall be constructed with five-eighths inch (5/8") type X
moisture-resistant drywall;
11. Cannabis cultivation areas shall be secured by a functioning audible alarm at all times during growing seasons;
12. The growing of cannabis outdoors shall comply with the setback requirements for the primary residence on the property subject to the zoning
classification of the property;
13. Cannabis plants grown outdoors shall be grown in an area enclosed with a solid view obscuring fence, secured with self-closing and locking gates;
and
14. Areas for cultivation of cannabis shall be secured, locked, and fully enclosed and rendered inaccessible to minors.
F. Prohibited Uses And Activities:
1. Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is prohibited in all zones, specific plans areas, and overlay zones of the City. No person shall
establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow or engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City. To the extent this prohibition
conflicts with any other provision of this Municipal Code, this prohibition will control.
2. A property owner shall not rent, lease or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real
property in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial
cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City.
3. Subsection F1 of this section shall prohibit all activities for which a State license is required pursuant to MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended
from time to time. Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required
under the MAUCRSA, as the same may be amended from time to time. The City shall also not issue any local license to a nonprofit entity pursuant
to California Business and Professions Code section 26070.5.
4. To the extent not already prohibited by subsection F1 of this section, all deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products, to or from any location are
expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products, which delivery either originates or
terminates within the City. This subsection shall not prohibit any person from transporting cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the City for
delivery or distribution to a person located outside the City, where such transport does not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits
of the City.
5. The smoking, ingesting, or use of cannabis or cannabis products is prohibited in all public places, in all locations where smoking tobacco is
prohibited, and on all business properties or within business facilities within the jurisdictional limits of the City, unless otherwise expressly authorized
by City regulation, or required to be allowed by State law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 398/636
G. Enforcement: Any violation of this section is subject to any and all penalties as prescribed in the Porterville Municipal Code, in addition to being subject
to other remedies provided by law, including but not limited to, injunctive relief, nuisance abatement action, summary abatement of immediately
hazardous conditions, and all other applicable fines, penalties and remedies. This section is adopted to address public health and safety issues, and as
such, carries with it an express legislative intent to be interpreted strictly, enforced with an emphasis on public and community safety, and enforced
rigorously in a manner such as to deter further violations. In any civil action brought pursuant to this section, a court of competent jurisdiction may
award reasonable attorneys' fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in the Porterville Municipal Code, no
provision of this section or this Code authorizes a criminal prosecution, arrest or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by Health and Safety Code
section 11362.71 et seq., or section 11362.1 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict between the penalties
enumerated under this Code and any penalties set forth in State law, the maximum penalties allowable under State law shall govern. (Ord. 1843, 11-7-
2017)
ARTICLE 302. AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS AND OTHER INCENTIVES
302.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the affordable housing density bonus and other incentives regulations are to:
A. Allow for density bonuses and additional incentives, consistent with Government Code section 65915, for affordable housing lower and moderate
income households, for seniors and disabled persons, and for development that includes a childcare facility;
B. Implement the policies of the general plan housing element to expand the provision of housing for lower and moderate income households, elderly
residents and others with special housing needs; and
C. Establish requirements for resale and rental controls to ensure that units remain affordable for at least thirty (30) years or such other term as required
by the city, consistent with state law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
302.02: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. State Law Governs: The provisions of this article shall be governed by the requirements of Government Code section 65915, as amended. Where
conflict occurs between the provisions of this article and state law, the state law shall govern.
B. Land Use Compatibility: All affordable housing units shall be dispersed throughout the community. Affordable housing units within market rate projects
shall be comparable with the design of market rate units in appearance, use of materials, and finished quality. Building forms, materials and proportions
shall comply with the standards of series 200 of this chapter.
C. Availability: Affordable housing units shall be constructed concurrently with, and made available for qualified occupants at the same time as the market
rate housing units within the same project unless both the city and the developer agree to an alternative schedule for development.
D. Effect Of Granting Density Bonus: The granting of a density bonus shall not, in and of itself, require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other
discretionary approval.
E. Income Levels: For purposes of determining income levels of households under this article, the city shall use the Tulare County income limits in title 25,
section 6932 of the California code of regulations or other income limits adopted by the city council if the state department of housing and community
development fails to provide timely updates of the income limits in the California code of regulations. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
302.03: STATE AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS:
A. Minimum Density Bonus And Composition Of Qualifying Projects: Pursuant to Government Code section 65915, the city shall grant a density bonus in
the following amounts over the otherwise allowable maximum residential density permitted by this chapter and the general plan, and one or more
additional concessions or incentives, consistent with Government Code section 65915 and this section, if the applicant applies for and proposes to
construct any one of the following:
1. Lower Income Units: A density bonus of twenty percent (20%) if ten percent (10%) of the total units of a housing development are affordable to lower
income households, as defined in section 50079.5 of the Health And Safety Code.
2. Very Low Income Units: A density bonus of twenty percent (20%) if five percent (5%) of the total units of a housing development are affordable to
very low income households, as defined in section 50105 of the Health And Safety Code.
3. Senior Citizen Housing Development: A density bonus of twenty percent (20%) if a housing development qualifies as a senior citizen housing
development, as defined in section 51.3 of the Civil Code.
4. Moderate Income Units In Condominium And Planned Use Developments: A density bonus of five percent (5%) if ten percent (10%) of the total
dwelling units in a condominium project, as defined in section 4125 of the Civil Code, or in a planned development, as defined in section 4175 of the
Civil Code, are affordable to persons and families of moderate income, as defined in section 50093 of the Health And Safety Code.
B. Additional Sliding Scale Density Bonus: As provided for in Government Code section 65915(g) the number of units to which the applicant is entitled may
exceed the percentage specified in subsection A of this section under the following provisions:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 399/636
1. Lower Income Dwellings: For each additional one percent (1%) increase above ten percent (10%) units affordable to lower income households, the
density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent (1.5%) up to a maximum density bonus of thirty five percent (35%) of the maximum
allowable residential density for the site.
2. Very Low Income Dwellings: For each additional one percent (1%) increase above five percent (5%) in the proportion of units affordable to very low
income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent (2.5%), up to a maximum of thirty five percent (35%) of the
maximum allowable residential density for the site.
3. Condominium And Planned Development Units: For each additional one percent (1%) increase above ten percent (10%) units affordable to
moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent (1%), up to a maximum of thirty five percent (35%) of the
maximum allowable residential density for the site.
C. Qualifying Projects; Number Of Units: The bonuses under subsections A and B of this section are applicable to residential projects of five (5) or more
units, and senior housing projects of more than thirty five (35) units.
D. Calculation Of Density Bonus Units: When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, all fractional units shall be rounded to the next
higher whole number. The applicant who requests a density bonus for a project that meets two (2) or more of the eligibility requirements shall specify
whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of subsection A1, A2, A3, or A4 of this section. The density bonus shall not be included when
determining the number of target units to be provided in a development project.
E. Optional Density Bonus: The city may grant a proportionally lower density bonus and/or provide concessions and/or incentives set forth in section
302.05, "Affordable Housing Concessions And Incentives", of this article, if an applicant agrees to construct a development containing less than the
percentage of housing for lower or very low income households than provided in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
302.04: STATE CHILDCARE FACILITY DENSITY BONUS:
A. Basic Requirements: When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that conforms to the requirements of the state density bonus law
and includes a childcare facility other than a family daycare home that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the project, the city
shall grant either of the following:
1. Additional Density Bonus: A density bonus of additional residential units equal in square footage to the amount of square feet of the childcare facility.
2. Additional Concession Or Incentive: An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction
of the childcare facility.
B. Conditions Of Approval: The city shall require, as a condition of approving the housing development, that the following occur:
1. Length Of Operation: The childcare facility remains in operation for a period of time that is as long as, or longer than the length of time during which
the affordable housing units shall remain affordable.
2. Attending Children: The percentage of children of very low, low or moderate income households who attend the childcare facility shall be the same or
greater than the percentage of dwelling units in the project that are required for households at each income level.
C. Exceptions: The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a childcare facility if it finds that, based upon substantial
evidence, the community has adequate childcare facilities. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
302.05: AFFORDABLE HOUSING CONCESSIONS AND INCENTIVES:
A. Number Of Incentives Or Concessions: Pursuant to Government Code section 65915, an applicant is entitled to receive incentives and/or concessions
as follows:
1. One incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten percent (10%) of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent
(5%) for very low income households, or at least ten percent (10%) for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned
development; or
2. One incentive or concession for senior citizen housing developments; or
3. Two (2) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least twenty percent (20%) of the total units for lower income households, at least ten
percent (10%) for very low income households, or at least twenty percent (20%) for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or
planned development; or
4. Three (3) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least thirty percent (30%) of the total units for lower income households, at least
fifteen percent (15%) for very low income households, or at least thirty percent (30%) for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium
or planned development.
5. The applicant who requests incentives or concessions for a mixed income project shall specify whether the incentives or concessions shall be
awarded on the basis of subsection A1, A2, A3, or A4 of this section.
B. Proposal Of Incentives And Findings: An applicant may propose specific incentives or concessions that would contribute significantly to the economic
feasibility of providing affordable units pursuant to this article and state law. In addition to any increase in density to which an applicant is entitled, the
city shall grant one or more incentives and/or concessions that an applicant requests, up to the maximum number of incentives and concessions
required pursuant to subsection A of this section, unless the city makes a written finding that either:
1. The concession or incentive is not necessary in order to provide the proposed targeted units, or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 400/636
2. The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact that can not be feasibly mitigated on public health and safety or the physical
environment or any property that is listed in the California register of historical resources.
3. Notwithstanding the restriction in subsection A5 of this section, the applicant may propose and the city may approve additional incentives and
concessions for an eligible project that provides targeted units that meet two (2) or more of the eligibility requirements based on a written finding that
the additional incentives or concessions are necessary in order to make the project economically feasible.
C. Types Of Affordable Housing Incentives: Affordable housing incentives may consist of any combination of the items listed below:
1. Modification Of Development Standards: Up to twenty percent (20%) in modification of site development standards or zoning code requirements that
exceed minimum building code standards and fire code standards, including, but not limited to:
a. Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions.
b. Reduced minimum building setbacks and building separation requirements.
c. Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private usable open space requirements.
d. Increased maximum lot coverage.
e. Increased maximum building height.
2. Parking: Upon the applicant's request, the following maximum parking standards, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, shall apply to the
entire project. Further reductions in required parking may be requested as one of the incentives allowed under subsection A of this section.
a. One on site space for studios to one bedroom units;
b. Two (2) on site spaces for two (2) to three (3) bedroom units; and
c. Two and a half (2.5) on site spaces for four (4) or more bedroom units.
d. For purposes of this section, at the applicant's request, on site parking may be provided through tandem parking or uncovered parking but not
through on street parking.
3. Mixed Use Zoning: Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial or other land uses will
reduce the cost of the housing development and such uses are compatible with the housing project and the surrounding area.
4. Other Incentives: Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable cost reductions or
avoidance. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
302.06: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this article shall be submitted in
conjunction with the project application and shall be processed concurrently with all other applications required for the project. The application shall be
submitted on a form provided by the city and shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
A. A site plan showing the total number of units, the number and location of the units dedicated pursuant to California Government Code section 65915(b),
and the number and location of the proposed density bonus units;
B. The level of affordability of the dedicated units;
C. A description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards and
evidence demonstrating that the application of the subject standard or requirement would preclude construction of the project at the densities provided
for in California Government Code section 65915 and that the waiver or modification is necessary to make development of the project financially
feasible at the densities provided for in California Government Code section 65915;
D. If a density bonus is requested for a land donation pursuant to California Government Code section 65915(g), the application shall show the location of
the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that the requirements of section 65915(g) have been met, thus entitling the project to the requested
density bonus; and
E. If a density bonus is requested for construction of a childcare facility pursuant to California Government Code section 65915(h), the application shall
show the location and square footage of the proposed facility and provide evidence that the requirements of section 65915(h) have been met, thus
entitling the project to the requested density bonus. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
302.07: REVIEW:
A. Duration Of Affordability: All affordable housing units shall be kept affordable for a minimum period of thirty (30) years or such other term approved by
the city, consistent with state law.
B. Regulatory Agreement Required: All affordable housing projects shall be subject to the approval of an agreement pursuant to conforming to the
provisions of sections 65864 to 65869 of the Government Code. The terms of the agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the
zoning administrator and/or city attorney, who shall formulate a recommendation to the decision making body for final approval. This agreement shall
include, but is not limited to, the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 401/636
1. Number Of Units: The total number of units approved for the projects, including the number of affordable housing units.
2. Target Units: The location, unit sizes (in square feet) and number of bedrooms of the affordable housing units.
3. Household Income Group: A description of the household income groups to be accommodated by the project and a calculation of the affordable
sales price.
4. Certification Procedures: The party responsible for certifying sales prices or annual rental rates, and the process that will be used for certification.
5. Schedule: A schedule for the completion and occupancy of the affordable housing units.
6. Required Term Of Affordability: Duration of affordability of the housing units. Provisions shall also cover resale control and deed restrictions on
targeted housing units that are binding on property upon sale or transfer.
7. Expiration Of Agreement: Provisions covering the expiration of the agreement, including notice prior to conversion to market rate units and right of
first refusal option for the city and/or the distribution of accrued equity for for-sale units.
8. Remedies For Breach: A description of the remedies for breach of the agreement by either party.
9. Other Provisions: Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this article.
10. Condominium And Planned Developments: In the case of condominium and planned developments, the regulatory agreement shall provide for the
following conditions governing the initial resale and use of affordable housing units:
a. Target units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible very low, lower, or moderate income households at an affordable sales price and housing
cost, or to qualified residents as defined by this chapter.
b. Target units shall be initially owner occupied by eligible very low or lower income households.
c. Upon resale, the seller of a target unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of
appreciation. The city shall recapture its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall be used to promote home ownership opportunities as
provided for in Health And Safety Code section 33334.2. The city's proportionate share shall be equal to the percentage by which the initial sale
price to the targeted household was less than the fair market value of the dwelling unit at the time of initial sale.
11. Rental Housing Developments: In the case of rental housing developments, the regulatory agreement shall provide for the following conditions
governing the use of target units during the use restriction period:
a. The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent rates, filling vacancies, and maintaining target units for qualified
tenants.
b. Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this article.
c. Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to the city, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying target
units, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or cost of each target unit. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 303. LANDSCAPING
303.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the landscaping regulations are to:
A. Improve the appearance of the community by requiring aesthetically pleasing landscaping on public and private sites;
B. Aid in energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter from the wind;
C. Soften the appearance of parking lots and other development through landscaping;
D. Promote conservation of water resources through the use of native and drought tolerant plants, and water conserving irrigation practices; and
E. Minimize or eliminate conflicts between potentially incompatible but otherwise permitted land uses on adjoining lots through visual screening. (Ord.
1830, 11-17-2015)
303.02: APPLICABILITY:
The standards of this chapter apply to all new development or improvements subject to project review and building permits. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
303.03: LANDSCAPE DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
The following design principles are general standards to be used by city staff in evaluating whether landscape plans conform to the requirements of this
article:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 402/636
A. Natural Landscapes: Landscape designs shall incorporate and enhance existing natural landscapes and existing specimen trees and native vegetation
(including canopy, understory, and ground cover). Particular care shall be given to preserve intact natural landscapes. Where previous landscaping has
dramatically altered natural landscapes, new designs shall seek to reestablish natural landscape patterns and plantings. Natural landscapes and native
vegetation do not include weeds.
B. Composition: The quality of a landscape design is dependent not only on the quantity and selection of plant materials but also on how that material is
arranged. Landscape materials shall include a combination of ground covers, shrubs, vines and trees with a variety of plant heights and colors.
C. Buffering And Screening: The placement of natural landscape materials (trees, shrubs, and hedges) is the preferred method for buffering differing land
uses, for providing a transition between adjacent properties, and for screening the view of any parking or storage area, refuse collection, utility
enclosures, or other service area visible from a public street, alley, or pedestrian area. Plants may be used with fences or berms to achieve the desired
screening or buffering effect. When used to screen an activity area such as a parking lot, landscaping shall not interfere with public safety.
D. Responsive To Local Context And Character: Landscape designs shall build on the site's and area's unique physical characteristics, conserving and
complementing existing natural features. Naturalistic design elements such as irregular plant spacing, undulating berm contours, and mixed proportions
of plant species shall be used to ensure that new landscaping blends in and contributes to the quality of the surrounding area. Selection and spacing of
plant material shall be reflective of the surrounding area's character.
E. Use Of Native And Drought Resistant Plants: Landscape designs shall feature native and/or related plant species and avoid invasive species, especially
in areas adjacent to existing native vegetation, to take advantage of the unique natural character and diversity of the region and the adaptability of
native plants to local environmental conditions. Where feasible, the reestablishment of native habitats shall be incorporated into the landscape design.
In the same manner, landscape designs shall utilize drought tolerant plant materials to the maximum extent feasible. The use of drought tolerant plants
shall enrich the existing landscape character, conserve water and energy, and provide as pleasant and varied a visual appearance as plants that
require more water.
F. Continuity And Connection: Landscaping shall be designed within the context of the surrounding area, provided that the landscaping is also consistent
with these design principles. Where the design intent and the surrounding landscape is naturalistic, plant materials shall blend well with adjacent
properties, particularly where property edges meet, to create a seamless and natural landscape. Where the design intent and the surrounding
landscape is formal, consistent or similar plant material and spacing shall be utilized. Exceptions shall be made when seeking to create a transition
between uses, districts, and tiers.
G. Enhancing Architecture: Landscape designs shall be compatible with and enhance the architectural character and features of the buildings on site, and
help relate the building to the surrounding landscape. Major landscape elements shall be designed to complement architectural elevations and rooflines
through color, texture, density, and form on both vertical and horizontal planes. Landscaping shall be in scale with on site and adjacent buildings. Plant
material shall be installed at an appropriate size and allowed to accomplish these intended goals. When foundation planting is required, plantings and
window boxes shall incorporate artistic elements and be compatible with a building's architectural character. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
303.04: AREAS TO BE LANDSCAPED:
The following areas shall be landscaped, and may count toward the total area of site landscaping required by the zoning district regulations:
A. Required Setbacks: All required front and street facing side setbacks, except for areas used for exit and entry, shall be landscaped.
FIGURE 303.04A: REQUIRED SETBACKS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 403/636
B. Interior Property Lines Abutting R Districts: A minimum five foot (5') wide landscape buffer shall be provided along interior property lines, where no
building abuts a property line, in districts adjacent to an R district.
C. Building Perimeters: The portions of a building facade that face onto a customer parking lot or front a public street shall have one or more landscape
planters installed along a minimum twenty percent (20%) of that building face. The minimum width of the planter shall be three feet (3'). This standard
does not apply where a building is located on the front or corner side property line and there is no setback between the building and the property line.
FIGURE 303.04C: BUILDING PERIMETERS
D. Landscaping In Parking Areas: Parking areas shall be landscaped as required by article 304, "On Site Parking And Loading", of this series.
E. Orchards And Gardens: Areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens.
F. Unused Areas: All areas of a project site not intended for a specific use, including areas planned for future phases of a phased development, shall be
landscaped or left in a natural state. Access to the unused portion of the site shall be prohibited by a concrete curb, timber barrier or other barrier not
less than six inches (6") high. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
303.05: GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS:
A. Materials:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 404/636
1. General: Landscaping shall consist of a combination of ground covers, shrubs, vines, and trees. Landscaped areas may include paved or graveled
surfaces, provided they do not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the area required to be landscaped. Plant materials shall be selected from
those species and varieties known to thrive in the Porterville climate and/or listed in Sunset's "Western Garden Book, Region No. 9". Recirculating
water shall be used for decorative water features.
2. Ground Cover Materials: Ground cover shall be of living organic plant material. Ground cover may include grasses. The exclusive or majority use of
nonplant materials such as gravel, colored rock, cinder, bark, and similar materials may not be used to meet the minimum planting area requirements
required by this article. Mulch is not a substitute for ground cover plants.
3. Turf Allowance/Drought Tolerant Materials: The maximum amount of lawn in required landscape areas shall be twenty five percent (25%) except for
turf areas that comprise an essential component of a project (e.g., golf courses or playing fields), which are exempt from this limit. The installation of
turf on slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) is prohibited. The use of drought tolerant or artificial turf plant materials is preferred in these
applications to conserve the city's water resources.
4. Mulch: A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or
rooting ground covers or other special planting situations where mulch is not recommended. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes.
5. Size And Spacing: Plant materials shall be grouped in hydrozones in accordance with their respective water, cultural (soil, climate, sun and light) and
maintenance needs. Plants shall be of the following size and spacing at the time of installation:
a. Ground Covers: Areas planted in ground cover plants other than grass seed or sod shall be planted at a rate of one per twelve inches (12") on
center.
b. Shrubs: Shrubs shall be a minimum size of one gallon. When planted to serve as a hedge or screen, shrubs shall be planted with two (2) to four
feet (4') of spacing, depending on the plant species.
c. Trees: Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons in size with a one inch (1") diameter at breast height (dbh) spaced at thirty five feet (35') on
center. Newly planted trees shall be supported with stakes or guywires.
B. Dimension Of Landscaped Areas: No landscaped area smaller than three feet (3') in any horizontal dimension shall count toward required landscaping.
C. Drivers' Visibility: Trees and shrubs shall be planted and maintained so that at maturity they do not interfere with traffic safety sight areas, or public
safety. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, landscaping must comply with section 300.16, "Visibility At Driveways And Intersections (Sight
Distance)", of this series. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
303.06: INSTALLATION AND COMPLETION:
A. Consistency With Approved Plans: All landscaping and screening shall be installed consistent with approved plans and specifications, in a manner
designed to promote and maintain healthy plant growth.
B. Timing Of Installation: Required landscaping and screening shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the associated
project.
C. Exception; Assurance Of Landscaping Completion: The zoning administrator may permit the required landscaping to be installed within one hundred
twenty (120) days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy in special circumstances related to weather conditions or plant availability. A surety in
the amount equal to one hundred fifty percent (150%) of the estimated cost of landscaping, including materials and labor, as well as an agreement that
the required landscaping will be installed within one hundred twenty (120) days, shall be filed with the city to assure completion of landscaping
installation within such time. The surety may take the form of cash deposit; and together with the agreement, would provide for payment to the city of
any costs incurred in contracting for completion of the required landscaping.
D. Certification Of Substantial Completion: Upon completion of the installation of the landscaping and irrigation system, a field observation shall be
completed by the licensed project contractor. A certificate of substantial completion shall be submitted to the city by the licensed project contractor. The
certificate shall specifically indicate that the plants were installed as specified, that the irrigation system was installed as designed, along with a list of
any deficiencies. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
ARTICLE 304. ON SITE PARKING AND LOADING
304.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of the on site parking and loading regulations are to:
A. Ensure that parking uses are provided for new land uses and major alterations to existing uses to meet the parking needs created by such uses;
B. Establish standards and regulations for the developer, owner, or operator of any specific use occurring outdoors or within an existing, newly
constructed, or relocated building to provide well designed, on site parking areas; and
C. Ensure that on site parking and loading areas are designed and located to protect the public safety; minimize congestion and conflict points on travel
aisles and public streets; and where appropriate, buffer surrounding land uses from their impact. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 405/636
304.02: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of this article apply to the establishment, alteration, expansion, or change in any use or structure, as provided in this section.
A. New Buildings And Land Uses: On site parking and loading shall be provided according to the provisions of this article at the time any main building or
structure is erected or any new use is established.
B. Expansion And Change In Use Of Existing Buildings: When an expansion of floor area or change in use classification creates an increase of ten percent
(10%) or more in the number of required on site parking or loading spaces, on site parking and loading shall be provided according to the provisions of
this chapter.
C. Reconstruction: Additional parking spaces are not required for the remodel or reconstruction of an existing building when there is no increase in
footprint or floor area.
D. Alterations That Increase Number Of Dwelling Units: If an alteration to an existing building increases the number of residential dwelling units on the site,
on site parking to serve the new dwelling units shall be provided according to the provisions of this article.
E. When Constructed: On site parking and loading facilities required by this article shall be constructed or installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the uses that they serve. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.03: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Existing Parking And Loading To Be Maintained: No existing parking or loading serving any use may be reduced in amount or changed in design,
location or maintenance below the requirements for such use, unless equivalent substitute parking or loading facilities are provided or a parking
reduction is approved pursuant to section 304.06, "Parking Reductions", of this article.
B. Use Of Required Parking Spaces: Required on site parking areas shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and shall not be used
for the sale, lease, display, repair, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use,
unless specifically authorized by another provision of this chapter.
C. Nonconforming Parking Or Loading: An existing use of land or structure shall not be deemed to be nonconforming solely because of a lack of on site
parking or loading facilities required by this chapter, provided that facilities used for on site parking and loading as of the date of adoption hereof are not
reduced in number to less than that required by this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.04: REQUIRED PARKING SPACES:
A. Minimum Number Of Spaces Required: Each land use shall be provided at least the number of on site parking spaces stated in table 304.04A of this
section.
B. Calculation Of Required Spaces: The number of required parking spaces shall be calculated according to the following rules:
1. Fractions: If the calculation of required parking or loading spaces results in the requirement of a fractional space, such fraction, if one-half (0.5) or
greater, shall be considered one additional space; if the fraction is less than one-half (0.5), it shall result in no additional spaces.
2. Floor Area: Where an on site parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to floor area, the floor area is assumed to be gross
floor area, unless otherwise stated.
3. Employees: Where an on site parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to employees, the number of employees shall be
based on the largest shift that occurs in a typical week.
4. Bedrooms: Where an on site parking requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to bedrooms, any rooms having the potential of being a
bedroom and meeting the standard of the building code as a bedroom shall be counted as a bedroom.
5. Students Or Clients: Where a parking or loading requirement is stated as a ratio of parking spaces to students (including children in daycare), the
number is assumed to be the number of students or clients at the state certified capacity.
6. Seats: Where parking requirements are stated as a ratio of parking spaces to seats, each eighteen inches (18") of bench type seating at maximum
seating capacity is counted as one seat.
C. Existing Spaces; Role In Parking Calculation: The number of parking or loading spaces required for an expansion or change in use shall be based on
the existing spaces plus the additional spaces prescribed in this section, unless the preexisting number is already greater than the number required.
D. Downtown Parking; Role In Parking Calculation: For properties in the downtown districts, on street parking spaces may be counted toward required off
street parking for nonresidential uses in an amount equal to the proportionate share of the block face. For example, a site that occupies twenty five
percent (25%) of the block face is credited with twenty five percent (25%) of the on street parking spaces along that block face. These provisions apply
to street frontages where on street parking is allowed as identified in section 304.07, "Downtown Parking Districts", of this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 406/636
E. Sites With Multiple Uses: If more than one use is located on a site, the number of required on site parking spaces and loading spaces shall be equal to
the sum of the requirements prescribed for each use unless a reduction for shared parking is approved pursuant to subsection 304.06B, "Shared
Parking", of this article, and except for commercial centers with two (2) or more commercial establishments, which shall be provided parking at a ratio
of one parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area if the floor area is more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet.
F. Uses Not Specified: The parking requirement for any use not listed in table 304.04A of this section shall be determined by the zoning administrator
based upon the requirements for the most similar comparable use, the particular characteristics of the proposed use, and any other relevant data
regarding parking demand. In order to make this determination, the zoning administrator may require the applicant to submit a parking demand study or
other information, at the applicant's cost.
G. Parking Requirements Determined By Zoning Administrator: Where the parking requirement in table 304.04A of this section is listed as "to be
determined by the zoning administrator", the zoning administrator shall establish the parking requirement based on the particular characteristics of the
proposed use, and any other relevant data regarding parking demand. The zoning administrator may require the applicant to submit parking studies or
any other information needed to assess parking demand for the proposed project. Where a conditional use permit is required for the use, the ultimate
parking requirement will be established by the conditional use permit.
H. Queuing Area: The number of parking spaces required by table 304.04A of this section does not include queuing space that may be required for
vehicles and customers waiting in vehicles for service at drive-through facilities, pump stations, auto service bays, or similar uses. Queuing area shall
provide space for six (6) vehicles (restaurants shall provide spacing from the menu board). In lieu of this standard, a focused traffic study which models
vehicular queuing may be prepared subject to zoning administrator approval. The stacking area shall not interfere with other on site circulation and
parking facilities. Where required, queuing area shall be measured as twenty feet (20') per car.
TABLE 304.04A: REQUIRED ON SITE PARKING SPACES
Land Use Classification Required Parking Spaces
Residential use classifications:
Single-family, detached
Single-family, attached
2 covered parking for each dwelling unit
Second unit See section 301.16, "Second Dwelling Units", of this series
Multi-family residential 1 per studio unit. 1.5 per 1 bedroom unit. 2 per 2 bedroom unit
Additional bedrooms above 2: 0.5 space/bedroom. 1 space for each unit shall be designated for the unit and
covered. 1 additional guest parking space shall be provided for every 3 units
Small family daycare home None, beyond what is required for the residential use
Large family daycare home 1 per nonresident employee. 1 passenger loading space, on or off site. (Required spaces are in addition to
those required for the primary residential use.)
Group residential 1 per bed, bedroom, or dwelling unit, whichever is greatest, plus 1 guest parking space per 3 units
Mobile home park 2 on site spaces for each dwelling unit. At least 1 required space shall be covered. Tandem parking allowed
Residential care, limited None, beyond what is required for the residential use
Public and semipublic use
classifications:
Cemetery To be determined by the zoning administrator
Clubs and lodges 1 for each 3 permanent seats in main assembly area, or 1 for every 50 square feet of assembly area where
temporary or movable seats are provided
Colleges and trade schools,
public or private
To be determined by the zoning administrator based on parking demand study
Community center To be determined by the zoning administrator
Cultural institutions:
For theaters and auditoriums 1 for each 3 permanent seats in main assembly area, or 1 for every 50 square feet of assembly area where
temporary or movable seats are provided
Galleries and museums 1 for every 400 square feet of floor area
Other establishments Determined by the zoning administrator
Daycare center 1 per first 5 clients, plus 1 for each additional 10 clients
Elderly and long term care:
For first 10 beds 1 per 2 beds
Additional beds 1 additional space for each 4 beds
Government offices 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 407/636
Instructional services 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Park and recreation facilities,
public
To be determined by the zoning administrator
Public safety facilities To be determined by the zoning administrator
Religious facilities 1 for each 3 permanent seats in main assembly area, or 1 for every 50 square feet of assembly area where
temporary or movable seats are provided
Residential care, general:
For first 10 beds 1 per 2 beds
Additional beds 1 additional space for each 4 beds
Schools, public or private:
Elementary and middle
schools
1 per classroom, plus 1 per 250 square feet of office area
High schools 0.35 per student
Social service facilities 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Commercial use classifications:
Aircraft sales, services, and
storage
To be determined by the zoning administrator
Animal care, sales and services:
Kennels 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Pet store 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Veterinary services 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Artists' studios 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Automobile/vehicle sales and
services:
Automobile/vehicle rentals 1 per 250 square feet of office area in addition to spaces for all vehicles for rent
Automobile/vehicle sales and
leasing
1 per 250 square feet of office area, plus 1 space per 1,000 square feet of indoor or outdoor sales display
area
Any accessory auto repair: 2 spaces per service bay. Minimum 5 spaces per dealership
Automobile/vehicle repair,
major or minor
2 per service bay
Automobile/vehicle washing Minimum 1 space for automatic facilities, minimum 3 spaces for other facilities, plus 1 space per 250 square
feet of any indoor sales, office, or lounge areas
Large vehicle and equipment
sales, service and rental
1 per 250 square feet of office area plus 1 per 2,500 square feet of sales display area
Service station 2 per service bay, if service bays are included on site. 1 per 200 square feet of any convenience store on site
Towing and impound 1 per 500 square feet of building area plus 1 per 0.5 acre of gross outdoor use area
Banks and financial institutions
(all subclassifications)
1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Building materials services 1 per 400 square feet of floor area; 1 per 600 square feet of outdoor display area
Business services 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Commercial entertainment and
recreation:
Establishments with seating 1 for each 3 permanent seats in main assembly area, or 1 for every 50 square feet of assembly area where
temporary or movable seats are provided
Bowling alleys 3 per lane
Other commercial
entertainment and recreation
uses
To be determined by zoning administrator
Eating, drinking, and smoking
establishments:
Bars/nightclubs/lounges Minimum 2 spaces. 1 per 75 square feet of customer seating area
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 408/636
Coffee shops/cafes Minimum 2 spaces. 1 per 100 square feet of customer seating area
Restaurants Minimum 2 spaces. 1 per 75 square feet of customer seating area; no parking is required for outdoor seating
when seats provided equal 50 percent or less of total indoor seating
Tobacco bars Minimum 2 spaces. 1 per 75 square feet of customer seating area
Food and beverage retail sales 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Funeral parlors and mortuaries 1 for each 4 permanent seats in assembly areas, plus 1 per 250 square feet of office area
Hotels and motels 1 per each living or sleeping unit, plus 2 spaces adjacent to registration office. Additional parking required for
ancillary uses, such as restaurants, according to the parking requirements for the ancillary use
Light fleet based services 1 per 250 square feet of office floor area, plus 1 space for each fleet vehicle
Maintenance and repair services
1 per 350 square feet of building floor area, plus 1 space for each fleet vehicle
Medical facilities:
Hospital 1 per bed; plus 1 per 250 square feet of area used for office, clinics, testing, research, administration, and
similar activities associated with the principal use
Medical clinic 1 per 200 square feet
Single physician office 1 per 175 square feet
Nurseries and garden centers 1 per 250 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 500 square feet of outside display or greenhouse area
Offices (all subclassifications) 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
Parking, public or private 1 per attendant station (in addition to the spaces that are available to public)
Personal services 1 per 200 square feet of floor area
Retail sales:
Less than 50,000 square feet 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
50,000 square feet or more 1 per 300 square feet of floor area
Salvage and wrecking 1 per 500 square feet of building area plus 1 per 0.5 acre of gross outdoor use area
Sexually oriented business As determined by the zoning administrator based upon requirements for the most similar comparable use
Wholesaling and distribution 1 per 2,000 square feet of floor area
Industrial use classifications:
Construction and materials yards
To be determined by zoning administrator
Handicraft/custom manufacturing
1 per 2,000 square feet of floor area
Industry, general 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Industry, limited 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Recycling collection facilities:
Recycling collection point Minimum 1 space. Number of additional spaces to be determined by the zoning administrator
Recycling processing facility 1 for each 2 employees on the maximum work shift, or 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area, whichever is
greater
Warehousing and storage:
Chemical, mineral, and
explosives storage
1 per 2 employees or 1 per 200 square feet of office area, whichever is greater
Indoor commercial storage 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Outdoor storage 1 per 2 employees or 1 per 200 square feet of office area, whichever is greater
Personal storage 1 space per 75 storage units, plus 1 space per 300 square feet of office area. A minimum of 5 spaces shall
be provided
Transportation, communication, and
utilities use classifications:
Airports and heliports To be determined by the zoning administrator
Communication facilities:
Antennas and transmission
towers
Minimum 1 space for maintenance and servicing. Additional spaces to be determined by the zoning
administrator
Facilities within buildings To be determined by the zoning administrator
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 409/636
Freight/truck terminals and
warehouses
1 for each 2 employees on the maximum work shift, or 1 for each 3,000 square feet of floor area, whichever
is greater
Transportation passenger
terminals
To be determined by the zoning administrator
Utilities, major To be determined by the zoning administrator
Utilities, minor None
Agriculture and extractive use
classifications:
Crop and animal raising 1 for every 2 employees on the maximum shift
Mining and quarrying 1 for every 2 employees on the maximum shift
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.05: LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING:
A. Single-Family Dwellings And Second Units: Required parking for a single-family dwelling (except a manufactured home located within a manufactured
home park) and a second unit shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling(s) served, and shall not be located within a required front or street facing
side yard. For purposes of this section, the required front yard setback is twenty feet (20').
B. Multi-Family Residential, Group Housing, And Mobile Homes: Required parking for multi-family residential, group housing, mobile homes located in a
mobile home park, and other residential uses, shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served, or in a common parking area not more than four
hundred feet (400') from the dwellings served. If located in a common parking area, a parking agreement shall be filed as provided in subsection D2 of
this section. Parking shall not be located within a required front or street facing side yard.
C. Nonresidential Uses: Required parking spaces serving commercial, industrial, and other nonresidential uses shall be located on the same lot as the use
they serve, or in an off site parking facility as provided in subsection D of this section.
D. Off Site Parking Facilities: A parking facility serving one or more nonresidential uses located on a site other than the site of one or more such use(s)
may be approved if the standards of this subsection are met.
1. Location: Any off site parking facility shall be located within four hundred feet (400'), along a pedestrian route, of the principal entrance containing the
use(s) for which the parking is required.
2. Parking Agreement: A written agreement between the landowner(s) and the city shall be filed, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, and
including:
a. A guarantee among the landowner(s) for access to and use of the parking facility;
b. A guarantee that the spaces to be provided will be maintained and reserved for the uses served for as long as such uses are in operation; and
c. Evidence that the agreement has been recorded in the county recorder's office.
FIGURE 304.05: LOCATION OF REQUIRED PARKING
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 410/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.06: PARKING REDUCTIONS:
The number of on site motor vehicle parking spaces required by section 304.04, table 304.04A of this article may be reduced in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
A. Residential Uses: If a developer can demonstrate that a multi-family residential, group residential, or service oriented housing project designed for
residents with special needs, such as senior citizens or handicapped individuals, will not generate a need for as much parking as such a project
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 411/636
designed for a general market, the city council shall have the authority to allow a reduction in the number of required parking spaces. Upon conversion
of a senior citizen or other special needs group housing project to a general market apartment or condominium complex, parking shall be provided
consistent with the requirements of section 304.04, table 304.04A of this article.
B. Shared Parking: Where a shared parking facility serving more than one use will be provided, the total number of required parking spaces may be
reduced with a minor conditional use permit, if the city council finds that all of the following are true:
1. The peak hours of use will not overlap or coincide to the degree that peak demand for parking spaces from all uses will be greater than the total
supply of spaces;
2. The adequacy of the quantity and efficiency of parking provided will equal or exceed the level that can be expected if parking for each use were
provided separately;
3. A parking demand study prepared by an independent qualified professional approved by the city supports the proposed reduction; and
4. In the case of a shared parking facility that serves more than one property, a parking agreement has been prepared consistent with the provisions of
subsection 304.05D, "Off Site Parking Facilities", of this article.
C. Other Parking Reductions: Required parking for any use may be reduced through approval of a minor conditional use permit.
1. Criteria For Approval: The city council shall consider the following before approving a minor conditional use permit:
a. The required findings in article 604, "Conditional Use Permits", of this chapter are met.
b. Special conditions - including, but not limited to, the nature of the proposed operation, proximity to frequent transit service, transportation
characteristics of persons residing, working, or visiting the site, or because the applicant has undertaken a transportation demand management
program - exist that will reduce parking demand at the site;
c. The use will adequately be served by the proposed parking; and
d. Parking demand generated by the project will not exceed the capacity of or have a detrimental impact on the supply of on street parking in the
surrounding area.
2. Parking Demand Study: In order to evaluate a proposed project's compliance with the above criteria, the zoning administrator may require submittal
of a parking demand study that substantiates the basis for granting a reduced number of spaces and includes any of the following information, as
directed by the city:
a. Total square footage of all uses within existing and proposed development and the square footage devoted to each type of use.
b. A survey of existing on street and on site parking within three hundred fifty feet (350') of the project site.
c. Parking requirements for the net change in square footage and/or change in use, based on the requirements of section 304.04, table 304.04A of
this article.
d. Estimated net change in parking demand between existing and proposed development, using any available existing parking generation studies
from the Institute For Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other sources. If appropriate parking demand studies are not available, the city may
require the applicant to conduct a parking demand survey of a development similar to the proposed.
e. Comparison of proposed parking supply with parking requirements and net change in parking demand.
f. A shared parking analysis, as appropriate.
g. A description of possible transportation demand management measures, such as preferential car pool spaces, telecommuting or staggered work
shifts, provision of transit passes or other transit incentives for residents or employees, incorporation of spaces for car share vehicles, bicycles, or
other measures that could result in reduced parking demand.
h. Other information as required by the city. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.07: DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICTS:
A. Purpose: The city has established two (2) downtown parking districts in the downtown area in recognition that due to the concentration and mix of uses
in the downtown area, parking spaces will be shared among uses and the actual demand for spaces in these areas is less than what would otherwise
be necessary. In addition, the proximity to the city transit center further reduces parking demand in these areas.
B. Required Parking Spaces: The number of off street parking spaces required within the zones of downtown parking district no. 1, as shown in figure
304.07A of this section, shall not be less than stated in table 304.07B of this section. The number of off street parking spaces in downtown parking
district no. 2, as shown in figure 304.07B of this section shall be determined by the city council.
TABLE 304.07B: REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
IN DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT NO. 1
Zones Of Benefit Required Parking Spaces
Zone A No parking spaces required for a total of 3 stories of floor area with a basement, if any, included as 1 story
Zone B 1 per 600 square feet of floor area
Zone C 1 per 500 square feet of floor area
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 412/636
Zone D 1 per 400 square feet of floor area
Zone E 1 per 250 square feet of floor area
FIGURE 304.07A: DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT NO. 1
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 413/636
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 414/636
FIGURE 304.07B: DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT NO. 2
C. In-Lieu Payments: In lieu of providing the parking spaces required in table 304.07B of this section, the person required to provide said parking spaces
may pay to the city in the case of downtown parking district no. 1 and the redevelopment agency/successor agency in the case of downtown parking
district no. 2, an amount to be established by the city council. All monies collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special fund with said
fund to be used only for the purpose of acquisition of properties and construction of parking spaces within the respective downtown parking district. For
all projects within downtown parking district no. 1 - zone E and projects that exceed two (2) stories in downtown parking district no. 2, the in-lieu
payment option is subject to city council approval.
D. Exceptions: The following uses are not subject to the parking space requirements in table 304.07B of this section and shall instead provide parking in
accordance with section 304.04, table 304.04A of this article:
1. All residential uses.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 415/636
2. Bowling lanes.
3. Commercial entertainment and recreation facilities.
4. Drive-in restaurants.
5. Gymnasiums.
6. Hotels and motels.
7. Theaters.
E. Location Of Parking: The parking spaces required by this article shall be located within the boundaries of the respective downtown parking district or
immediately adjacent to the district. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.08: BICYCLE PARKING:
Bicycle parking shall comply with the latest edition of the California green building standards code, and the location of such parking shall be shown on the
site plan. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.09: ON SITE LOADING:
A. Loading Spaces Required: A building, or part thereof, having a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more that is to be occupied by a
manufacturing plant, storage facility, warehouse facility, retail store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning
establishment, or other use similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles or trucks of material or merchandise shall provide at least one on
site loading space, plus one additional loading space for each additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet of floor area. Such on site loading space
shall be maintained during the existence of the building or use that it is required to serve.
1. Reduction In Number Of Loading Spaces Required: The loading space requirement may be waived upon a finding that the applicant has
satisfactorily demonstrated that due to the nature of the proposed use, such loading space will not be needed.
2. Additional Loading Spaces Required: The required number of loading spaces may be increased to ensure that trucks will not be loaded, unloaded, or
stored on public streets. Such requirement shall be based on the anticipated frequency of truck pick ups and deliveries and of the truck storage
requirements of the use for which the on site loading spaces are required.
B. Minimum Size: Each on site loading space required by this article shall not be less than twelve feet (12') wide, thirty feet (30') long, and fifteen feet (15')
high, exclusive of driveways for ingress and egress and maneuvering areas.
C. Driveways For Ingress And Egress And Maneuvering Areas: Each on site loading space required by this article shall be provided with driveways for
ingress and egress and maneuvering space of the same type and meeting the same criteria required for on site parking spaces. Truck maneuvering
areas shall not encroach into required parking areas, travelways, or street rights of way. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.10: PARKING AREA DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Handicapped Parking: Each lot or parking structure where parking is provided for the public as clients, guests, or employees shall include parking
accessible to handicapped or disabled persons as near as practical to a primary entrance and in accordance with the Americans with disabilities act.
B. Compact Parking: On a site with at least ten (10) parking spaces, up to ten percent (10%) of the total required parking spaces may be compact spaces,
provided that the following standards are met:
1. In residential parking areas, all parking spaces that are required to be covered shall be standard size; and
2. All compact spaces are to be designated with a sign or pavement marking.
C. Size Of Parking Spaces And Maneuvering Aisles: Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be provided to meet the minimum dimensions required
by this subsection. Screening walls, roof support posts, columns, or other structural members shall not intrude into the required dimensions for parking
spaces.
1. Standard Parking Spaces: The minimum basic dimension for standard parking spaces is nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'). This dimension is
reduced to nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') where an additional two feet (2') of sidewalk or landscaped area planted with low growing plants is
provided for vehicle overhang. Table 304.10C1 of this section provides the dimensions of spaces (stalls) and aisles according to angle of parking
spaces.
TABLE 304.10C1: STANDARD PARKING SPACE
AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
Angle Of
Parking
Stall
Width
Curb Length
Per Stall
Stall Depth
From Curb
Aisle Width
One-Way Two-Way
Parallel 9'0" 23'0" 9'0" 12' 20'
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 416/636
45° 9'0" 12'8" 20'0" 15' 20'
60° 9'0" 10'5" 21'6" 18' 20'
90° 9'0" 9'0" 20'0" 25' 25'
FIGURE 304.10C1: STANDARD PARKING SPACES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 417/636
2. Compact Parking Spaces: The minimum basic dimension for compact parking stalls shall be seven feet by sixteen feet (7' x 16').
3. Parking Spaces Abutting Wall Or Fence: Parking spaces shall be located a minimum of two feet (2') from any wall, fence, column, or other
obstruction higher than one-half foot (0.5').
4. Long Term Parking: In parking areas, or portions of parking areas, restricted to employee use rather than customer or visitor use, and in which a
vehicle is not normally moved during the period of an employee's work shift, the width of parking spaces may be reduced to eight and one-half feet
(8.5') and the stall depth for standard spaces may be reduced to eighteen feet (18').
5. Minimum Dimensions For Residential Carports: Each single car carport shall measure at least eleven feet wide by twenty feet long (11' x 20'). Each
double carport shall measure at least twenty feet wide by twenty feet long (20' x 20'). The width of the carport is to be measured from inside face of
support to inside face of opposite support. The carport roof shall cover the entire twenty foot (20') length of the space. Unless adequate enclosed
storage area is provided elsewhere on site, the carport shall include a minimum eighty (80) square foot enclosed storage unit with minimum
dimensions of six feet (6') in height and four feet (4') in width and depth.
FIGURE 304.10C5: MINIMUM DIMENSIONS
FOR RESIDENTIAL CARPORTS
6. Minimum Dimensions For Residential Enclosed Garages: Enclosed garages serving residential uses shall be constructed to meet the following
minimum inside dimensions:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 418/636
a. A single car garage shall be at least eleven feet (11') wide and twenty feet (20') long.
b. A double car garage shall be at least twenty feet (20') wide and twenty feet (20') long.
D. Surfacing:
1. Residential: New residences or improvements to an existing residence of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more within a two (2) year
period shall provide a paved driveway consisting of concrete, asphalt concrete, pavers or other like material.
2. Nonresidential:
a. For parking, aisles, and access drives that are used on a daily basis asphalt concrete or concrete paving is required.
b. For long term parking or storage inside a secured enclosure that is not used on a daily basis any combination of asphalt concrete, concrete,
pavers, decomposed granite or like material that creates a dust free surface may be approved by the zoning administrator and the city engineer.
c. Fire access roads shall be designed to carry the traffic loads anticipated.
d. Improvements to parking areas to be utilized for overflow parking or special events may be approved by the zoning administrator and city
engineer.
E. Parking Lot Striping: All parking stalls shall be clearly outlined with striping, and all aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked
with directional arrows and lines as necessary to provide for safe traffic movement.
F. Perimeter Curbing: A six inch (6") wide and six inch (6") high concrete curb shall be provided along the outer edge of the parking facility pavement,
except where said pavement abuts a fence or wall. Where a parking facility abuts an area planned for a future phase of a phased development a timber
barrier or other barrier not less than six inches (6") high may be installed instead of a curb.
G. Parking Lot Lighting: Public parking areas designed to accommodate ten (10) or more vehicles shall be provided with a minimum of one-half (0.5) footcandle
and a maximum average of three (3) foot-candles of light over the parking surface during the hours of use from one-half (0.5) hour before dusk
until one-half (0.5) hour after dawn. Lighting design shall be coordinated with the landscape plan to ensure that vegetation growth will not substantially
impair the intended illumination. Parking lot lighting shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be designed and installed so that light and glare is not
directed onto residential use areas or adjacent public rights of way, consistent with article 306, "Performance Standards", of this series.
H. Separation From On Site Buildings: Parking areas shall be separated from the front and side exterior walls of on site buildings by walkways at least four
feet (4') in width.
I. Landscaping: Landscaping of parking areas shall be provided and maintained according to the general standards of article 303, "Landscaping", of this
series, as well as the standards of this subsection. The provisions of this subsection apply to all uses except single-family dwellings and duplexes.
1. Landscape Area Required: A minimum of ten percent (10%) of any parking lot area shall be landscaped. For the purpose of calculating required
parking lot landscaping, parking lot areas are deemed to include parking and loading spaces as well as aisles, vehicle entry and exit areas, and any
adjacent paved areas. Parking lot area does not include enclosed vehicle storage areas.
2. Minimum Planter Dimension: No landscape planter that is to be counted toward the required landscape area shall be smaller than twenty five (25)
square feet in area, or four feet (4') in any horizontal dimension, excluding curbing.
3. Layout: Landscaped areas shall be well distributed throughout the parking lot area. Parking lot landscaping may be provided in any combination of:
a. Landscaped planting strips at least four feet (4') wide between rows of parking stalls;
b. Landscaped planting strips between parking areas and adjacent buildings or internal pedestrian walkways;
c. Landscaped islands located between parking stalls or at the ends of rows of parking stalls; and
d. On site landscaping at the parking lot perimeter.
4. Required Landscaped Islands: A landscaped island at least six feet (6') in all interior dimensions and containing at least one 15-gallon size tree shall
be provided at each end of each interior row of parking stalls and between all consecutive parking stalls in the following ratios:
a. Between every eight (8) stalls in any nonresidential development;
b. Between every six (6) consecutive stalls in a residential development or in a mixed use development in which residential units overlook on site
parking areas.
5. Landscaped Buffer For Open Parking Adjacent To Right Of Way: A landscaped buffer area shall be provided between any surface parking area and
any property line adjacent to a public street. The landscaped buffer shall have a minimum width as listed below unless a different dimension is
specified in the base district standards applicable to a site.
a. Residential districts: Five feet (5'). Landscaped parkways or strips between the property line and the sidewalk count toward this requirement.
b. Nonresidential districts: Ten feet (10').
6. Landscaped Buffer For Open Parking Abutting Interior Lot Line: A landscaped area at least three feet (3') wide shall be provided between the outside
edge of any surface parking area and any adjacent lot for the length of the parking area and a five foot (5') wide landscaped area shall be provided
where commercial abuts an R district.
7. Trees: Trees shall be planted to result in fifty percent (50%) shading of parking lot surface areas within fifteen (15) years.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 419/636
a. Distribution: Trees shall be distributed relatively evenly throughout the parking area.
b. Species: Required trees for parking lots shall be selected from a list of recommended trees maintained by the community development department
or are listed in Sunset's "Western Garden Book, Region No. 9".
c. Minimum Planter Size: Any planting area for a tree shall have a minimum interior dimension of five feet (5'). Additional space may be required for
some tree species.
FIGURE 304.10I: LANDSCAPING
8. Protection Of Vegetation:
a. Clearance From Vehicles: All landscaped areas shall be designed so that plant materials, at maturity, are protected from vehicle damage by
providing a minimum two foot (2') clearance of low growing plants where a vehicle overhang is permitted.
b. Planters: All required parking lot landscaping shall be within planters bounded by a concrete curb at least six inches (6") wide and six inches (6")
high.
FIGURE 304.10I8: PROTECTION OF VEGETATION
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 420/636
9. Irrigation: All landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatic sprinkler system.
10. Visibility And Clearance: Landscaping in planters at the end of parking aisles may not obstruct drivers' vision of vehicular and pedestrian cross
traffic. Mature trees shall have a foliage clearance maintained at eight feet (8') from the surface of the parking area. Other plant materials located in
the interior of a parking lot shall not exceed thirty inches (30") in height.
J. Circulation And Safety:
1. Visibility shall be assured for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists entering individual parking spaces, circulating within a parking facility, and
entering or leaving a parking facility.
2. Off street parking and loading areas shall be provided with sufficient maneuvering room so that all vehicles can enter and exit from a public street by
forward motion only. This standard shall not apply to parking areas serving single-family dwellings or duplexes served by individual driveways.
3. Parking lots shall be designed so that sanitation, emergency, and other public service vehicles can provide service without backing unreasonable
distances or making other dangerous or hazardous turning movements.
4. Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided where possible. Multi-family residential developments of five (5) or more
units shall be provided pedestrian access that is separate and distinct from driveways. Parking areas for commercial and mixed use developments
that are eighty feet (80') or more in depth and/or include fifty (50) or more parking spaces shall have distinct and dedicated pedestrian access from
the commercial use to parking areas and public sidewalks, according to the following standards:
a. Connection To Public Sidewalk: An on site walkway shall connect the main building entry to a public sidewalk on each street frontage. Such
walkway shall be the shortest practical distance between the main building entry and sidewalk, no more than one hundred twenty five percent
(125%) of the straight line distance.
b. Materials And Width: Walkways shall provide at least five feet (5') of unobstructed width and be paved with concrete, stone, tile, brick, or
comparable material.
c. Identification: Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly differentiated from driveways, parking aisles, and parking and loading spaces through the use
of elevation changes, a different paving material, or similar method.
d. Separation: Where a pedestrian walkway is parallel and adjacent to an auto travel lane, it shall be raised and separated from the auto travel lane
by a raised curb at least four inches (4") high, bollards, or other physical barrier.
FIGURE 304.10J: CIRCULATION AND SAFETY
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 421/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
304.11: PARKING AND STORAGE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES:
Parking and storing of recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers and similar vehicles are prohibited from being stored for a period longer than seventy
two (72) hours in the front yard setback. They may be stored in the side or rear yard behind a minimum six foot (6') high, solid fence. At no time are
recreational vehicles allowed to be occupied as residences. Connection to any combination of electrical, water, cable, or sewer facilities is considered
prima facie evidence of occupation as a residence. Storage on the street is limited pursuant to section 17-10.4 of the municipal code. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
ARTICLE 305. SIGNS1
305.01: PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 422/636
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations to ensure the orderly display of signs as a citywide information system, consistent with state and
federal law. These regulations recognize the desire and need of each individual, business, firm or corporation to identify its place of residence, business or
service, and realizing that the indiscriminate erection, location, illumination, coloring, size, and lack of proper maintenance of signs and advertising
structures constitutes a significant contributing factor detrimental to the well being and continuing activity of a city's people and economy. Specifically,
these regulations are intended to:
A. Assure that all signs and advertising structures are designed, erected and maintained in a manner to enhance, rather than detract from, the ultimate
design and appearance of the affected locality, and do not impair the view of nearby or adjacent signs;
B. Prohibit the installation and maintenance of signs or advertising structures that unduly distract motorists' attention from driving, and which detract from
attention to traffic movement and to signs and signals promoting traffic safety;
C. Prevent the installation and maintenance of signs or advertising structures that individually or collectively have an injurious effect on the morale of the
people and the economic well being of the city;
D. Assure that size and location of signs and advertising structures do not constitute an obstacle to effective fire protection and firefighting techniques; nor
constitute a direct or potential danger to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, especially in the event of structural failure during the period of inclement weather
and earthquakes or in the event of impaired vision due to improper size or location; and
E. Otherwise protect the public health, safety, morale, and promote the public welfare. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.02: POLICIES:
The policies and principles stated in this section apply to all signs within the regulatory scope of this article, and to all procedures set forth in, or invoked
by, this article. These policies are to prevail over any other provision to the contrary, even if more specific.
A. Permit Requirement: Unless expressly exempted by a provision of this article, or by other applicable law, signs within the regulatory scope of this article
may be displayed only pursuant to a permit issued by the city.
B. Message Neutrality: It is the city's policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that is content neutral as to noncommercial signs and viewpoint
neutral as to commercial signs.
C. Regulatory Interpretations: All regulatory interpretations of this article are to be exercised in light of the city's message neutrality policy. Where a
particular type of sign is proposed in a permit application, and the type is neither expressly allowed nor prohibited by this article, or wherever a sign
does not qualify as a "structure" as defined in the building code, then the zoning administrator shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
application based on the most similar sign type that is expressly regulated by this article.
D. Substitution Of Messages: Subject to the property owner's consent, a noncommercial message of any type may be substituted for any duly permitted or
allowed noncommercial message, provided that the sign structure or mounting device is legal without consideration of the message content. Such
substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the
contrary within this article. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over any other noncommercial
message. This provision does not create the right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, lot or land use; does not affect the requirement
that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted; does not allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its mounting device; does
not allow the substitution of an off site commercial message in place of an on site commercial message; and does not allow one particular on site
commercial message to be substituted for another without a permit.
E. Rules For Noncommunicative Aspects Of Signs: All rules and regulations concerning the noncommunicative aspects of signs, such as location, size,
height, illumination, spacing, orientation, etc., stand enforceable independently of any permit or approval process.
F. Sites Of Noncommercial Message Signs: The on site/off site distinction applies only to commercial messages on signs.
G. Property Owner's Consent: No sign may be displayed without the consent of the legal owner(s) of the property on which the sign is mounted or
displayed. For purposes of this policy, "owner" means the holder of the legal title to the property and all parties and persons holding a present right to
possession, control or use of the property.
H. Legal Nature Of Signage Rights And Duties: As to all signs attached to property, real or personal, the signage rights, duties and obligations arising from
this article attach to and travel with the land or other property on which a sign is mounted or displayed. This provision does not modify or affect the law
of fixtures, sign related provisions in private leases regarding signs (so long as they are not in conflict with this article), or the ownership of sign
structures.
I. Sign Programs: Sign programs for specific developments, as well as special sign districts or special sign overlay zones, when approved by the approving
authority, may modify the rules stated herein as to sign size, height, number, illumination, spacing, orientation or other noncommunication aspects of
signs, but may not override or modify any of the basic policies stated in this section. All the provisions of this section shall automatically apply to, and
be deemed a part of, any sign program after the date on which this provision is initially adopted.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 423/636
J. Severance: If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion or provision of this article is held invalid, or unconstitutional, or unenforceable by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect, impair, or invalidate any other section, sentence, clause, phrase, word, portion, or
provision of this article which can be given effect without the invalid portion. In adopting this article, the city council affirmatively declares that it would
have approved and adopted the article even without any portion which may be held invalid or unenforceable. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.03: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements and development standards in this article apply to signs in all zoning districts, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.04: DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
A. Architectural Compatibility: A sign (including its supporting structure, if any) shall be designed as an integral design element of a building's architecture
and architecturally compatible, including color and scale, with any building to which the sign is to be attached and with surrounding structures. A sign
that spills over "natural" boundaries or architectural features and obliterates parts of upper floors of buildings, or is detrimental to visual order is not
permitted.
B. Consistency With Area Character: A sign shall be consistent with distinct area or district characteristics and incorporate common design elements such
as sign materials or themes. Where a sign is located in close proximity to a residential area, the sign shall be designed and located so it has little or no
impact on adjacent residential neighborhoods.
C. Legibility: The proportion of the elements of the sign's message, including logos, letters, icons and other graphic images, shall be selected based on the
anticipated distance and travel speed of the viewer. Colors chosen for the sign text and/or graphics shall have sufficient contrast with the sign
background in order to be easily read during both day and night hours.
FIGURE 305.04C: LEGIBILITY OF SIGNS
D. Finish: Signs shall have finished edges with a clean, smooth, consistent surface. Lettering on the sign is to be of complementary size, proportion and
font and either carved, routed, painted or applied.
E. Visibility: A sign shall be conspicuous and readily distinguishable from its surroundings. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.05: EXEMPT SIGNS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 424/636
The following signs are exempt from the permit requirements of this article, and they do not count toward the total sign number or area limit for a site,
provided that they conform to the specified standards and obtain building permits when required by law.
A. Civic Signs: Signs for historical or memorial buildings, when constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials or cut into any masonry surface and
installed by a civic organization recognized by the city council.
B. Change Of Business Signs: A temporary attachment or covering of wood, plastic, or canvas over a permanent sign may be displayed no longer than
thirty (30) days following the change of ownership, or up to ninety (90) days following issuance of a building permit. The sign shall be no larger than the
previously permitted permanent sign.
C. Construction Signs: One sign, with a maximum sign area of thirty two (32) square feet, per street frontage on real property where construction,
structural alteration or repair is to take place, or is taking place. Construction signs shall be removed upon final building inspection.
D. Equipment Signs: Signs, not more than four (4) square feet in area, incorporated into displays, machinery or equipment by a manufacturer, distributor or
vendor, such as signs customarily fixed to automated teller machines (ATMs), gasoline pumps, vending machines, menu boards and umbrellas.
FIGURE 305.05D: EQUIPMENT SIGNS
E. Flags: Flags with the display of only noncommercial speech.
F. Handbills: Handbills, advertising circulars, etc., must comply with the standards and licensing contained in chapter 3, article II of the municipal code.
G. Identification Signs: A maximum of one sign per apartment house, boarding or rooming house or similar use, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area.
H. Information Signs: A maximum of two (2) signs per building within six feet (6') of the building entrances for commercial, industrial, and office uses, not
exceeding six (6) square feet per building. Government uses, in addition to the aforementioned six (6) square feet per building, may include not more
than one shadowbox with not more than ten (10) square feet of display area.
I. On Site Signs: Up to two (2) on site signs for public or private developments, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area per face, and not exceeding forty
eight inches (48") in height, provided such signs are not prohibited or further regulated by other sections of this article or any other ordinance of the city.
Uses that include a drive-through service window are allowed one additional sign per this exemption.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 425/636
J. For Sale Or Rent Signs: Properties or leased spaces may display not more than one on site sign with a maximum size of six (6) square feet (excluding
rider signs no larger than a total of 6 square feet) and a maximum height of six feet (6') in the R districts, and a maximum size of thirty two (32) square
feet and a maximum height of eight feet (8') in all other districts, per street frontage of a parcel when the property is currently for sale or rent. Such
signs shall be removed within five (5) days following close of escrow or finalization of sale, rental or lease.
K. Reader Panels: Permanent reader panels for public, charitable, or religious institutions provided said reader panels are located on the property to which
such reader panels pertain and do not exceed twenty (20) square feet in total area per face nor more than ten feet (10') in height, and further provided
said reader panels are located in such a manner as not to constitute a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. Electronic reader boards which
otherwise comply with the signage requirements of the zone in which they are located, and do not include animation, characters, flashing, or similar
rapid movements, and which are programmed to change messages no more frequently than once every three (3) seconds shall also be allowed as
exempt signs for public, charitable or religious institutions.
L. Sponsorship Signs: One sign per business provided by said business, which sponsors and contributes to the sports activities upon public premises, not
to exceed thirty six (36) square feet in area, per site shall be permitted for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days preceding the event or season. Such
sign shall be removed within fifteen (15) days after the event or season.
M. Transit Signs: Bus stop, shelter, and bench advertisement displays as permitted by the transit advertising policy. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.06: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following types of signs and devices are specifically prohibited:
A. Animated, Flashing Or Moving Signs: Signs that incorporate flashing, moving, rotating, pulsating or intermittent lighting, with the exception of
changeable copy message center display signs and barber poles, except as allowed elsewhere in this article. Any sign that, because of brilliant lighting,
interferes with the enjoyment of surrounding residential property or interferes with traffic, vehicular or pedestrian, is prohibited.
B. Balloons, Banners, Streamers And Pennants: Signs, balloons, banners, pennants, or any other advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light
fabric, paper, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, except awnings or as allowed for automobile/vehicle sales and leasing establishments, or in
section 305.11, "Temporary Signs", of this article.
C. Billboards: Any sign directing attention to a business, service, or product that is not conducted, sold, produced, or offered by any use on the same lot, or
which identifies by brand name a product which, although sold on the premises, does not constitute one of the principal items for sale on the premises
unless otherwise provided by the California outdoor advertising act2.
D. Emissions: Signs that produce noise in excess of forty (40) decibels, excluding voice units at drive-through facilities, and signs that emit odor or visible
smoke, vapor or particles.
E. Fence Signs: Signs attached or painted on fences or freestanding walls that are not part of a building, except for subdivision entry signs as allowed in
subsection 305.08B of this article.
F. Obscenities: Signs that depict, describe or relate to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in article 700, "List Of Terms
And Definitions", of this chapter.
G. Obstructions To Exits: Signs erected, constructed or maintained which obstruct any firefighting equipment, fire escape, required exit or door opening
intended as a means of egress, unless approved by the fire marshal.
H. Obstructions To Driver Visibility: Signs in corner cutoffs and lines of sight in accordance with the provisions of section 300.16, "Visibility At Driveways
And Intersections (Sight Distance)", of this series.
I. Obstructions To Ventilation: Signs that interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
J. Portable Signs: Signs not permanently attached to, mounted upon or affixed to a building, structure or the ground, except as otherwise provided herein.
K. Posters: Posters of a temporary character that are tacked, painted, pasted or otherwise placed or affixed and made visible from a public way, on the
walls of buildings, on barns, sheds, trees, fences, utility poles or other structures, sidewalks or patios, except as otherwise provided in this article. This
subsection excludes signs placed in windows per subsection 305.10E of this article.
L. Roof Signs: Signs erected or painted upon, over or above the roof of a building or structure, or any sign affixed to the wall of a building so that it projects
above the ridgeline or top of parapet, except as allowed in this article.
FIGURE 305.06L: ROOF SIGNS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 426/636
M. Signs Creating Traffic Hazards: Signs that simulate in color, size or design any traffic control sign, signal or device, or that make use of words, symbols
or characters in a manner that interferes with, misleads or confuses pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No sign, light or advertising structure shall be
located in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision at any
location where, by reason of the position, shape, color or movement may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal or device.
N. Signs On Public Property: Signs affixed to or attached to public lands, including, but not limited to, public rights of way, parks, buildings, storm drainage
basins, and other public facilities, or signs affixed to public amenities or public facilities or other public property on said public lands, are prohibited.
When associated with rental or reservation of a public facility, signs may be temporarily attached to public property, so long as they are attached in
such a manner that the removal of the sign does not cause any damage to the public property. Such signs must be removed at the end of the
reservation period. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.07: GENERAL STANDARDS:
This section establishes general physical standards and requirements. More detailed standards applicable to specific sign types (e.g., wall signs, awning
signs) are in section 305.10, "Standards For Specific Types Of Signs", of this article. In addition to these general standards, all signs shall conform to the
specifications of chapter 3, "Advertising And Signs", of the municipal code.
A. Maximum Allowable Sign Area: All signs shall conform to the maximum area requirements specified in section 305.09, table 305.09 of this article,
unless a different limit is approved under a master sign program.
B. Measuring Sign Area: Sign area includes the entire face of a framed sign, but does not include the supporting structure. Individual letters attached to a
building shall be measured by the area enclosed by a continuous line outlining the perimeter of the words, emblems, and logos.
FIGURE 305.07B: MEASURING SIGN AREA
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 427/636
1. Double Faced Signs: For double faced signs, only one side shall be counted as the total area. Where the faces are not equal in size, the larger sign
face shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 428/636
2. Multifaced Signs: The sign area of signs with three (3) or more sign faces shall be calculated as the sum of two (2) sign faces. Where the faces are
not equal in size, the larger sign faces shall be used as the basis for calculating sign area.
3. Three-Dimensional Signs: Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more three-dimensional object(s) (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of
objects, sculpture, or statuelike trademarks) shall have a sign area of the sum of two (2) adjacent sides or sign faces.
FIGURE 305.07B3: THREE-DIMENSIONAL SIGNS
C. Abandoned Signs: Any sign, including its supporting structure, which no longer identifies the current occupant after a lapse of ninety (90) days, shall be
deemed an abandoned sign and shall be removed by the owner of the property on which it is located. When a wall sign is removed, the wall behind the
sign shall be repaired and painted to match the rest of the building wall. Any signs not removed or made blank within this time shall be removed
pursuant to the removal procedures set forth in this article.
D. Building Frontage: Building frontage shall be considered the wall of a building that faces and is roughly parallel with a public street, excluding an alley.
The linear dimension of that building frontage shall be used to calculate allowable signage. Buildings with walls facing more than one public street shall
be allowed signage for each building frontage in accordance with section 305.09, table 305.09 of this article. Buildings located on interior lots (not on a
corner) and that are oriented perpendicular to a public street shall be allowed signage based on the longer of the front or side building elevation. All, or
a percentage of, the allowable sign area may be transferred to the other building elevations provided the sign area on any wall shall not exceed the
maximum allowable for that wall in accordance with section 305.09, table 305.09 of this article. For buildings that have no public street frontage,
building frontage shall be determined by the zoning administrator.
E. Changeable Copy: Changeable copy shall cover no more than forty percent (40%) of the total sign allowance for manually changeable signs. For
electronic message center signs with copy that can be changed or altered by electric, electromechanical, electronic, or any other artificial energy
means, the changeable portion of the sign shall cover no more than forty percent (40%) of the total sign allowance. The following uses are exempt from
this restriction: religious institutions, cinemas, government or civic uses, gas station uses, indoor theaters, schools, and colleges.
F. Clearance From Utilities: Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance from, and not interfere with, electrical conductors,
communications equipment or lines, surface and underground facilities and conduits for water, sewage, gas, electricity and communications equipment
or lines. Signs shall not be placed in public utility easements unless express written permission from the affected public utility is obtained.
G. Construction And Maintenance:
1. Unless exempt, signs and supporting structures shall be installed in accordance with the latest adopted building code.
2. All signs, together with all supporting structures, shall be maintained in the following manner:
a. Signs shall be kept free of rust, dirt and chipped, cracked or peeling paint.
b. All hanging, dangling, torn or frayed parts of signs shall be promptly repaired, and graffiti and unauthorized attachments shall be removed.
c. Failed, damaged, or blinking illumination shall be promptly replaced.
d. Sign areas shall be kept free and clear of all noxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
e. Discolored or faded panels on plastic faces shall be restored to their original condition and color.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 429/636
H. Encroachment Into Public Street Or Sidewalk: Any sign projecting into a public right of way requires an encroachment agreement approved by the city
engineer.
I. Illumination: Channel letters, internally illuminated signs and neon signs are permitted. Bare bulbs visible from the public right of way are prohibited. On
signs with external illumination, lights shall be provided with proper reflectors to concentrate the illumination on the area of the sign to prevent glare on
the street or adjacent properties. All sign illumination shall adhere to the performance standards for lighting and glare in article 306, "Performance
Standards", of this series.
J. Materials: Paper, cardboard, untreated plywood and other materials subject to rapid deterioration shall be limited to signs displayed for no more than
thirty (30) days. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.08: SIGN STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
A. Religious facilities, multi-family residential projects, schools, civic uses and other nonresidential uses in R districts are allowed one building mounted
sign and one monument sign with a maximum cumulative sign area of thirty two (32) square feet.
B. Residential subdivisions are allowed one monument sign or wall sign per street frontage for entry into the subdivision. Each sign shall not exceed a
maximum size of thirty two (32) square feet. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.09: SIGN STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
Signage in nonresidential districts shall comply with the standards in table 305.09 of this section unless a different sign area allowed for a specific use is
described elsewhere in this municipal code. Buildings without clearly defined tenant space frontage shall share total sign area allowed per building as
determined in table 305.09 of this section. All properties in nonresidential districts shall be allowed a minimum sign area of twenty (20) square feet.
TABLE 305.09
SIGN AREA AND SIGN STANDARDS FOR
SPECIFIC SIGN TYPES AND ZONING DISTRICTS
Zoning Districts
(Frontage)
Sign Area Allowed
(Square Feet Per
1 Linear Foot Of
Building Frontage) Permitted Sign Types
DR-N, D-MX 2 Awning and canopy
Marquee
Projecting
Wall
Window
D-PO 2 Awning and canopy
Monument
Projecting
Window
D-PS 2 Awning and canopy
Marquee
Monument
Projecting
Wall
Window
DR-D, DR-S 2 Awning and canopy
Marquee
Projecting
Wall
Window
D-GC 2 Awning and canopy
Marquee
Monument
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 430/636
Projecting
Wall
Window
CMX, CN, PO 1.5 Awning and canopy
Freestanding
Marquee
Monument
Projecting
Wall
Window
CG, CR 3 Awning and canopy
Freestanding
Marquee
Monument
Projecting
Wall
Window
IP, IG, IA 2 Awning and canopy
Freestanding
Marquee
Monument
Projecting
Wall
Window
REC, PK, PS 2 Awning and canopy
Freestanding
Monument
Projecting
Wall
(Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.10: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF SIGNS:
A. Awning And Canopy Signs: Signs painted on awnings, canopies, arcades, or similar attachments or structures are allowed. Awning and canopy signs
are subject to the specific zoning district standards and the following standards:
1. Maximum sign area per awning or canopy sign:
a. Downtown, CMX, and CN districts: Twenty four (24) square feet.
b. CG, CR, and employment districts: Sixty (60) square feet.
2. Sign clearance: Minimum of eight feet (8').
3. Height limit: Twenty five feet (25').
4. Number of signs: Four (4) maximum per building facade, which includes any wall signs.
B. Marquee Signs: A sign permanently affixed to a marquee is allowed in conjunction with theaters, museums, galleries, and similar uses. Removable
copy may be changed on the face of permitted marquee signs without securing a permit. Marquee signs are subject to the specific zoning district
standards and the following standards:
1. Maximum number of signs: One marquee sign per site.
2. Maximum sign area per sign: One and one-half (1.5) square feet per linear foot of building frontage.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 431/636
3. Sign clearance: Minimum of eight feet (8').
FIGURE 305.10B: MARQUEE SIGNS
C. Projecting Or Under Canopy Signs: Signs under canopies or covers in conjunction with pedestrian walkways, or signs projecting from the building wall
are allowed, subject to the specific zoning district standards and the following standards:
1. Maximum Number Of Signs: One projecting sign per building facade or tenant space frontage.
2. Maximum Sign Area Per Sign: Sixteen (16) square feet; except the maximum sign area per sign is eight (8) square feet when the sign is located
under a canopy or awning.
3. Sign Clearance: Minimum of eight feet (8').
4. Height: A projecting sign shall be erected in such a manner as not to create a traffic hazard to vehicles or pedestrians. Projecting signs shall not
extend higher than twenty feet (20') above ground level or above an eave or roof, whichever is lower.
5. Projection:
a. A projecting sign cannot extend more than three feet (3') from the building to which it is attached.
b. An under canopy sign, attached to and hanging from an awning or canopy shall be located completely under the canopy or awning and shall not
project beyond its edge. An under canopy sign shall not count toward the sign area allowed.
FIGURE 305.10C: PROJECTING OR UNDER CANOPY SIGNS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 432/636
D. Wall Signs: Wall signs include any sign attached to, erected against or painted upon the wall of a building or structure, the face of which is in a single
plane parallel to the plane of the wall. Wall signs also include signs on a parapet or mansard roof. Wall signs attached to the fascia shall be channel
letters and shall be architecturally consistent with other signage in the development. No wall sign may cover wholly or partially any required wall
opening. Wall signs are also subject to the specific zoning district standards and the following standards:
1. Maximum Number Of Signs: Four (4) maximum per building facade or tenant space frontage, which includes any awning or canopy signs.
2. Maximum Sign Area Per Sign: Three hundred (300) square feet.
3. Height: Wall signs shall not be mounted or placed higher than the second story and shall not extend higher than the building wall upon which they
are attached.
4. Coverage: Wall sign copy shall not occupy more than seventy five percent (75%) of the length of the wall to which the sign is attached.
5. Projection: Wall signs cannot extend more than twelve inches (12") beyond the face of the wall to which they are attached.
6. Design: Wall signs shall be oriented to achieve balance composition and harmony with other architectural elements of a building facade.
E. Window Signs: Window signs painted or otherwise adhered directly onto a window are exempt from the permit requirements of this article and do not
count toward the total sign area limit for a site, but are subject to the specific zoning district standards and the following standards:
1. Coverage: Window signs shall cover no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total glass window area along each building facade.
2. Height: Window signs shall not be mounted or placed on windows higher than the second story.
F. Monument Signs: Freestanding signs erected on the ground or on a monument base designed as an architectural unit are allowed, subject to the
specific zoning district standards and the following standards:
1. Maximum Number Of Signs: One monument sign per frontage per site.
2. Maximum Sign Area Per Sign:
a. D-PO, D-PS, D-GC, CMX, and CN districts: Thirty two (32) square feet.
b. CG, CR, and employment districts: Sixty (60) square feet.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 433/636
c. PS, REC and PK districts: Thirty two (32) square feet.
3. Height: A maximum of seven feet (7').
4. Landscaping: All monument signs shall require automatic irrigated landscaping at the base equivalent to the area of the sign copy.
FIGURE 305.10F: MONUMENT SIGNS
G. Freestanding Signs: Freestanding signs are allowed subject to the specific zoning district standards and the following standards:
1. Maximum Number Of Signs: One freestanding sign per site.
2. Allowable Sign Area Per Sign: The area of any freestanding sign shall be included in the maximum allowed sign area per section 305.09, table
305.09 of this article.
3. Architectural Treatment: Freestanding signs shall be architecturally compatible in style, finish and color with the adjacent building or development.
Structural supports, poles, angle bars, iron pipes, I-beams or similar structural members shall be architecturally encased with finished metal cladding,
stucco, or similar material at least one foot (1') in diameter, subject to approval by the zoning administrator as to proportion and architectural
compatibility.
4. Landscaping: Freestanding signs shall be placed within a landscaped planter with at least twenty four (24) square feet of planting area. As a
condition of any permit for a freestanding sign, additional landscaping of the property may be required where needed to better integrate sign
appearance with the site through scale and softening effects.
5. Height:
a. A maximum of twenty feet (20'); thirty five feet (35') within five hundred feet (500') of a freeway right of way. Freestanding signs shall have a
minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14') over parking lots and driveways, and eight feet (8') over interior pedestrian walkways.
b. A maximum of twelve feet (12') in the CMX, CN and PO zone districts.
6. Projection: Freestanding signs shall not project beyond the property line.
FIGURE 305.10G: FREESTANDING SIGNS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 434/636
H. Other Sign Types:
1. Commercial Center Signs: Commercial center signs may be erected in the commercial and employment districts, subject to the following limitations:
a. Allowable Areas: The center shall consist of a commercial or industrial development with an integrated site and design plan creating a single
unified development with three (3) or more uses.
b. Area Not Counted: The area of the sign shall not count toward the sign area allowed for the individual tenant space or building on the lot.
c. Sign Area Allowed: The maximum sign area may be no more than one square foot for each linear foot of street frontage, but in no case shall the
total sign area exceed two hundred (200) square feet. If more than one entrance to the lot exists, the maximum sign area permitted will be divided
among the number of entryways and signs requested.
d. Sign Height: The maximum sign height shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in the CMX, CN and PO zone districts; thirty five feet (35') in all other
commercial and employment zone districts.
e. Sign Base: The sign base is to be located within a planter box or planting area at least twenty four (24) square feet in area and the design and
location is to be approved by the zoning administrator.
2. A-Frame/Sandwich Board Signs: Temporary, portable A-frame or sandwich board signs may be erected in all nonresidential zone districts, subject to
the following limitations:
a. Area Not Counted: The area of the sign shall not count toward the permissible sign area of the individual lot.
b. Maximum Number Of Signs: One A-frame/sandwich board sign per tenant space.
c. Maximum Sign Area: The total sign area shall not exceed a maximum of six (6) square feet per side.
d. Location: Such sign may encroach into the right of way up to two feet (2') from the property line provided there remains a five foot (5') wide
walkable area when the sign is in place.
e. Removal: Such sign is to be removed during nonoperational hours.
3. Mobile Signs: Signs pulled on a trailer or otherwise mounted to a vehicle may be allowed subject to the following limitations:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 435/636
a. Permit Process: Not more than one sign per twenty five thousand (25,000) population, or portion thereof, shall be permitted at a given time. A
party wishing to present signage in a mobile or semimobile manner may apply for a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit will be valid
for a term of two (2) years, beginning July 1 of even years. A lottery will be held by May 1 of each even year for the respective terms. If a currently
permitted mobile sign succeeds in being selected in a subsequent lottery, the conditional use permit would be extended for another two (2) years.
b. Materials: A mobile sign permitted per this section shall be developed of materials as prescribed in section 305.07 of this article, and shall include
any additional design considerations to assure that such signs are securely and safely affixed to the host vehicle in consideration of its use on
streets and roadways.
c. Size: Signs may not exceed the height of the vehicle to which they are affixed by more than eighteen inches (18"), and may not extend beyond the
horizontal dimensions of the trailer on which they are mounted.
d. Exemptions: Decals, paint, stickers, and similar treatments affixed directly to the exterior of the host vehicle, or to a trailer, are exempted from this
subsection, provided that:
(1) Lighting, changeable copy, and digital signs are not permissible exemptions.
(2) In order for signage on a trailer to be exempt, the trailer shall meet the standard minimum dimensions established by the U.S. department of
transportation, federal highway administration, in the federal size regulations for commercial motor vehicles.
e. Mobile Signage: Signs placed or displayed on vehicles parked in a conspicuous location that do not otherwise suit the above noted exemptions
shall be considered mobile signage and are subject to this subsection. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.11: TEMPORARY SIGNS:
The following types of temporary signs are permitted, provided that they conform to the standards of this section:
A. Signs Associated With Commercial Uses: Banners, handheld signs, portable signs and other similar temporary advertising devices shall be prohibited,
except for business openings, special events, promotional events and new subdivisions being developed in the city and are subject to the following:
1. A temporary sign permit shall be secured prior to the installation or display of any such sign. Issuance of a temporary sign permit may be contingent
upon the overall permissible area available for temporary signs within a geographic area as identified in subsection A6 of this section. In addition, the
application would be reviewed in light of other temporary sign permit applications submitted for the same area, which may put such signs in conflict
with subsection A6 of this section.
2. A temporary sign permit shall be granted for any one business or building for a period of three (3) calendar months. A temporary sign permit shall
authorize the business to display a banner, handheld sign, portable sign or inflatable sign for the duration of the sign permit. A maximum of two (2)
such signs may be permitted with a single application.
3. No more than one temporary sign permit shall be in effect simultaneously for any business.
4. Each business shall be limited to a maximum of four (4) temporary sign permits in any calendar year. A temporary sign is not intended to be in lieu of
a permanent sign. A temporary sign permit shall not be permitted longer than one year before a permanent sign is installed.
5. Each business shall be limited to a maximum of one temporary sign permit during a "going out of business sale", or the equivalent in any calendar
year.
6. Unless otherwise authorized by a master sign program, freestanding temporary signs for multiple tenants of any one building, shopping center, office
complex, or unified development shall be separated by a minimum of one hundred feet (100').
7. All banners, regardless of their ratio allowance of signage to linear building frontage, shall not exceed forty (40) square feet in size.
8. A-frame signs are not considered temporary and as such do not apply to this section.
9. No temporary sign shall be mounted on or above roofs or mansards or otherwise extend above a parapet wall or ridgeline of a structure.
10. During the period of time beginning sixty (60) days before a general, special, primary or runoff election, and ending fifteen (15) days after such
election, one additional temporary sign may be permitted without a temporary use permit, subject to the following size limitations:
a. Size limitations in a residential zone district: The following size limitations apply:
(1) Four (4) square feet of cumulative signage when located on private property with frontage on a local street as designated in the general plan.
(2) Eight (8) square feet of cumulative signage when located on private property with frontage on an arterial or collector street as designated in the
general plan.
b. Size limitations in a nonresidential zone district: The following size limitations apply:
(1) Sixteen (16) square feet of cumulative signage when located on private property.
(2) Four (4) square feet of cumulative signage when located within the public right of way.
B. Signs Associated With Residential Uses: On residential uses, nonilluminated temporary signs with the size restrictions as specified below may be
displayed at any time. However, during the period of time beginning sixty (60) days before a general, special, primary or runoff election, and ending
fifteen (15) days after such election, the amount of display area may be doubled. Flags do not count toward the signage allowed under this provision.
1. Size Limitations In A Residential Zone District: The following size limitations apply:
a. Four (4) square feet of cumulative signage when located on private property with frontage on a local street as designated in the general plan.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 436/636
b. Eight (8) square feet of cumulative signage when located on private property with frontage on an arterial or collector street as designated in the
general plan.
2. Size Limitations In A Nonresidential Zone District: The following size limitations apply:
a. Sixteen (16) square feet of cumulative signage when located on private property.
b. Four (4) square feet of cumulative signage when located within the public right of way.
3. Violations: Violation to any of the above regulatory conditions shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such; and each
day that such violation continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
C. Subdivision Signs: Developers of a new subdivision being developed in the city may be permitted signs subject to the following requirements:
1. One sign per street frontage with a maximum of three (3) temporary signs may be permitted on the subdivision site in accordance with the following:
a. Maximum Sign Area: The maximum sign area may be no more than one hundred (100) square feet (total of all signs).
b. Height: A maximum of ten feet (10').
c. Duration: Subdivision signs shall be removed twelve (12) months from the date the permit for same is issued, or within one year of the date that
the last building permit was issued for a new house within the subdivision.
d. Letter Of Agreement: A letter of agreement from the property owners giving the city right of entry to remove signs in the event the above
stipulations are not complied with shall be submitted to the zoning administrator prior to the issuance of a sign permit. If at any time the property on
which the signs are located is sold, the signs shall be removed, or a new letter of agreement shall be submitted from the buyer to permit the signs
to remain and granting the city right to enter the property and remove the signs.
2. Up to four (4) off site signs may be permitted in any zone, provided that:
a. Maximum Sign Area: The maximum sign area per sign may be no more than thirty two (32) square feet.
b. Height: A maximum of twelve feet (12').
c. Duration: Said signs shall be removed twelve (12) months from the date the permit for same is issued, or within one year of the date that the last
building permit was issued for a new house within the subdivision.
d. Consent Of Landowner: A completed application form, including a notarized affidavit signed by each property owner of each site, is required prior
to issuance of a sign permit. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.12: PERMITS REQUIRED; REVIEW PROCESS:
A. Authority: Unless otherwise stated, the zoning administrator shall review and approve all signs as specified in this article.
B. Applicability: Except for certain signs exempted in compliance with section 305.05, "Exempt Signs", of this article, no sign shall be erected, reerected,
constructed or altered (excluding change of copy on a can or cabinet sign) without zoning administrator approval and a building permit being issued by
the building division.
C. Applications For Filing, Processing And Review:
1. Applicant: Sign owners or their designees shall apply for building permits for signs that require them.
2. Filing And Filing Fee: Application for such permits shall be made upon forms furnished by the zoning administrator and accompanied by the required
fee and working drawings adequate to show the location, construction and design, including colors, materials, lighting, electrical elements, and
advertising copy of the sign in accordance with applicable sign design guidelines and the linear footage of building frontage owned or leased by the
business.
3. Compliance With Standards:
a. Upon acceptance of a sign application, the zoning administrator shall review the request for compliance with the locational and operational
standards identified in this article and with any standards established in a master sign program pursuant to section 305.13, "Master Sign Program",
of this article.
b. The zoning administrator's decision shall clearly state any conditions of approval or reasons for disapproval and applicable appeal provisions.
D. Appeals: Decisions by the zoning administrator may be appealed subject to the provisions of article 612, "Appeals", of this chapter. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-
2015)
305.13: MASTER SIGN PROGRAM:
A. Purpose: The purpose of a master sign program is to provide a method for an applicant to integrate the design and placement of signs within a project
with the overall development design to achieve a more unified appearance. It is not the intent of this section to be used solely to request relief from the
sign regulations in order to circumvent any requirements or purpose of this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 437/636
B. Applicability: A master sign program may be processed for any development. However, shown below are examples of when a master sign program may
be most appropriate:
1. Nonresidential developments of three (3) or more separate tenants that share either the same parcel or structure and use common access and
parking facilities (e.g., shopping centers, malls, office complexes and industrial parks); or
2. Developments with multiple structures with limited frontage or no frontage on a public street; or
3. Businesses conducted primarily outside of a building; or
4. New multi-family residential developments of one hundred (100) or more units; or
5. Other developments where the strict application of the sign code unduly restricts the allowable signage that can be located on the parcel.
C. Application: Master sign program applications shall contain all written and graphic information needed to fully describe the proposed sign program,
including the proposed location and dimension of each sign, as well as proposed color schemes, font types, materials, methods of attachment or
support, and methods of illumination. A master sign program application shall also include calculation of total allowed sign area, and total proposed
sign area, for the site.
D. Allowable Modifications: A master sign program may provide for additional sign area and other deviations from the standards of this article, provided
that the master sign program is consistent with the sections on design principles and general standards.
E. Review Authority: All master sign programs are subject to review and approval of the zoning administrator, unless the signs are associated with a
project that requires city council review and approval; then the city council shall review and approve it as part of the overall project approval.
F. Required Findings: In order to approve a master sign program, the decision making body shall find that all of the following are met, in addition to other
applicable regulations in this section:
1. The proposed signs are compatible in style and character with any building to which the signs are to be attached, any surrounding structures and
any adjoining signage on the site;
2. Future tenants will be provided with adequate opportunities to construct, erect or maintain a sign for identification;
3. Directional signage and building addressing is adequate for pedestrian and vehicular circulation and emergency vehicle access; and
4. Use of the master sign program provides a more desirable functional and aesthetic appearance than would otherwise be provided by standard code
requirements.
G. Lessees To Be Informed Of Master Sign Program: Lessees within developments subject to the requirements of an approved master sign program shall
be made aware of the master sign program in their lease.
H. Revisions To Master Sign Programs: Revisions to an approved master sign program shall be approved by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-
2015)
305.14: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
A. All legal nonconforming signs are permitted to remain unless they are subject to a permit condition or development agreement providing for their
removal after a fixed period of time.
B. Any changes to legal nonconforming signs or their structures in terms of location, orientation, size, or height other than routine maintenance and repair
or change of sign copy shall require the signs to be brought into conformance with this article.
C. A legal nonconforming sign loses its legal nonconforming status when the activity, product, business, service, or other use which was being advertised
has ceased or vacated the premises for one hundred eighty (180) days, at which time it shall be considered an abandoned sign, subject to the
requirements of subsection 305.07C, "Abandoned Signs", of this article. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
305.15: ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL OF ILLEGAL SIGNS:
A. Authority To Abate: The city has the authority to abate illegal and abandoned signs.
B. Illegal Signs In The Public Right Of Way: Illegal signs posted in the public right of way or upon public property may be removed by the zoning
administrator or officer without notice or hearing. Signs shall be retained by the city for a period of not less than thirty (30) days if identifiable.
Thereafter, any unclaimed signs may be discarded.
C. Recovery Of Costs: When the city is required to remove illegal or abandoned signs in compliance with this article, the reasonable cost of the removal
may be assessed against the owner of the sign(s).
D. Sign Removal:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 438/636
1. Any sign, including its supporting structure, which no longer identifies the current occupant or products currently sold, or which otherwise fails to
serve its original purpose, or is not maintained in a safe, presentable, and good condition, including the replacement of defective parts, painting,
repainting, and cleaning, shall be removed by the owner of the property within thirty (30) calendar days after written notice to do so from the building
division.
2. Any sign which the building division establishes as unsafe or unsecure shall be corrected or removed, together with all supporting structures, by the
owner of the property upon which the sign is located within thirty (30) days after written notice by the building division.
3. Such notice shall state the location of the sign, the nature of the violation, and/or the manner in which the sign constitutes a public nuisance. The
notice also shall require the removal or other abatement of the sign before the date specified in the notice. Further, the notice shall state that failure
to comply may result in the removal of the sign by the city and that the cost of such removal may be imposed on the owner of the property. The
notice shall also include instructions for the filing of an appeal of the determination of the zoning administrator that the sign is in violation of this
article or constitutes a public nuisance. Such notice shall be served by posting on the property on which the sign is located and by registered or
certified mail delivery, postage prepaid, to the owner of the property, and, if known, the owner of the sign.
4. After the periods specified in subsections D1 and D2 of this section, the building division may cause such sign to be removed, and the cost of such
removal shall become a lien against the property.
5. If a hazardous condition exists, the condition shall be corrected forthwith upon notice by the building division.
6. If an appeal is received prior to the date specified in the notice, abatement proceedings shall be suspended, and any deadlines shall be suspended,
pending the outcome of such appeal. (Ord. 1828, 11-3-2015)
ARTICLE 306. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
306.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purposes of this article are to:
A. Establish permissible limits and permit objective measurement of nuisances, hazards, and objectionable conditions;
B. Ensure that all uses will provide necessary control measures to protect the community from nuisances, hazards, and objectionable conditions; and
C. Protect any industry from arbitrary exclusion. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.02: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements in this article apply to all land uses in all zoning districts, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.03: GENERAL STANDARD:
Land or buildings shall not be used or occupied in a manner creating dangerous, injurious, or noxious fire, explosive or other hazard; noise, vibration,
smoke, dust, odor, or form of air pollution; heat, cold, dampness, electrical or other disturbance; glare, refuse, or wastes; or other substances, conditions or
elements which would substantially affect the surrounding area in an adverse manner. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.04: LOCATION OF MEASUREMENT FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE:
Measurements necessary for determining compliance with the standards of this chapter shall be taken at the lot line of the establishment or use that is the
source of a potentially objectionable condition, hazard, or nuisance. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.05: NOISE:
A. General Requirements: No use may generate noise that is in violation of the city's noise standards contained in chapter 18, article IX of the municipal
code or other standards as may be adopted by the city council.
B. Acoustic Study: An acoustic study shall be required for any proposed project which could create or be subject to a noise exposure greater than that
deemed "normally acceptable" by the general plan.
C. Noise Attenuation Measures: Noise attenuation measures necessary to reduce noise impacts to acceptable levels to the extent feasible may be
required to be incorporated into a project in accordance with the following:
1. All new residential development shall achieve interior noise level reductions through sound insulation and other measures to meet the general plan
land use compatibility standards by acoustical design and construction of the structure and building elements.
2. New dwelling units exposed to an exterior DNL above sixty five (65) dB shall incorporate the following noise reduction measures:
a. All facades shall be constructed with substantial weight and insulation;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 439/636
b. Sound rated windows providing noise reduction performance similar to that of the facade shall be included for all exterior entries;
c. Acoustic baffling of vents is required for chimneys, fans, and gable ends; and
d. Installation of a mechanical ventilation system affording comfort under closed window conditions.
3. Sound walls or other attenuation measures designed to reduce noise by a minimum of ten (10) dB in residential areas adjacent to state highways
when additional lanes are added or when new residential development or sensitive receptors would be exposed to noise above sixty five (65) dB.
4. Other measures identified in an acoustic study conducted for the proposed project as necessary to reduce noise levels to "normally acceptable"
levels. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.06: VIBRATION:
No vibration shall be produced that is discernible without the aid of instruments by a reasonable person at the lot lines of the site. Vibrations from
temporary construction, demolition, and vehicles that enter and leave the subject parcel (e.g., construction equipment, trains, trucks, etc.) are exempt from
this standard. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.07: LIGHTING AND GLARE:
Activities, processes, and uses shall be operated in compliance with the following provisions:
A. Mechanical Or Chemical Processes: Light or glare from mechanical or chemical processes, high temperature processes such as combustion or
welding, or from reflective materials on buildings or used or stored on a site, shall be shielded or modified to prevent casting of adverse light or glare
onto other properties.
B. Lighting: Lights shall be placed to deflect light away from adjacent properties and public streets, and to prevent adverse interference with the normal
operation or enjoyment of surrounding properties. Direct or sky reflected glare from floodlights shall not be directed into any other property or street.
Except for public streetlights, no light or combination of lights, or activity shall cast light on a public street exceeding one foot-candle as measured from
the centerline of the street. No light, combination of lights, or activity shall cast light onto a residentially zoned property, or any property containing
residential uses, exceeding one-half (1/2) foot-candle. Refer to section 300.07, "Lighting And Illumination", and subsection 304.10G, "Parking Lot
Lighting", of this series for additional lighting standards required by this code.
C. Glare: No use shall be operated such that significant, direct glare, incidental to the operation of the use is visible beyond the boundaries of the lot where
the use is located. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.08: MAINTENANCE:
Sites and facilities shall be maintained free of refuse, debris, or other accumulated matter and shall be kept in good repair at all times.
A. Walls: Walls shall be maintained in good repair, including painting, if required, and shall be kept free of graffiti, litter, or advertising. Where hedges are
used as screening, trimming or pruning shall be employed as necessary to maintain the maximum allowed height.
B. Signs: Every sign displayed within the city, including exempt signs, shall be maintained in good physical condition. All defective or broken parts shall be
replaced. Exposed surfaces shall be kept clean, in good repair, free from graffiti, and painted where paint is required. The zoning administrator may
order the repair or removal of any sign determined by the city to be unsafe, defective, damaged, or substantially deteriorated.
C. Landscaping: All planting and other landscape elements shall be permanently maintained in good growing condition. Such maintenance shall include,
where appropriate, pruning, mowing, weeding, cleaning, fertilizing, and regular watering. Wherever necessary, plantings shall be replaced with other
plant materials to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements.
D. Trees: Trees shall be maintained by property owners to be free from physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage, accidents,
vandalism, insects and disease. Any tree showing significant damage shall be replaced with another tree.
E. Parking Lots: Parking lots, including landscaped areas, driveways, and loading areas, shall be maintained free of refuse, debris, or other accumulated
matter and shall be kept in good repair at all times. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.09: ODORS:
No use, process, or activity shall produce objectionable odors that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the lot lines of a site.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.10: HEAT AND HUMIDITY:
Uses, activities, and processes shall not produce any emissions of heat or humidity that cause distress, physical discomfort, or injury to a reasonable
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 440/636
person, or interfere with ability to perform work tasks or conduct other customary activities. In no case shall heat emitted by a use cause a temperature
increase in excess of five degrees Fahrenheit (5°F) on another property. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.11: AIR CONTAMINANTS:
Uses, activities, and processes shall not operate in a manner that emits excessive dust, fumes, smoke, or particulate matter.
A. Compliance: Sources of air pollution shall comply with rules identified by the environmental protection agency (code of federal regulations, title 40), the
California air resources board, and the San Joaquin Valley air pollution control district (SJVAPCD).
B. SJVAPCD Permit: Operators of activities, processes, or uses that require "approval to operate" from the SJVAPCD, shall file a copy of the permit with
the planning division within thirty (30) days of permit approval. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.12: LIQUID OR SOLID WASTES:
A. Discharges To Water Or Sewers: Liquids and solids of any kind shall not be discharged, whether directly or indirectly, into a public or private body of
water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California regional water quality control
board (California code of regulations, title 23, division 3 and California Water Code, division 7).
B. Solid Wastes: Solid wastes shall be handled and stored so as to prevent nuisances, health, safety and fire hazards, and to facilitate recycling. There
shall be no accumulation outdoors of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects, unless stored in closed containers. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
306.13: FIRE AND EXPLOSIVE HAZARDS:
All activities, processes and uses involving the use of, or storage of, flammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices
against the hazard of fire and explosion. Firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in industry shall be approved by the fire
department. All incineration is prohibited with the exception of those substances such as, but not limited to, chemicals, insecticides, hospital materials and
waste products, required by law to be disposed of by burning, and those instances wherein the fire department deems it a practical necessity. (Ord. 1801,
12-3-2013)
306.14: HAZARDOUS AND EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS MATERIALS:
The use, handling, storage and transportation of hazardous and extremely hazardous materials shall comply with the provisions of the California
hazardous materials regulations and the California fire and building code, as well as the laws and regulations of the California department of toxic
substances control and the county environmental health agency. Activities, processes, and uses shall not generate or emit any fissionable or radioactive
materials into the atmosphere, a sewage system or onto the ground. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.15: ELECTROMAGNETIC INTERFERENCE:
No use, activity or process shall cause electromagnetic interference with normal radio and television reception in any R district, or with the function of other
electronic equipment beyond the lot line of the site in which it is situated. All uses, activities and processes shall comply with applicable federal
communications commission regulations. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
306.16: RADIOACTIVITY:
No radiation of any kind shall be emitted that is dangerous to humans. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 307. NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND LOTS
307.01: PURPOSE:
The specific purpose of this article is to permit continuation of uses and continued occupancy and maintenance of structures that were legally established
but do not comply with all of the standards and requirements of this chapter in a manner that does not impair public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.02: APPLICABILITY:
These provisions apply to structures, land and uses that have become nonconforming by operation of this chapter and that remain in a nonconforming
status by application of this article, as well as structures, land, and uses that hereafter become nonconforming due to annexation to the city or
amendments to the zoning map or development ordinance text. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 441/636
307.03: ESTABLISHMENT OF LEGAL NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES:
A. Nonconformity: A nonconformity may result from any inconsistency with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, location, density,
height, yard, usable open space, buffering, or performance standards or the lack of a conditional use permit, variance, or other required authorization.
A use or structure shall not be deemed nonconforming solely because it does not conform with the parking dimension standards, loading, planting
area, or screening regulations of the district in which it is located or does not conform to the standards for the following building features: garage door
location; garage door width; chimney height; cornices, eaves, and other ornamental features that exceed maximum projections into required yards; or
bay windows and balconies above the first floor that exceed maximum projections into required yards.
B. Nonconforming Uses And Structures; Right To Continue: Any use or structure that was legally established prior to the effective date hereof or of any
subsequent rezoning or amendment shall be deemed to be in compliance with this chapter and may be continued and maintained indefinitely if it has
remained in continuous existence. The right to continue a nonconforming use or structure shall run with the land. However, no substitution, expansion,
or other change in use and no alteration or other change in structures is permitted, except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.04: CONTINUATION AND MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Legal nonconforming structures may be continued and maintained in compliance with the requirements of this article unless deemed to be a public
nuisance because of health or safety conditions.
A. Maintenance And Nonstructural Repairs: Maintenance, nonstructural repairs and nonstructural interior alterations are permitted to a nonconforming
structure or to a structure occupied by a nonconforming use, so long as the changes and improvements do not enlarge or extend the structure.
B. Structural Repairs: Structural repairs that do not enlarge or extend the structure, including modification or repair of bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders, may be undertaken only when the building official determines that such modification or repair is immediately necessary to protect public health
and safety, occupants of the nonconforming structure, or occupants of adjacent property and when the cost of such work does not exceed fifty percent
(50%) of the higher of the assessed value of the nonconforming structure as determined by the Tulare County assessor or an appraisal performed by a
certified appraiser for the applicant. If an applicant chooses not to submit an appraisal, the Tulare County assessor's determination shall be used. (Ord.
1801, 12-3-2013)
307.05: ALTERATIONS AND ENLARGEMENTS TO NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
Nonconforming structures may be enlarged, extended, structurally altered or repaired as long as the use of the property is conforming, and subject to the
following provisions:
A. Nonconforming Single-Family Dwellings: A single-family dwelling that is nonconforming with respect to one or more required setbacks may be enlarged
or altered, subject to the following standards:
1. Interior Side And Rear Setbacks: Additions or enlargements that maintain a nonconforming interior side or rear yard setback are permitted as long
as the addition does not:
a. Further reduce any nonconforming side or rear setback;
b. Create any new encroachment into any other required setback;
c. Increase the existing height of the portion of the structure that is within the required setback;
d. Result in a violation of applicable standards for building coverage, parking, or usable open space; or
e. Result in a violation of any standard of the building code.
2. Front Setbacks: Additions or enlargements that vertically or horizontally extend a nonconforming front yard setback may be approved based on a
finding that the proposed addition will maintain the average setback of development on the same block front within two hundred feet (200') of the lot.
3. Height: Additions or enlargements that horizontally extend a nonconforming side or rear setback of any portion of a structure that is nonconforming
with respect to height may be approved based on findings that the proposed alteration will not:
a. Substantially interfere with solar access available to surrounding properties;
b. Reduce the privacy of surrounding properties; or
c. Create a structure that is incompatible with the character of surrounding development due to its bulk or form.
B. Nonconforming Parking:
1. Nonresidential Structures: A nonresidential structure that is nonconforming because it does not satisfy the parking requirements of this chapter may
not be expanded unless the parking spaces that are required for the expansion are provided in accordance with applicable provisions of article 304,
"On Site Parking And Loading", of this series.
2. Residential Structures: A residential structure that is nonconforming because two (2) spaces have not been previously required by this chapter may
be altered or expanded with only one covered space, provided that such alterations or expansions of an individual dwelling shall not cumulatively
exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the habitable floor area at the time of the first expansion or alteration.
3. Exception: No residence may be constructed or expanded by more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of additional habitable area without
providing parking in accordance with the applicable provisions of article 304, "On Site Parking And Loading", of this series.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 442/636
C. Nonconforming Lot Coverage: A structure that is nonconforming because it exceeds the maximum allowable lot coverage may be expanded in floor
area only if the expansion does not increase the lot coverage. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.06: CLASSIFICATION OF NONCONFORMING USES:
The city council may classify legally established nonconforming uses for the purpose of determining whether to permit substitution or expansion subject to
the requirements of the following section. The classification of any use or structure shall be optional and shall be based on written application by the
property owner or his/her designee, including such information as may be deemed necessary to determine that the use was legally established and to
make any other findings that may be required.
A. Class I: Class I nonconforming uses are designated by the city council following a public hearing and based on findings that:
1. The existing nonconforming use was legally established;
2. The proposed expansion or substitution of the nonconforming use would not be detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare;
3. The proposed expansion or substitution would not be inconsistent with the general plan and would not preclude or interfere with implementation of
any applicable adopted city plan;
4. The proposed use will not depress the value of nearby properties; and
5. No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions or requirements of this chapter with which the use or structure does not
conform.
B. Class II: Class II nonconforming uses include any legally established nonresidential use that involves the following:
1. Storage, use, or generation of hazardous materials, processes, products, or wastes;
2. Activity that may be detrimental to public health and safety because of the potential to create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gases, odor, smoke,
vibration;
3. Conditions that would be incompatible with surrounding uses; or
4. Any nonconforming sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.07: CHANGES AND SUBSTITUTIONS OF NONCONFORMING USES:
No legal nonconforming use shall be substantially expanded or changed in operation without the approval of a conditional use permit as provided for in this
article. This requirement shall not apply to a change of ownership, tenancy, or management where the new use is in the same classification as the
previous use, as defined in article 701, "Use Classifications", of this chapter, and the use is not expanded.
A. Change From Nonconforming To Permitted Use: Any nonconforming use may be changed to a use that is allowed by right in the zoning district in which
it is located and complies with all applicable standards for such use.
B. Conditional Use Permit To Legalize Use: Any use that is nonconforming solely by reason of the absence of a conditional use permit may be changed to
a conforming use by obtaining the required permit.
C. Change From Nonconforming Use To Other Nonconforming Use: The city council may allow the expansion of a class I nonconforming use, substitution
of a class II nonconforming use with a class I nonconforming use, or substitution of a class I nonconforming use with another class I nonconforming
use, subject to approval of a conditional use permit and the requirements of this article.
1. Within A Structure That Conforms To The Development Ordinance: A class I nonconforming use in a structure that conforms to this chapter and to
the requirements of the building code may expand the floor area that it occupies, subject to conditional use permit approval provided that no
structural alteration is proposed or made for the purpose of the expansion.
a. A nonconforming use may not be expanded to occupy all or a part of another structure or another lot that it did not occupy on the effective date
hereof.
b. The expansion of the nonconforming use shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the area that the nonconforming use legally occupies at the time
of application.
2. Within A Structure That Does Not Conform To The Development Ordinance: A class I nonconforming use in a structure that does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter may expand its occupancy and building floor area subject to the requirements of subsection C1 of this section.
3. Within A Structure That Does Not Conform To The Building Code: Any nonconforming use in a structure that does not conform to the building code
may not expand the area it occupies. A class I nonconforming use may expand the area it occupies subject to conditional use permit approval after
the structure is brought into conformance with all applicable building code requirements.
4. City Council Review: The city council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the procedures established in article 601, "Common Procedures", of
this chapter, on each application for a change or substitution of use. In addition to any other findings that may be required, the city council shall find
that:
a. The proposed new use will be more compatible with the purposes of the district and surrounding uses than the nonconforming use it replaces;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 443/636
b. The proposed new use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort or general welfare of persons residing or working in the
surrounding area or be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements of adjacent properties, the surrounding area, or the neighborhood
because of noise, traffic generation, odors, dust, glare, vibrations, or other effects; and
c. The proposed new use will comply with all applicable standards or there are special circumstances peculiar to the property and its relation to
surrounding uses or to the district itself that would justify modification to applicable standards.
5. Standards For Council Determination: In making its findings and conclusions pursuant to subsection C4 of this section, the city council shall consider
the following factors:
a. Noise;
b. Traffic generation;
c. Hours of operation;
d. Noxious or annoying emissions of odor, smoke, wastewater or other matters;
e. Proximity of the use to conforming uses;
f. Extent and severity of nonconformity;
g. Effect of the nonconforming use on surrounding conforming uses;
h. Character of the surrounding neighborhood, including the number and proportion of nonconforming uses;
i. Access to the nonconforming use;
j. Maintenance of the nonconforming use; and
k. Any other factors the city council deems relevant given the purposes of this article.
6. Conditions: When making its decision on an application for a change or substitution of use, the council may establish conditions that are necessary
to accomplish the purposes of this article, including, but not limited to:
a. Required improvement of, or modifications to existing improvements on, the property;
b. Limitations on hours of operations;
c. Limitations on the nature of operations; and
d. A specified term of years for which the continued nonconforming use shall be allowed.
7. Revocation Of Approved Changes Of Nonconforming Use: The city council may initiate a review of a changed or substituted nonconforming use
upon its own motion, or following a recommendation from the zoning administrator, in accordance with section 601.10, "Revocation Or Modification
Of Approvals", of this chapter, and the following standards and procedures:
a. Initiation Of Revocation Procedure: Initiation of city council review of a nonconforming use approved pursuant to this section shall first require a
report from the zoning administrator based upon the zoning administrator's independent investigation and determination, recommending action by
the council.
b. City Council Review And Decision: The city council shall hold a public hearing, pursuant to the procedures established in article 601, "Common
Procedures", of this chapter. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall determine whether the nonconforming status shall be
revoked and the use discontinued or allowed to continue subject to conditions. In making its determination the council shall base its decision on
the same considerations it used when approving the conditional use permit to allow a change or substitution of a nonconforming use and the
standards in subsection C5 of this section. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.08: RESTORATION OF DAMAGED NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
A. Restoration When Damage Is Less Than Seventy Five Percent Of Value: If a nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is
destroyed by fire or other calamity, to the extent of seventy five percent (75%) or less of the replacement cost, as determined by the building official, the
structure may be restored and the nonconforming use may be resumed, provided that a building permit for restoration is issued within six (6) months
and restoration work is diligently pursued to completion.
B. Restoration When Damage Exceeds Seventy Five Percent Of Value: If any nonconforming structure or a structure containing a nonconforming use is
destroyed by fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God to an extent of seventy five percent (75%) or greater of the replacement cost, as determined
by the building official, then the structure may be restored and used only in compliance with the applicable regulations for the district where it is located,
except as provided below:
1. Exceptions For Residential Structures:
a. Any nonconforming residential use may be reconstructed, restored, or rebuilt up to the size and number of dwelling units prior to the damage and
the nonconforming use, if any, may be resumed unless the city finds that:
(1) The reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding will be detrimental or injurious to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or
working in the neighborhood, or will be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood.
(2) The existing nonconforming use of the building or structure can be more appropriately moved to a zoning district in which the use is permitted,
or that there no longer exists a district in which the existing nonconforming use is permitted.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 444/636
2. Compliance With Building Code: Any reconstruction, restoration, or rebuilding undertaken pursuant to this section shall conform to all applicable
building code requirements.
3. Building Permit: A building permit shall be obtained within two (2) years after the date of the damage or destruction. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.09: CORRECTION OF NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES:
Prior to occupancy of a site or structure that is nonconforming due to lack of one of the following: screening of mechanical equipment; required walls or
fences to screen parking; required paving for driveways; or required landscaping; a schedule for elimination or substantial reduction of these
nonconformities over a period not exceeding five (5) years shall be submitted. Priority may be given to elimination of nonconformities that have a
significant adverse impact on surrounding properties, and shall not require a commitment to remove nonconformities that have a minor impact and would
be costly to eliminate due to the configuration of the site and the location of existing structures. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
307.10: ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USES:
No nonconforming use may be resumed, reestablished, reopened or replaced by any other nonconforming use after it has been abandoned or vacated for
a period of six (6) months, except as provided for in this section. The nonconforming use of a legally established structure may be reestablished if the city
council approves a conditional use permit after making all the following findings in addition to any other required findings. As a condition of approving the
resumption of such nonconforming use, the council may impose a time limit on its duration if necessary in order to make the required findings.
A. The structure cannot be used for any conforming use because of its original design or because of legal structural changes made for a previous
nonconforming use;
B. The structure can be reasonably expected to remain in active use for a period of twenty (20) years without requiring repairs or maintenance in excess of
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement cost of the structure, as defined in this article, within any five (5) year period; and
C. The continuation of the use or structure will not be incompatible with or detrimental to surrounding conforming uses. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
Chapter Series 400
LAND DIVISIONS
ARTICLE 400. GENERAL PROVISIONS
400.01: INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS:
A. Citation And Authority: This series is enacted pursuant to the provisions of division 2 of title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California, referred
to herein as the "subdivision map act".
B. Purpose: Series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter, is adopted to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety, convenience, prosperity
and general welfare. More specifically, this series is adopted in order to achieve the following objectives:
1. To aid in the implementation of the general plan, and elements thereof, as adopted by the city council.
2. To provide lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used.
3. To provide streets of adequate capacity for the anticipated traffic which would utilize them, and to ensure that they are designed to promote a safe
vehicular and pedestrian traffic circulation system.
4. To accommodate new development in a manner which will preserve and enhance the city's living environment.
5. To provide for water supply, sewage disposal, storm drainage, and other utilities and facilities which are required by conditions of an urban
environment.
6. To ensure that the costs of providing rights of way, street improvements, utilities and public areas and facilities needed to service new developments
are borne fairly and equitably by the subdivider, rather than by property owners of the city at large.
C. Scope: Series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter, is enacted for the purpose of regulating subdivision of land in accordance with the subdivision map
act of the state of California, and any future amendments thereto, and repeals all other regulations of the city of Porterville in conflict with this series;
provided, however, that such repeal shall not affect any agreement, contract, or bond executed pursuant to such regulations or any rights of action
accruing thereunder. The regulations contained in this series shall apply to all subdivisions and parcel maps or parts of subdivisions and parcel maps
hereafter made entirely or partially within the city of Porterville. The provisions of this series shall be in addition to and shall be considered as
supplemental to the provisions of the subdivision map act of the state of California, as now in effect or hereinafter amended.
D. Exclusions: These standards shall not apply to those divisions of land excluded by section 66412 of the subdivision map act. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
400.02: GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 445/636
A. City Attorney: The city attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and improvement securities.
B. City Council: The city council shall review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative and final subdivision maps and parcel maps when
the parcel map is in coordination with a discretionary permit and/or multiapplication projects. The city council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval
of final maps and improvement agreements and the acceptance by the city of lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the city
for final maps. The city council shall act as the final appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval or disapproval for parcel
maps.
C. City Engineer Or Public Works Director: The city engineer or public works director shall be responsible for:
1. Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications;
2. Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this series and the subdivision map act and for reporting the
findings together with any recommendations for approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map to the zoning administrator for tentative
subdivision maps and parcel maps.
3. The processing of final maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans, lot
line adjustments, mergers, and certificates of compliance.
4. Examining and stating that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map.
5. The inspection and approval of subdivision improvements.
6. On behalf of the city council, accept the dedication of streets, alleys, including access rights and abutter's rights, drainage easements, elementary
school sites, parks, and other easements and parcels of land intended for public use.
7. The collection of all required deposits and fees.
D. Zoning Administrator: The zoning administrator shall be responsible for design analysis for conformity with the general plan and this chapter; for the
environmental quality of the subdivision design; and for the expedient processing of subdivision maps, parcel maps, and reports, as provided herein.
E. Project Review Committee: The project review committee shall be responsible for reviewing and commenting on preliminary maps that show the
general characteristics of the proposed subdivision.
F. Parcel Map Committee: The parcel map committee shall be the designated advisory agency for parcel map subdivisions and shall have the authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or deny tentative parcel maps. The parcel map committee may impose conditions upon a tentative map, as
appropriate, to determine compliance with general engineering or surveying practices.
G. Subdivider: The subdivider shall prepare maps consistent with the standards contained herein, and design public improvements consistent with the
public improvement standards of the city of Porterville. The subdivider shall process said maps in accordance with the regulations set forth herein.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
400.03: APPEALS:
A. The subdivider or any interested person adversely affected may appeal any decision, determination or requirement of the city engineer, zoning
administrator or parcel map committee consistent with the provisions of article 612, "Appeals", of this chapter.
B. When the parcel map committee has acted on an application for an exception, in accordance with the provisions of this series, any interested person
may appeal to the city clerk pursuant to the procedures and within the time limits set forth in article 612, "Appeals", of this chapter. City council
decisions are final upon adoption of the resolution. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
400.04: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
A. A tentative map or parcel map shall be denied approval or conditional approval in the event any one of the following findings is found to prevail by the
legislative body:
1. That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
2. That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.
3. That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development.
4. That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.
5. That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
6. That the design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems.
7. That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use
of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for
access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subsection shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 446/636
apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to
a legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
400.05: AUTHORITY TO VARY REGULATIONS:
A. Modifications: The parcel map committee/city council, with respect to tentative parcel maps and tentative subdivision maps, respectively, can modify
any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this series as it pertains to lot design, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. Variation
of regulations is applicable when there are natural features such as topographic constraints and soils conditions that may warrant modified standards.
Application for any such modification shall be made in writing by the subdivider in the form of a conditional use permit application, stating fully the
grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the subdivider. Such application shall be filed with the tentative map of the proposed land
division. If in the opinion of the zoning administrator and public works director/city engineer the on and/or off site improvements, phasing and/or type of
improvements necessitate it, a development agreement may be required between the city and the subdivider. In order for the property referred to in the
application to come within the provisions of this section, it shall be necessary that the city council or parcel map committee find the following facts with
respect thereto:
1. There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property that make it impractical to conform to all of the provisions prescribed by this
series provided, however, that no exceptions may be granted to any requirements imposed by the subdivision map act or any other applicable
provision of state law;
2. That the modification is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner;
3. That the granting of the modification will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which such property is
situated;
4. That the exception is appropriate for the proper design and/or function of the subdivision; and
5. That the granting of the exception is consistent with the general plan.
B. Exception To Conditional Use Permit Requirement: As it pertains to tentative parcel maps and tentative subdivision maps, exceptions to regulations
pertaining to lot depth, reverse corner lots, street length and width, and double frontage lots or for minor exceptions as determined by the zoning
administrator, shall be processed with the tentative map and shall not be subject to a conditional use permit per subsection A of this section.
Exceptions from additional subdivision design standards and/or standards pertaining to the lot design within particular zones shall be subject to the
approval of a conditional use permit.
C. Action On Exceptions: In the event that the proposed exceptions represent more than exceptions from lot depth, reverse corner lots, street length and
width, and double frontage lots, the city council shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application for a conditional use permit
pertaining to a tentative map in a public hearing held concurrently with the proposed tentative map. The parcel map committee shall consider the
exceptions not subject to a conditional use permit during the public hearing at which it considers the tentative parcel map. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
400.06: MAPS REQUIRED:
A. General: The necessity for tentative maps, or vesting tentative maps, parcel maps, and final maps shall be governed by the provisions of this series. A
designated remainder lot shall not be counted as a parcel for the purpose of determining whether a parcel or final map is required.
B. Final Map: A tentative or vesting tentative and final map shall be required for all divisions of land creating five (5) or more parcels, five (5) or more
condominiums as defined in section 783 of the state Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five (5) or more parcels, or for the
conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five (5) or more dwelling units, except where:
1. The land before division contains less than five (5) acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and
no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or
2. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or
highway; or
3. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned
for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or
4. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres or is not less than one-fourth (1/4) of a quarter section.
5. The land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision pursuant to section 66418.2 of the subdivision map act.
6. The subdivisions described in subsection B1, B2, B3, B4 or B5 of this section shall require a parcel map.
C. Parcel Map: A tentative map, vesting tentative map, and parcel map shall be required for all divisions of land into four (4) or fewer parcels, and for
divisions of land into five (5) or more parcels that are classified as a parcel map in subsection B of this section, except that a tentative map and parcel
map shall not be required for:
1. Right Of Way Subdivisions: Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right of way of a railroad corporation, defined by section 230 of the Public
Utilities Code that are created by short term leases terminable by either party on not more than thirty (30) days' notice in writing.
2. Conveyances: Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility
for conveyance to the public utility for rights of way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy
necessitates a parcel map.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 447/636
3. Lot Line Adjustments: Lot line adjustments that meet the requirements of section 406.03, "Lot Line Adjustments", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
ARTICLE 401. PRELIMINARY MAP
401.01: FORM OF PRELIMINARY MAP:
A. Prior to the filing of a map, the subdivider shall submit to the zoning administrator an application for project review committee and nine (9) copies of a
preliminary map to indicate the essential characteristics of the subdivision. The preliminary map shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches
(18" x 26"), be legibly drawn, in pencil or ink, and shall use a decimal or an engineer's scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet
(1" = 100') and shall contain the following minimum information:
1. Key map showing adjacent property, subdivisions and roads or streets, proposed street in the subdivision, and other development that would affect
the subdivision.
2. Name and address of the owner of record, subdivider and engineer or surveyor.
3. Date, north point and scale showing the general topography contours and features.
4. Approximate location and widths of proposed and existing street rights of way.
5. Approximate location, average size, and number of lots.
6. Approximate acreage of proposed tract.
7. The intended land use and information on utilities, sanitary sewers, drainage, water and other improvements. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
401.02: PROJECT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
A. The zoning administrator will schedule a meeting of the project review committee, in compliance with section 601.03 of this chapter, with the subdivider
on the preliminary map. The project review committee will make such general recommendations to the subdivider as shall seem proper regarding such
preliminary map and shall recommend consultations by the subdivider with such other public or private agencies as it shall designate. The project
review committee shall furnish written copies of its recommendations to the subdivider and to all other public or private agencies which may be
interested. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 402. TENTATIVE MAPS
402.01: MAP FILING PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Filing: The subdivider shall file with the zoning administrator ten (10) copies, one photo ready master (11 inches x 17 inches maximum) and one copy of
the owner's statement (if not included on the tentative map), all in accordance with the requirement of this series, of each proposed subdivision. Said
tentative map shall be accompanied with filing fees per resolution adopted by the city council. The zoning administrator shall indicate upon all copies of
the tentative map and accompanying data the date of filing, which shall be the date on which all required maps, masters, and accompanying data are
deposited in the office of the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may refuse to accept a tentative map which is inaccurate, illegible,
incomplete, or which fails to comply with the requirements of this series.
B. Department Review And Referral:
1. Determination Of Complete Application: Not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of an application for a tentative map approval, the zoning
administrator shall determine in writing whether such application is complete, and shall immediately transmit such determination to the applicant for
the tentative map. In the event that the application is determined not to be complete, the zoning administrator's determination shall identify those
parts of the application which are complete, and shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete, and shall indicate the manner in
which they can be made complete. The zoning administrator may, in the course of processing the application, request the applicant to clarify, amplify,
correct, or otherwise supplement the information required for the application.
2. Referral: Within ten (10) days of acceptance of a tentative map of a subdivision, the zoning administrator shall transmit the requested number of
copies of such map, together with accompanying data, to such public agencies and utilities as may be concerned. Each of the public agencies and
utilities may, within fifteen (15) days after distribution of the tentative map, forward to the zoning administrator a written report of their findings and
recommendations thereon. The zoning administrator shall prepare a written report on the conformity of the tentative map to the provisions of the
general plan, the development ordinance, and all other applicable requirements of this chapter and other ordinances and regulations of the city of
Porterville. Such public agencies and utilities include, but are not limited to:
a. Public works director/city engineer;
b. Chief building official;
c. Police department;
d. Fire department;
e. Field services manager;
f. Office of intergovernmental management as required by the Government Code;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 448/636
g. Southern California Edison or other affected electric company;
h. The Gas Company or other affected gas company;
i. Telephone company or other affected phone company;
j. Cable TV companies affected;
k. School districts as required by section 66455.7 of the map act;
l. Water supplier that is or may become a public water system as required by section 66455.3 of the map act; and
m. Affected owner of irrigation ditches or canals, and any other public agency or public utility affected by the subdivision.
C. Consideration Of Tentative Maps: The zoning administrator shall prepare a written report on the conformity of the tentative map to the provisions of the
general plan and all other applicable requirements of this and other ordinances and regulations of the city of Porterville. The report shall include a
recommendation for action, including any requirements or conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the map will comply with the general plan and
any applicable city regulations. The public works director/city engineer shall prepare a written report of recommendations on the tentative map in
relation to the public improvement requirements of this chapter and the provisions of the map act.
D. Notification Procedures For Public Hearings: Notice of the time and place of any public hearing shall be given in conformance with the provisions of
section 601.05, "Public Notification", of this chapter.
E. Action: Within the time frames established in the permit streamlining act, the city council shall act on the tentative map for subdivisions and the parcel
map committee shall act on the tentative parcel map, unless an extension is agreed upon by the subdivider as provided for in the permit streamlining
act. If the city council/parcel map committee finds that the proposed map complies with the requirements of this chapter and the map act, it shall
approve the map. If the city council/parcel map committee finds that the proposed map does not meet the requirements of this chapter and the map
act, it shall conditionally approve or disapprove such map.
F. Notice Of Action: Within ten (10) days following the action by the city council or parcel map committee, as appropriate, the zoning administrator shall
transmit a letter containing the record pertaining to such action to the party submitting the tentative map. Upon approval, the tentative shall be so
marked and all conditions of approval and required dedications and improvements clearly specified on or with the map. Copies of the approved
tentative map shall be filed with the zoning administrator and the city engineer. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
402.02: FORM OF MAP AND CONTENT:
A. The subdivider shall cause the tentative map of the land proposed to be subdivided to be prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land
surveyor. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26"). The tentative map shall be legibly drawn, in pencil or ink,
and shall use a decimal or an engineer's scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), or as approved by the zoning
administrator.
The tentative map shall clearly show the following information:
1. The tract name or number, date, north point, scale and sufficient description to define the location and boundaries of the proposed tract.
2. Names, addresses, and phone numbers of record owner(s), subdivider, and engineer or surveyor.
3. Partial legal description (1/4 section, township/range).
4. The tentative map shall include enough sheets to show details at the scale of the map. The number of the sheet and the total number of sheets
comprising the tentative map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.
5. Location, names, present right of way and physical dimension, and approximate grades of adjacent roads, streets, highways or ways, names and
dimensions of abutting subdivisions and properties.
6. The locations, names, widths, and proposed grade of all streets in the proposed subdivision.
7. Radius of each curve (in accordance with section 407.03, "Design And Construction Standards", of this series).
8. Typical cross sections of any nonstandard streets.
9. The outline of any existing buildings and their locations in relation to existing or proposed street and lot lines. The location of existing wells and
sewage disposal facilities and the proposed disposition of same.
10. Contour lines having the following intervals (development within the hillside zone shall comply with article 501, "Hillside Zone (HZ) Overlay District",
of this chapter):
a. One foot (1') contour interval for ground slopes between level and five percent (5%).
b. Five foot (5') contour intervals for ground slopes exceeding five percent (5%).
11. The approximate widths, location and purpose of all existing or proposed easements.
12. Approximate lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot, and each to be numbered.
13. The area of the subdivision in gross area and net area (excluding streets and other proposed public uses).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 449/636
14. Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width, grade and direction of flow of all
watercourses and the location of all floodplain lines.
15. Public areas proposed.
16. City limit lines.
17. Vicinity map showing the proposed subdivision and surrounding streets within one-fourth (1/4) mile radius of the proposed subdivision.
18. Location of trees to remain in place and landscaping proposed to remain in public right of way.
19. Show all proposed dedications and irrevocable offers of dedication on the tentative map or to be made by separate instrument.
20. The location and sizes of existing and proposed utility lines and structures.
21. The elevation of sewers at the proposed connection.
22. Any other drawings, data or information as deemed necessary by the zoning administrator and/or the city engineer.
23. The zoning administrator may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision or existing
documentation demonstrate that a waiver is justified.
B. Owner's Statement And Accompanying Data: Additional information relating to the subdivision which may not practicably be shown on the tentative map
shall be contained in similar supplemental maps or written owner's statement which shall accompany the tentative map and include the following
information. Any information that is engineering in nature shall be provided by a civil engineer.
1. Existing use or uses of the property, present zoning, and general plan designation.
2. Proposed uses of the property indicating respective proportion of the total area of the subdivision represented by each.
3. General outline of proposed water system.
4. Provisions for sanitary sewage disposal and general outline of proposed system.
5. Plan for surface drainage and flood control and general outline of proposed system.
6. Proposed street improvements for sidewalk, curb and gutter, and paving of public ways, as required, indicating approximate location and dimensions
of the proposed system.
7. If developed in increments, maps shall indicate approximate sequence of development.
8. Environmental information form.
9. Additional data and information, including fees, as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental documents pursuant to the
California environmental quality act.
10. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the zoning administrator and/or the city engineer. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
402.03: EXPIRATION OF MAPS AND EXTENSIONS OF TIME:
A. Expiration: When a timely filing is made prior to expiration, subsequent actions of the city council or parcel map committee, as appropriate, including,
but not limited to, processing, approval, and recordation, may lawfully occur after the date of expiration of the tentative map. Delivery to the city
engineer shall be deemed a timely filing for purposes of this section. The effective life of an approved tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map
shall comply with the provisions of sections 66463.5 and 66452.6 of the map act, respectively. The expiration of an approved or conditionally approved
tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map
shall be filed with the city council or parcel map committee, as appropriate, without first processing a new tentative map.
B. Extension: Extensions for tentative parcel maps and tentative subdivision maps may be granted pursuant to the provisions of sections 66463.5 and
66452.6 of the map act, respectively. Upon application of the subdivider, prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map,
the time at which the map expires may be extended by the parcel map committee or by the city council.
1. Request For Extension: Prior to the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, upon receipt of a written application by the
subdivider to extend that map, the map shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days or until the application for the extension is approved,
conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. A written application to extend an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall
be submitted to the zoning administrator prior to expiration of the tentative map, who shall forward such to the city council or parcel map committee,
as appropriate. If the parcel map committee denies a subdivider's application for an extension, the subdivider may appeal, in writing, to the city
council within ten (10) days after the parcel map committee has denied the extension.
2. Consideration Of Extension Request: Consideration of an application for an extension of time shall be limited to the mandatory findings of
significance contained in the original parcel map committee conditions or city council resolution which approved or conditionally approved the
tentative map. If it can be reasonably demonstrated that any one of the original mandatory findings of significance used to justify approval or
conditional approval of the tentative map, as specified in the original resolution has changed to the extent it can be considered a cause for denial,
then such request for extension may be denied.
3. Companion Permits: When a tentative map is approved or conditionally approved in conjunction with a conditional use permit or other discretionary
permit, such permit shall expire at the same time as the tentative map unless the permit states a different expiration date approved by the city
council. Extensions of time of tentative maps approved with companion conditional use permits or other discretionary permits may also include
extensions of time for such companion permits to exceed the maximum appropriate time limit permitted by this section. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 450/636
ARTICLE 403. VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
403.01: VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS GENERALLY:
A. Citation And Authority: This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by chapter 4.5 (commencing with section 66498.1) of division 2 of title 7
of the Government Code of the state of California (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map statute).
B. Purpose: It is the purpose of this article to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting tentative map statute, and to
supplement the provisions of the subdivision map act.
C. Consistency: No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to the vesting tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general
plan and any applicable specific plan, or not permitted by this chapter or other applicable provisions of the municipal code, which were in effect at the
time the vesting tentative map was approved or conditionally approved.
D. Application:
1. Whenever a provision of the map act, as implemented and supplemented by this series, requires the filing of a tentative map, a vesting tentative map
may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof.
2. If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite
to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.
E. Filing And Processing: A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall
be processed in the same manner as set forth in this series for a tentative map, except as hereinafter provided:
1. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map".
2. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider may be required to supply the following information in addition to the requirements set forth
in section 402.02, "Form Of Map And Content", of this series:
a. Height, size, and location of buildings.
b. Geological studies.
c. Architectural plans.
d. Any other studies that are normally deferred to the building permit stage.
F. Expiration: The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the
same extensions established by section 402.03, "Expiration Of Maps And Extensions Of Time", of this series for the expiration of the approval or
conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
403.02: VESTING OF DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS:
A. Review Authority Action:
1. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code section 66474.2. However, if section 66474.2 of the Government Code is
repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial
compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.
2. Notwithstanding subsection A1 of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following
are determined:
a. A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both.
b. The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.
B. Time Limits And Extensions Of Time On Vesting Tentative Maps: The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the
expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided below. If the final map is approved, these rights shall last for the following periods of time:
1. An initial time period of two (2) years. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative
map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.
2. The initial time period set forth in subsection B1 of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete
application for a grading permit or for design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application
is filed.
3. A subdivider may apply for a one year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection B1 of this section expires.
4. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections B1, B2, and B3 of this
section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that period, or any extension of that permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 451/636
C. Development Inconsistent With Zoning; Conditional Approval:
1. Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with this chapter, that
inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider/applicant
obtaining the necessary change in this chapter to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in this chapter is obtained, the approved or conditionally
approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding subsection A1 of this section, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in
substantial compliance with the change in this chapter and the map, as approved.
2. The rights conferred by this subsection shall be for the time periods set forth in subsection B of this section.
D. Applications Inconsistent With Current Policies: Notwithstanding any provision of this section, the applicant may seek approvals or permits for
development which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards and local agencies may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the
extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 404. FINAL MAPS
404.01: FILING FINAL MAP:
A. Within the time limit designated in section 402.03, "Expiration Of Maps And Extensions Of Time", of this series and upon the accomplishment of all
dedication by certification on the map and required construction of all public improvements, or the execution of an agreement and provision of surety
providing therefor and the payment of all applicable fees and charges, the applicant may file with the city engineer, who shall approve, a final map
which shall substantially conform to the approved tentative map and all applicable provisions of the map act. The appropriate statements as provided
by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of the map act, shall be signed by the city engineer upon the final map; and the final map shall be
transmitted to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder.
1. Multiple Final Maps: Multiple final maps shall be filed if the subdivider informs the zoning administrator in writing of his or her intention to file multiple
final maps, at the time the tentative map is filed or, if the zoning administrator and the subdivider concur to the filing of multiple final maps after the
filing of the tentative map.
2. Effect Of Multiple Final Maps: The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any
part of the requirements to provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole
subdivision.
B. The subdivider shall file the original and three (3) copies of the final map and required accompanying data with the city engineer. The said final map
shall be accompanied by filing fees as specified in the comprehensive fee schedule. When a final map is submitted to the city engineer in accordance
with this series, it shall be accompanied by the following documents:
1. Improvement Plans: The original tracings of detailed plans, cross sections and profiles of all improvements proposed to be installed as required by
the provisions of this series, and of all other improvements proposed to be installed by the subdivider in, on, over, or under any street, right of way,
easement or parcel of land dedicated by the map or previously dedicated, including the estimated cost thereof, shall be filed with the city engineer or
public works director for his approval and signature. All such plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer or
public works director. Plan sheets shall be twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") and a plan and profile drawn to a scale of one inch
equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), or an appropriate scale previously approved by the city engineer.
2. Traverse Sheets: Calculation and traverse sheets in a form approved by the city engineer giving bearings and distances, coordinates, error of
closure and areas within the boundary of the subdivision and blocks and lots therein shown on the final map.
3. Design Data: Design data, assumptions and computations for proper analysis in accordance with sound engineering practice.
4. Report And Guarantee Of Title: The final map shall be accompanied by a current (within 6 months of the final map filing date) report prepared by a
duly authorized title company naming the persons whose consent is necessary for the preparation and recordation of such map, and for dedication of
the streets, alleys and other public places shown on the map and certifying that, as of the date of the preparation of the report, the persons wherein
named are all the persons necessary to give clear title to such subdivision. At the time of recording said map, following approval by the city council,
there shall be filed with the county recorder a guarantee executed by a duly authorized title company for the benefit and protection of the city
showing that the persons consenting to the preparation and recordation of such map and offering for dedication the streets, alleys and other public
places shown thereon are all the persons necessary to pass clear title to such subdivision and to the dedications shown thereon. The report should
also include a statement of explanation of why any right of way or easement holders across the subdivision need not sign the map if they are not
included as needed to pass a clear title.
5. Preliminary Soils Report: A preliminary soil report prepared by a civil engineer registered by the state of California, based upon adequate test
borings or excavations. The fact that a soil report has been prepared shall be kept on file for public inspection by the city. The preliminary soil report
may be waived by the city engineer or public works director if adequate existing data is available as to the soil qualities of the soils of the subdivision.
If the preliminary soil report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural
defects, a soil investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required, prepared by a civil engineer registered by the state of California. The soil
investigation shall recommend corrective action intended to prevent structural damage to each dwelling proposed to be constructed on expansive or
unstable soil. The report shall be filed with the building department. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of naturally occurring
asbestos, a construction dust management plan shall be prepared.
6. Utility Statements: Statements from the various public utility companies authorized to serve in the area of the subdivision or division of land certifying
that satisfactory provisions have been made to accommodate their facilities.
7. Improvement Agreements: With final review; all agreements, improvement security required by state law or this chapter, and offer(s) of dedication.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
404.02: FORM OF MAP AND CONTENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 452/636
A. Final Map Preparation: The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer authorized to practice land surveying or
licensed land surveyor, shall be based upon a survey, and shall conform to all of the following provisions:
1. It shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film.
Statements, certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on
polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.
2. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26") or four hundred sixty by six hundred sixty millimeters
(460 x 660 mm). A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch (1") or twenty five
millimeters (25 mm). The scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end.
The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each
adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.
3. All survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior
boundary lines appearing on the map shall be shown, including bearings and distances of straight lines, and radii and arc length or chord bearings
and length for all curves and any information which may be necessary to determine the location of the centers of curves and ties to existing
monuments used to establish and subdivision boundaries.
4. Each lot shall be numbered. Each street shall be named or otherwise designated. The subdivision name/number shall be shown together with the
description of the real property being subdivided.
5. Exterior boundary of the land included within the subdivision shall be indicated by distinctive symbols and clearly so designated. The map shall show
the definite location of the subdivision, and particularly its relation to surrounding surveys. If the map includes a "designated remainder" parcel, and
the gross area of the "designated remainder" parcel or similar parcel is five (5) acres or more, that remainder parcel need not be indicated as a
matter of survey, but only by deed reference to the existing boundaries of the remainder parcel. A parcel designated as "not a part" shall be deemed
to be a "designated remainder" for purposes of this section.
6. On and after January 1, 1987, no additional requirements shall be included that do not affect record title interests. However, the map shall contain a
notation or reference to additional information required by a local ordinance adopted pursuant to section 66434.2.
7. Any public streets or public easements to be left in effect after the subdivision shall be adequately delineated on the map. The filing of the final map
shall constitute abandonment of all public streets and public easements not shown on the map, provided that a written notation of each abandonment
is listed by reference to the recording data or other official record creating these public streets or public easements and certified to on the map by the
clerk of the legislative body or the designee of the legislative body approving the map. Before a public easement vested in another public entity may
be abandoned pursuant to this section, that public entity shall receive notice of the proposed abandonment. No public easement vested in another
public entity shall be abandoned pursuant to this section if that public entity objects to the proposed abandonment.
B. Survey Requirement: At the time of making a survey for final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with city
standards so that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one exterior boundary line of the land being subdivided be
adequately monumented or referenced before the map is recorded.
1. The monuments shall be approved by the city engineer and shall be per city standards. Any monument or bench mark, as required by this section,
which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements shall be replaced by the subdivider. The monuments shall be set at each
corner and angle point in the exterior and interior boundaries (lot corners) of the subdivision, except wherein such monuments already exist in their
proper positions. Monuments shall be set on street and alley centerlines or offsets thereto at all street intersections, beginnings and end of curves,
angle points or as otherwise directed by the city engineer.
2. Interior monuments need not be set at the time the map is recorded, if the engineer or surveyor certifies on the map that monuments will be set on or
before a specified date, and if the subdivider furnishes to the city security guaranteeing payment of the cost of setting such monuments in
accordance with section 66496 of the map act.
3. Within five (5) days after the final setting of monuments has been completed, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the subdivider and
to the city engineer that the final monuments have been set in accordance with section 66497 of the map act.
C. Statements And Acknowledgment: The title sheet of the map, below the title, shall show the name of the engineer or surveyor together with the date of
the survey, the scale of the map and the number of sheets. The following statements, certificates, acknowledgments and description shall appear on
the title sheet of final maps, and such statements may be combined where appropriate:
1. Statement By Parties Holding Title: A statement in accordance with the provisions of sections 66436 and 66445 of the map act.
2. Dedication Statement: A statement in accordance with section 66439 of the map act.
3. Engineer's Or Surveyor's Statement: A statement in accordance with section 66441 of the map act.
4. Soil Engineer's Statement: A statement referring to preliminary soils reports on file with the city in accordance with section 66434.5 of the map act.
5. Statement To Be Executed: A statement for execution by each of the following, as applicable:
a. City engineer;
b. Surveyor;
c. Soil engineer;
d. Zoning administrator;
e. City council;
f. City clerk;
g. County board of supervisors;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 453/636
h. County recorder;
i. Owner.
6. Notation Or Reference: Notation or reference to survey and map information required pursuant to section 66434.2 of the map act.
D. Information On Final Maps:
1. Each parcel shall be consecutively numbered. Each parcel shall have its area shown to the nearest one-hundredth (1/100) of an acre or nearest
square foot. The exterior boundary of the land included within the parcel or parcels being created shall be indicated by a distinctive border applied to
the reverse side of the tracings. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data. The map shall show the definite location of
such parcel or parcels, and particularly the relationship to existing surveys.
2. The final map shall also contain the following information:
a. The tentative map number or vesting tentative map number, resolution number and date of preparation, printed on the upper right hand corner of
the face sheet.
b. The net dimensions of each lot. No ditto marks shall be used.
c. The names, locations and right of way widths of all abutting public streets.
d. The proposed location, purpose and width of all proposed public roads and private access easements.
e. The boundaries of any private easement, whether an easement or record or a prescriptive easement, shall be shown by means of a dotted line;
and the name of the person owning the easement shall be shown on the map.
f. Location and widths of easements for public utilities, if required.
g. The location and widths of watercourses and areas subject to inundation, and location of selected flood lines within the parcels being created.
h. Building setback lines, if applicable.
i. A north point and graphic scale.
j. Location or vicinity map at a minimum scale of one inch equals one mile (1" = 1 mile).
k. Names and addresses of the owners of the property being divided. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
404.03: APPROVALS:
A. Approval By City Engineer: Upon receipt of the final map and other data submitted therewith, the city engineer shall examine such to determine that the
subdivision as shown is substantially the same as it appeared on the tentative map, and any approved alterations thereof, that all provisions of this
series or any other ordinance and the map act applicable at the time the application for the tentative map is deemed complete, and that he is satisfied
that the map is technically correct. If the city engineer shall determine the final map is not in full conformity with the tentative map, he shall advise the
subdivider of the changes or additions that must be made for such purposes, and shall afford the subdivider an opportunity to make such changes or
additions. If the city engineer determines that full conformity therewith has been made, he shall transmit said map to the city council for approval in the
case of a final map.
B. City Council Approval; Final Map:
1. The city council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the final map for approval, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it
received the map, approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of this series and the map act applicable at the time of approval or
conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder.
2. The council may reject any or all offers of dedication. In the event that all improvements required or conditions imposed upon approval under the
terms of this series or by law are not completed before the filing of the final map, the council may enter into an agreement with the subdivider for
posting improvement security as provided in this series. The city engineer, upon the approval of the final map by the city council, shall transmit the
map to the clerk of the board of supervisors, who shall record same. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 405. PARCEL MAPS
405.01: FILING:
A. Ten (10) copies of the tentative parcel map and one photo ready master (11 inches x 17 inches maximum) shall be filed with the zoning administrator.
B. The tentative parcel map shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by city council resolution.
C. The zoning administrator may refuse to accept a tentative parcel map which is inaccurate, illegible, incomplete, or which fails to comply with the
requirements of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
405.02: FORM AND CONTENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 454/636
A. Form: The subdivider shall cause the tentative parcel map of the land proposed to be subdivided to be prepared by a registered civil engineer
authorized to practice surveying or licensed land surveyor. The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26"). The
tentative parcel map shall be legibly drawn, in pencil or ink, and shall use a decimal or an engineer's scale of not less than one inch equals one
hundred feet (1" = 100'), unless the zoning administrator determines that a different scale will be adequate and appropriate for the tentative parcel map.
B. Content: The tentative parcel map shall clearly show the following information:
1. A key map showing the location of the subject property, adjacent property, subdivisions, streets or roads and other development which would affect
the tentative parcel map.
2. Names, addresses, and phone numbers of record owner(s), subdivider, and engineer or surveyor.
3. Partial legal description (1/4 section, township/range).
4. The tentative parcel map shall include enough sheets to show details at the scale of the map. The number of the sheet and the total number of
sheets comprising the tentative parcel map shall be stated on each of the sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.
5. Location, names, present right of way and physical dimension, and approximate grades of adjacent roads, streets, highways or ways, names and
dimensions of abutting subdivisions and properties.
6. The locations, names, widths, and proposed grade of all streets in the proposed subdivision.
7. Radius of each curve (in accordance with section 407.03, "Design And Construction Standards", of this series).
8. Typical cross sections of any nonstandard streets.
9. The outline of any existing buildings and their locations in relation to existing or proposed street and lot lines. The location of existing wells and
sewage disposal facilities and the proposed disposition of same.
10. Contour lines shall have the following intervals (development within the hillside zone shall comply with article 501, "Hillside Zone (HZ) Overlay
District", of this chapter):
a. One foot (1') contour interval for ground slopes between level and five percent (5%).
b. Five foot (5') contour intervals for ground slopes exceeding five percent (5%).
11. The approximate widths, location and purpose of all existing or proposed easements.
12. Approximate lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot, and each to be numbered.
13. The area of the subdivision in gross area and net area (excluding streets and other proposed public uses).
14. Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and the location, width, grade and direction of flow of all
watercourses and the location of all floodplain lines.
15. City limit lines.
16. Vicinity map showing the proposed subdivision and surrounding streets within one-fourth (1/4) mile radius of the proposed subdivision.
17. Location of trees to remain in place and landscaping proposed to remain in public right of way.
18. Show all proposed dedications and irrevocable offers of dedication on the parcel map or to be made by separate instrument.
19. The location and sizes of existing and proposed utility lines and structures.
20. The elevation of sewers at the proposed connection.
C. Owner's Statement And Accompanying Data: Additional information relating to the subdivision which may not practicably be shown on the tentative
parcel map shall be contained in similar supplemental maps or written owner's statement which shall accompany the tentative parcel map and include
the following information:
1. Existing use or uses of the property, present zoning, and general plan designation.
2. Proposed uses of the property indicating respective proportion of the total area of the subdivision represented by each.
3. General outline of proposed water system.
4. Provisions for sanitary sewage disposal and general outline of proposed system.
5. Plan for surface drainage and flood control and general outline of proposed system.
6. Proposed street improvements for sidewalk, curb and gutter, and paving of public ways, as required, indicating approximate location and dimensions
of the proposed system.
7. Environmental information form.
8. Additional data and information, including fees, as may be required for the preparation and processing of environmental documents pursuant to the
California environmental quality act.
9. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the zoning administrator and/or the city engineer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 455/636
D. Transmittal Of Maps To Public Agencies And Utilities:
1. When the tentative parcel map is received and filed under the provisions of this chapter, the zoning administrator shall, within ten (10) days
thereafter, transmit the tentative parcel map to each of the following:
a. Public works director/city engineer;
b. Chief building official;
c. Police department;
d. Fire department;
e. Field services manager;
f. Office of intergovernmental management as required by the Government Code;
g. Southern California Edison or other affected electric company;
h. The Gas Company or other affected gas company;
i. Telephone company or other affected phone company;
j. Cable TV companies affected;
k. School districts as required by section 66455.7 of the map act;
l. Water supplier that is or may become a public water system as required by section 66455.3 of the map act; and
m. Affected owner of irrigation ditches or canals, and any other public agency or public utility affected by the subdivision.
2. Such public utility companies and public utilities shall review the parcel map and transmit any report or recommendations thereon to the zoning
administrator who shall incorporate them into the report and recommendations to the advisory agency.
3. The departments of the city to which the map is transmitted shall file with the zoning administrator within ten (10) days of receipt thereof its approval
thereof or a report showing what changes are necessary to make such map conform to the requirements of this chapter and the map act coming
within the jurisdiction of such department.
E. Consideration Of Tentative Parcel Maps: Not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the zoning administrator has received an application for a tentative
parcel map approval, the zoning administrator shall determine in writing whether such application is complete, and shall immediately transmit such
determination to the applicant for the tentative parcel map. In the event that the application is determined not to be complete, the zoning administrator's
determination shall specify those parts of the application which are complete and shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and
shall indicate the manner in which they can be made complete. The zoning administrator may, in the course of processing the application, request the
applicant to clarify, amplify, correct, or otherwise supplement the information required for the application.
1. The parcel map committee shall review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative parcel map within thirty (30) days after the
date of acceptance of a complete application by the zoning administrator. Notice of the time and place of any public hearing shall be given in
conformance with the provisions of section 601.05, "Public Notification", of this chapter.
2. If the parcel map committee determines that the tentative parcel map complies with all of the provisions of this article, general plan, zoning
ordinance, and the map act, it shall approve the map.
3. If the tentative parcel map fails to meet one or more requirements set forth in this article, the parcel map committee may approve the map subject to
such conditions as may be necessary to conform to such requirements.
4. When approving or conditionally approving the tentative parcel map, the parcel map committee shall specify the dedications and improvements to be
made by the owner.
5. Within seven (7) days after the action by the parcel map committee, written notice of the action by the parcel map committee shall be mailed to the
applicant.
6. Upon approval of the tentative parcel map by the parcel map committee, the tentative parcel map shall be so marked and all conditions of approval
and required dedications and improvements clearly specified on or with the map. Copies of the approved tentative parcel map shall be filed with the
zoning administrator and the city engineer.
F. Appeals: Tentative parcel map decisions by the parcel map committee are subject to the provisions of section 400.03, "Appeals", of this series.
G. Time Limits And Extensions Of Time On Tentative Parcel Maps: Findings, time limits and extensions of time for tentative parcel maps shall be the same
as provided for by section 402.03, "Expiration Of Maps And Extensions Of Time", of this series.
H. Improvements: Pursuant to the provisions of the map act, the subdivider shall install, construct and/or provide all on or off site improvements as
required by the parcel map committee; and such improvements shall be in conformance with all applicable provisions of section 407.02,
"Improvements", of this series.
I. Right Of Way Dedications: Pursuant to the map act, the subdivider shall provide such dedication of right of way or easements as may be required by the
parcel map committee.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 456/636
J. Final Parcel Maps: Within the time limit designated in section 402.03, "Expiration Of Maps And Extensions Of Time", of this series, and upon the
accomplishment of all dedication by certification on the map and required construction of all public improvements, or the execution of an agreement
and provision of surety providing therefor and the payment of all applicable fees and charges, the applicant may file with the city engineer, who shall
approve, a final parcel map which shall substantially conform to the approved tentative parcel map and all applicable provisions of the map act. The
appropriate statements as provided by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of the map act, shall be signed by the city engineer upon the
parcel map; and the final parcel map shall be transmitted to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder.
K. Survey Requirement: In all cases where a parcel map is required, the parcel map shall be based on a field survey of the land conducted in accordance
with the land surveyor's act of the state of California. All new lot corners shall be monumented and based on a field survey. At the discretion of the city
engineer, a parcel map may be compiled from recorded or filed data when sufficient recorded or filed survey monumentation presently exists to enable
to retracement of the exterior boundary lines of the parcel map and the establishment of the interior parcel or lot lines of the parcel map. (Ord. 1801,
12-3-2013)
405.03: FINAL PARCEL MAP:
A. Information On Final Parcel Map: Each parcel shall be consecutively numbered. Each parcel shall have its area shown to the nearest one-hundredth
(1/100) of an acre or nearest square foot. The exterior boundary of the land included within the parcel or parcels being created shall be indicated by a
distinctive border applied to the reverse side of the tracings. Such border shall not interfere with the legibility of figures or other data. The map shall
show the definite location of such parcel or parcels, and particularly the relationship to existing surveys.
B. Content: The final parcel map shall also contain the following information:
1. The tentative parcel map number or vesting parcel map number, resolution number, and date of preparation, printed on the upper right hand corner
of the face sheet.
2. The net dimensions of each lot. No ditto marks shall be used.
3. The names, locations and right of way widths of all abutting public streets.
4. The proposed location, purpose, and width of all proposed public roads and private access easements.
5. The boundaries of any private easement, whether an easement or record or a prescriptive easement, shall be shown by means of a dotted line; and
the name of the person owning the easement shall be shown on the map.
6. Location and widths of easements for public utilities, if required.
7. The location and widths of watercourses and areas subject to inundation, and location of selected flood lines within the parcels being created.
8. Building setback lines, if applicable.
9. A north point and graphic scale.
10. Location of vicinity map at a minimum scale of one inch equals one mile (1" = 1 mile).
11. Names and addresses of the owners of the property being divided.
C. Required Statements:
1. All required dedications of rights of way or easements shall be certified on the final parcel map by appropriate statements in accordance with section
66447 of the map act.
2. All parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided shall sign a statement on the final parcel map in accordance with sections
66436 and 66445 of the map act.
3. A statement of the registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor who prepared the survey and the parcel map in compliance with section 66449
of the map act.
4. A statement of execution by the city engineer which complies with section 66450 of the map act.
5. A statement of execution by the zoning administrator on behalf of the parcel map committee certifying that the final parcel map conforms to the
approved tentative parcel map.
6. Additional information to be filed or recorded with the final parcel map as required in accordance with section 66434.2 of the map act. (Ord. 1801,
12-3-2013)
405.04: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS FOR PARCEL MAPS:
A. The requirement for a parcel map may be waived if a finding is made by the parcel map committee that the proposed division of land complies with all
requirements of this chapter as to area, improvement and design, drainage control, street dedications and improvements, sewer and water supply
availability and environmental protection. No parcel map will be required for tentative maps approved under this section.
B. Approval of an application for a waiver of the requirement of a parcel map shall automatically constitute approval for the issuance of a certificate of
compliance pursuant to the provisions of section 66499.35 of the map act. When approval has been given to an application for a waiver of the
requirement of a parcel map, the zoning administrator and city engineer shall issue a resolution approving the waived parcel map, and shall cause said
resolution to be filed with the county recorder. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 457/636
ARTICLE 406. REVERSIONS, MERGERS, AND LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
406.01: REVERSION TO ACREAGE:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish procedures and standards, consistent with the requirements of the subdivision map act, for the
reversion of previously subdivided property to acreage.
B. Initiation Of Proceedings: Proceedings for reversion to acreage may be initiated by the parcel map committee on its own motion or by petition of all of
the owners of record of the real property within the subdivision.
C. Contents Of Petition: The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the zoning administrator and shall contain the following:
1. Adequate evidence of title to the real property within the subdivision.
2. Sufficient data to enable the legislative body to make all of the determinations and findings required by this series, including a three hundred foot
(300') radius map and property owners list.
3. A final map which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications which are a condition to reversion if applicable and which
sufficiently describes all property to be reverted to acreage.
4. Such other pertinent information as may be required by the zoning administrator and city engineer.
D. Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held on the proposed reversion to acreage. Notice of the time and place of any public hearing shall be given in
conformance with the provisions of section 601.05, "Public Notification", of this chapter.
E. Required Findings: Subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage and a final map approved for recordation only if the parcel map committee
finds that:
1. Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes if applicable. Such determination regarding dedicated public streets shall be made by the city council in accordance with division 9, part 3
of the Streets And Highways Code of the state of California.
2. Either:
a. All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion; or
b. None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two (2) years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or
within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is the later; or
c. No lots shown on the final map or parcel map have been sold within five (5) years from the date such map was filed for record.
F. Conditions Of Approval: As conditions of reversion, the following shall be required:
1. Dedications or offers of dedication necessary for the purposes specified by city ordinance following reversion.
2. Retention of all previously paid fees if necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter adopted pursuant thereto.
3. Retention of any portion of required improvement security or deposits if necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter adopted pursuant
thereto.
G. Effective Date: Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder, and thereupon all dedications and offers of
dedication not shown thereon shall be of no further force or effect.
H. Deposits And Securities: When a reversion is effective, all fees and deposits shall be returned and all improvement security released, except those
retained pursuant to applicable city ordinance, including the stipulations of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
406.02: MERGERS:
A. Required Mergers: Two (2) or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of the map act or any prior law
regulating the division of land or a local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, or which were not subject to such provisions at the time of their creation,
shall not merge simply by virtue of the fact such contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner. No further proceeding under the provisions of
the map act or this series enacted pursuant thereto shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing of such contiguous parcels or units,
except, however, the city may provide for the merger of a parcel or unit with a contiguous parcel or unit held by the same owner if all of the following
requirements are satisfied:
1. At least one of the affected parcels is not developed with a structure, other than an accessory structure, for which a building permit was issued by
the local agency, or which was built prior to the time such permits were required by the local agency.
2. With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:
a. Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger.
b. Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 458/636
c. Does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply.
d. Does not meet slope stability standards.
e. Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability.
f. Its development would create health or safety hazards.
g. Is inconsistent with the applicable general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.
B. City Initiation Merger; Notification Of Intention To Merge: Prior to recording a notice of merger, the zoning administrator shall cause to be mailed by
certified mail to the current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be
merged pursuant to standards specified in the merger ordinance, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of
status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be
filed for record with the Tulare County recorder on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner.
1. Request For Hearing: At any time within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected
property may file with the zoning administrator a request for a hearing on determination of status.
2. Procedure For Hearing: Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status, the zoning administrator shall fix a time, date and place
for a hearing to be conducted by the city council, and shall so notify the property owner by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not less
than thirty (30) days following the receipt of the property owner's request therefor, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the
zoning administrator and the property owner.
3. Procedure For Determination Following Hearing: At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the
affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in the merger ordinance. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall
make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. A
determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in subsections B1 and B2 of
this section. A determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing.
4. Determination When No Hearing Is Requested: If, within the thirty (30) day period specified in subsection B1 of this section, the owner does not file a
request for a hearing, the zoning administrator may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are
not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded with the Tulare County recorder which specifies the names of the property owners
and particularly describes the real property in question no later than ninety (90) days following the mailing of the notice required by subsection B2 of
this section.
5. Notice Of Intention For Nonmerger: If, in accordance with subsection B3 or B4 of this section, the zoning administrator or city council determines that
the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded a release of the notice of intention to determine status, and shall mail a
clearance letter to the current owner of record.
C. Property Owner Initiated Merger Of Contiguous Parcels: Pursuant to Government Code section 66499.203/4, a property owner owning contiguous
parcels is authorized to merge those contiguous legal parcels without requiring the property to be reverted to acreage. Such merger shall be
accomplished in accordance with the following procedures:
1. The property owner shall file an application for merger with the zoning administrator, submit evidence of title to all parcels to be affected, submit a
proposed certificate of compliance, and pay the processing fee established by resolution of the city council. Mergers shall be in the form and contain
the information required of a tentative map together with a legal description of the merged parcel.
a. The zoning administrator and city engineer shall consider and approve the application if it is found that the parcel created by the merger will
conform to the requirements of this chapter and applicable state law.
b. The merger shall be evidenced by recording a certificate of compliance which lists the parcel numbers affected and is signed by the zoning
administrator and city engineer. The certificate of compliance shall be recorded concurrently with any deed of easement regarding the relocation or
elimination of applicable easements. The certificate of compliance shall be recorded against each parcel that is merged.
D. Certificate Of Compliance:
1. Any person owning real property may request, and the zoning administrator shall determine, whether such real property complies with the provisions
of the map act and of this series. Upon making such a determination, the zoning administrator shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for
record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with
applicable provisions of the map act and of this series. The zoning administrator may impose a reasonable fee to cover the cost of issuing and
recording the certificate of compliance.
2. If the zoning administrator determines that such real property does not comply with the provisions of the map act or of this series, he may, as a
condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the
current owner of record acquired the property and which had been established at such time by the map act or this series. Upon making such a
determination and establishing such conditions, the zoning administrator shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with
the county recorder. Such certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate pursuant to this section, a grantee
of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be
required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with such conditions shall
not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the city. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
406.03: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
A. Procedures: Pursuant to Government Code section 66412(d), a lot line adjustment between four (4) or fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land
taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, may be
approved by the city engineer and zoning administrator or authorized representatives without the approval and filing of a parcel map. Such lot line
adjustments shall be accomplished in accordance with the following procedures:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 459/636
1. Applications for lot line adjustments shall be filed with the zoning administrator and shall be in the form and contain the information required of a
tentative map together with legal descriptions of each parcel.
2. The property owner(s) or agent shall file an application for a lot line adjustment with the city, submit evidence of title to all parcels to be affected,
submit a proposed lot line adjustment map and legal description, and pay the processing fee established by resolution of the city council.
3. The zoning administrator and city engineer shall consider and approve the application if it is found that the parcels created by the lot line adjustment
will conform to the requirements of this chapter and applicable state law. Criteria to be considered includes, but is not limited to, standards relating to
lot width and depth and minimum lot area.
4. The lot line adjustment shall be evidenced by recording a deed describing each affected parcel and a city resolution signed by the zoning
administrator and city engineer. The deed and resolution shall be recorded concurrently with any easement deed regarding the relocation or
elimination of applicable easements.
B. Conditions: The city engineer shall not impose any conditions on the approval of a lot line adjustment except to comply with the requirements of
subsection A of this section. Any improvements that are required to be installed or constructed shall be constructed pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 407. DEDICATIONS, RESERVATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
407.01: DEDICATIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this article is to establish the dedications and reservations that the city may impose on a subdivider as a condition for approval
of a tentative map.
B. Required Dedications: When required as a condition for approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of
dedication of land within the subdivision that is needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage easements, elementary
school sites, parks, and other easements and parcels of land intended for public use according to the standards listed below. In addition, the subdivider
shall improve or agree to improve all streets and alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public
easements.
1. Streets: The subdivider shall dedicate land for streets according to adopted city standards. Partial streets shall be discouraged in developments
except in those situations where warranted and when approved by the city engineer in accordance with the following:
a. Where a full pavement street is constructed along the perimeter of a subdivision, the subdivider shall be compensated for this construction by
reimbursement agreement between the subdivider, the city and the adjoining property owner when development occurs on his property.
b. Where a partial street configuration is allowed, the outside edge shall be a thickened design approved by the city engineer, and when the other
portion of the street is constructed by development, the subdivider shall be required to overlay the existing partial street with pavement (making for
a smooth transition at the center and a smoother traveled way). No parking signs shall be posted by the subdivider if there are no lots fronting on
the partial street.
c. When there are lots fronting on the partial street the dedication and improvement shall be wide enough to permit two (2) lanes of traffic and on
street parking on one side.
2. Waiver Of Direct Access Right: The city engineer or public works director may require that offers of dedication of streets include a waiver of direct
access rights from any property shown on the final map as abutting thereon.
3. Public Easements: The subdivider shall dedicate easements of at least ten feet (10') in width for public utility, sanitary sewer and drainage purposes
on each side of rear lot lines, along side lot lines, and in planting strips wherever necessary. Easements of different width may be required, based on
the public works director's determination.
4. Drainage Facilities: In accordance with Government Code section 66483, the city, as appropriate and as permitted by law, shall require payment of
fees for purposes of defraying the costs of constructing planned drainage facilities if any part of the land division is located within a planned drainage
area. If the subdivider installs planned drainage facilities, fees shall be reduced accordingly. Fees required pursuant to this section and associated
with residential development shall be paid consistent with the provisions of section 66007 of the California Government Code.
5. Bicycle Paths: When required as a condition for approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication
of land that is needed to provide bicycle paths for the use, safety, and benefit of the residents of the subdivision.
6. Bridges And Major Thoroughfares: If a land division or any portion thereof lies within an area of benefit established in accordance with this chapter or
any other city ordinance adopted in accordance with section 66484 of the subdivision map act, the subdivider shall pay to the city the apportioned
fees applicable to that portion of the land division lying within such area of benefit, in accordance with the requirements of subsection B6d of this
section.
a. Considerations In Lieu Of Fees: The city council may allow any subdivider to furnish a consideration in lieu of payment of the fees mentioned in
the preceding paragraph, if the council finds that such consideration has a value not less than the fees that would otherwise be payable. The form
of consideration in lieu of fees may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following or a combination thereof:
(1) Construction of all or part of a bridge project or major thoroughfare project, as the case may be, for which the area of benefit was established.
(2) Dedication or conveyance of all or part of the site or right of way required for major construction of a bridge project or major thoroughfare
project, as the case may be, for which the area of benefit was established.
b. Value In Excess Of Fees: If the city council finds that the consideration in lieu of fees has a value in excess of the amount of fees that would be
otherwise payable, the council may enter into an agreement with the party furnishing such consideration for reimbursement of the amount of such
excess from monies, then in or which may later accrue to, the fund into which such party would have been required to pay fees but for such
consideration in lieu of fees, and to reimburse such party from such fund in accordance with such agreement.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 460/636
c. Requirement To Construct Facilities: The city shall require a subdivider to construct any necessary bridge facilities, major thoroughfares, parts
thereof, or contribute to bridge facility or major thoroughfare costs if the city council finds that:
(1) The subdivider's cost or contribution would not exceed the cost of a local facility in lieu of such bridges or major thoroughfares; or
(2) A proceeding has been commenced for establishing an area of benefit for such bridge project or major thoroughfare project and has been
abandoned by reason of majority protest, and that there is a reasonable probability that use of a local facility in lieu of such bridge would by
reason of traffic, including, but not limited to, traffic which may be generated by such land division, constitute a hazard to public safety.
d. Establishing Area Of Benefit: An area of benefit as referred to in this section shall be established in the following manner:
(1) The city council shall hold a public hearing for each area of benefit to be established. Notice of such hearing shall be given in accordance with
Government Code section 65091. Such notice shall contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the proposed area of benefit, the
estimated cost of the bridge project or major thoroughfare project, as the case may be, the proposed allocation to the area of benefit, and the
proposed method of fee appointment. Such notice shall also state the date, time and place of the public hearing, and that written protests may
be filed as provided in this section.
(2) Owners of property within the proposed area of benefit may file written protests with the city clerk at any time prior to the date and time fixed for
such public hearing. Any protest may be withdrawn by the owner of the land making the protest by a request in writing filed with the city clerk at
any time prior to conclusions of such public hearing.
(3) If a written protest by the owners of more than one-half (0.5) of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, against
establishment of such area of benefit or against the proposed improvements or acquisitions, is not withdrawn prior to the conclusion of the
hearing, then the proceedings shall be abandoned. In such event, the city council shall not, for at least one year from the date of such hearing,
commence or carry on any proceedings for establishment of an area of benefit for the same improvements or acquisitions.
(4) If a written protest by the owners of more than one-half (0.5) of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, against only a
portion of the proposed improvement or acquisition, is not withdrawn prior to the conclusion of the hearing, then the proceedings shall be
abandoned with respect to the proposed improvement or acquisition that has been protested against. In such event, the city council shall not, for
at least one year from the date of such hearing, commence or carry on any proceedings for the establishment of an area of benefit for the
improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the council, within such one year period,
from commencing or carrying on new proceedings for the establishment of an area of benefit for the part of the improvement or acquisition
protested, if it finds by the affirmative vote of at least four-fifths (4/5) of its members, that the owners of more than one-half (0.5) of the area of the
property to be benefited are in favor of going forward with such portion of the improvement or acquisition.
(5) At such public hearing, the city council shall determine whether to establish such area of benefit, and if so, shall adopt a resolution prescribing
the boundaries of the area of benefit, stating the cost, whether actual or estimated, a fair method of allocation of costs to the area of benefit, and
a fair apportionment of fees. A certified copy of such resolution shall be filed for record with the county recorder.
(6) In case of a requirement for any bridge, the city council shall find that, prior to said public hearing, the city has adopted at least thirty (30) days
prior to the filing of any tentative map, a circulation element as part of the general plan, which identifies railways, freeways, streams or canyons
for which bridge crossings are required, and that the bridge or each bridge for which such area of benefit is established is one necessary to
satisfy such bridge crossing requirement in such element or provisions of the general plan.
(7) In case of a requirement for any major thoroughfare, the city council shall find that, prior to said public hearing, the city has adopted at least
thirty (30) days prior to the filing of any tentative map, a circulation element as part of the general plan that identifies those major thoroughfares
whose primary purpose is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to the state highway system, and that the major thoroughfare
or section thereof for which such area of benefit is established is one so identified in such circulation element.
(8) The resolution adopted by the city council shall require that the apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit
and shall be payable as a condition of approval of any final map or any parcel map or a condition to issuing a building permit thereon, consistent
with the provisions of section 53077.5 of the Government Code.
(9) The area of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land or improvements that are the subject of any map or building permit
application considered at such hearing.
(10) Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this section, the city council shall make provisions for
payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to such lands from other sources.
(11) In the case of major thoroughfares, the method of fee apportionment shall not provide for higher fees on land that abuts the proposed
improvement, except where the abutting property is provided direct usable access to the major thoroughfare.
(12) In case of major thoroughfares, the payment of fees shall not be required unless the major thoroughfare is in addition to, or a reconstruction
of, any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of establishment of the zone of benefit.
(13) In the case of a planned bridge facility, the payment of fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving
the area of benefit or is an addition to an existing bridge facility serving such area at the time of establishment of the zone of benefit. No fees
contributed shall be expended to reimburse the cost of construction of any bridge existing at the time of establishment of the zone of benefit.
e. Planned Bridge Facility Fund: A planned bridge facility fund shall be established for a bridge project within an area of benefit, or if the area of
benefit is one in which more than one bridge is required to be constructed, a fund shall be established covering all such bridge projects. Fees paid
pursuant to this section on account of a bridge or bridges within an area of benefit shall be deposited into the fund for such area.
f. Planned Major Thoroughfare Fund: A planned major thoroughfare fund shall be established for each planned major thoroughfare project and each
particular area of benefit which it benefits. Fees paid pursuant to this section on account of a major thoroughfare project within an area of benefit
shall be deposited into the fund for such area.
g. Expenditure Of Bridge And Major Thoroughfare Facility Funds: Monies in such funds shall be expended solely for the construction of the
improvement project serving the area to be benefited as follows:
(1) To reimburse the city for costs advanced or incurred by it for construction of such improvement project or any portion thereof; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 461/636
(2) To reimburse any subdivider for the agreed portion of his or her costs of construction of such improvement project, or portion thereof, in
accordance with a reimbursement agreement entered into with the city, as mentioned in subsection B6b of this section.
(3) In the event that monies in such funds are insufficient to accomplish all of the purposes that this section lists, such monies in the fund shall be
apportioned to each such purpose on a pro rata basis.
h. Project Completion: After completion of all bridge facility projects for which a planned bridge facility fund has been established or all major
thoroughfare projects for which a planned major thoroughfare fund has been established, or in the event of abandonment of any such project, and
after reimbursement of the city and each subdivider entitled thereto under a reimbursement agreement, as mentioned in subsection B6b of this
section, the city council shall determine by resolution the amount of the surplus, if any, remaining in any such funds or as may accumulate in such
funds from time to time. The city council shall order any such surplus refunded as follows:
(1) There shall be refunded to the current owners of property for which a fee was previously collected the balance of such monies in the same
proportion which each individual fee collected bears to the total of all individual fees collected from the particular area of benefit. For the
purposes of this paragraph, the term "property for which a fee was previously collected" shall be deemed to include land within any land division
with respect to which such fees were paid as a condition to its approval and any building with respect to which such fees were paid as a
condition to issuing a building permit therefor. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "fee collected" shall include, in the case of a subdivider
who has entered into a reimbursement agreement with the city, the aggregate amount of cash fees and the value of the consideration in lieu of
fees furnished by such subdivider.
(2) Where property for which a fee was previously collected has subsequently been subdivided into more than one lot, each current owner of a lot
shall share in the refund payable to the owners of the property for which a fee was previously collected in the same proportion which the area of
each individual lot bears to the total area of the property for which a fee was previously collected.
(3) There shall be transferred to the city general fund any remaining portion of the surplus that has not been paid to or claimed by the persons
entitled thereto within two (2) years from the date of adoption of the resolution declaring a surplus.
(4) For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "fee collected" or any variation thereof, shall also be deemed to include the amount of fees that
would have been payable by a subdivider but for furnishing consideration in lieu of fees.
i. Advances And Voluntary Contributions: The city council may authorize advancement of money from the city general fund or from the road fund to
pay the cost of constructing any bridge project or major thoroughfare project and may reimburse such fund or funds for such advances from the
planned bridge facility fund or the planned major thoroughfare fund established to finance the construction of such improvements.
(1) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the city from providing funds for the construction of bridge facilities or major thoroughfares
to defray costs not allocated to an area of benefit.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude the subdivider from volunteering to construct a bridge or major thoroughfare or part thereof,
or to contribute to the cost thereof, in excess of the cost of a local facility, nor to preclude the city from participating in such construction or
carrying out such construction using money so contributed.
7. Transit Facilities: When required as a condition for approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of
dedication of land within the subdivision for local transit facilities such as bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing pads and similar items that directly
benefit the residents of a subdivision.
8. Railroad And Grade Crossings: The city council or the parcel map committee shall review proposed subdivision plans with respect to existing
railroad crossings and proposed or likely grade separations or other such facilities and shall require such changes as may be necessary to ensure
that the design and improvement of the subdivision does not interfere with such future grade separations or other measures. The subdivider shall
dedicate or make an irrevocable offer for dedication of the rights of way required for any grade separation or similar improvement that the general
plan circulation element proposes.
9. Solar Access Easements: At such time as the city has adopted solar access standards, and when required as a condition for approval of a tentative
map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of easements for the purpose of assuring that each parcel or unit in the
subdivision for which approval is sought has the ability to receive sunlight across adjacent parcels or units in the subdivision for any solar energy
system. The dimensions and locations of such easements shall be in accord with any standards for solar access adopted by the city council.
10. Park Land: As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the city shall require the subdivider to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication
of land, to pay a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both, for neighborhood and community open space, park and recreational purposes. In order
to conform to the policies of the general plan and maintain existing standards for parks and recreation facilities, the park area required to be
dedicated shall be equal to the ratio of the ultimate population of the subdivision to the current population of the city multiplied by the total park area
within the city's planning area at the time of filing of the tentative map but in no case shall be less than three (3) acres of park area per one thousand
(1,000) persons nor more than five (5) acres per one thousand (1,000) persons who will live in the subdivision, calculated as follows:
a. The ultimate population of the subdivision is based upon the approved residential density and the average household size for the type of unit;
b. Total population of the city shall be as reported in the most recent available federal census;
c. Current park acreage shall be the amount of neighborhood and community park acreage identified in the general plan or any more recent records,
maps, or reports.
11. Elementary School Sites: As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or
more subdivisions within one or more school districts maintaining an elementary school may be required to dedicate to the school district or districts
such lands as the district shall deem necessary for the purpose of constructing elementary schools necessary to assure the residents of the
subdivision adequate elementary school service.
a. Procedure: The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative map. If within thirty (30) days after the
requirement of dedication is imposed by the city the school district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept
the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made any time, before, concurrently with, or up
to sixty (60) days after the filing of the final map on any portion of the subdivision.
b. Payments To Subdivider: The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication of land, repay the subdivider the original cost of the dedicated land,
plus a sum equal to the total of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 462/636
(1) Improvement Costs: The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;
(2) Assessed Taxes: The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district's offer to enter into the binding commitment
to accept the dedication;
(3) Other Costs: Any other costs incurred by the subdivider to maintain the dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan on the
land.
c. Exceptions: The requirements for dedication shall not apply to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten (10) years
prior to the filing of the tentative map.
C. Acceptance Of Dedications: At the time the city approves a final map or parcel map, the city shall also accept subject to improvement, or reject, any
offer of dedication. The council or the city engineer, on behalf of the city council pursuant to section 1806(c) of the Streets And Highways Code, may
accept said dedications. The city clerk shall certify or state on the map the city's action.
1. Offers Of Dedication: If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys, or storm drainage easements are rejected, the offer shall
remain open and the council or the city engineer may, by resolution at any later date and without any further action by the subdivider, rescind the
city's action and accept and open the streets, paths, alleys or storm drain easements for public use which acceptance shall be recorded in the office
of the county recorder. Dedications and acceptance or rejection of parcels of land for elementary school sites, public utility and other easements on
parcels of land not previously specified shall be in accordance with the provisions of the map act.
2. Termination Of Offers: Offers of dedications may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as prescribed for the summary vacation of
streets by part 3 (commencing with section 8300) of division 9 of the Streets And Highways Code.
D. Recording Dedications: The city shall record a certificate with the county recorder for any dedication in fee for public purpose or for making public
improvements or constructing public facilities, other than for open space, parks, or schools. The certificate shall be attached to the map and shall
contain all of the following:
1. The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property.
2. A legal description of the real property being dedicated.
3. A statement that the city shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the city makes a determination that the same public purpose for which the
property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion thereof is not needed for public utilities.
E. Reservations:
1. General: As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and location, for parks, recreational
facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this section.
2. Standards For Reservation:
a. Such requirement is based upon an adopted specific plan or an adopted general plan containing policies and standards for those uses, and the
required reservations are in accordance with those policies and standards.
b. The ordinance has been in effect for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the tentative map.
c. The reserved area is of such size and shape as to permit the balance of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an
orderly and efficient manner.
d. The amount of land reserved will not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The reservation
area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit an efficient
division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired within the prescribed period; in such event, the subdivider shall make those
changes as are necessary to permit the reserved area to be developed for the intended purpose consistent with good subdividing practices.
3. Procedure: The city shall, at the time of approval of the final map or parcel map, enter into an agreement to acquire such reserved area within two
(2) years after completion and acceptance of all improvements required as a condition of such map, unless such period of time is extended by
mutual agreement.
4. Payment: The purchase price shall be the market value thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved area
from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs
incurred on any loan covering such reserved area.
5. Termination: If the city does not enter into the agreement required, the reservation of such area shall automatically terminate. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
407.02: IMPROVEMENTS:
A. General Requirements: The subdivider shall install improvements in accord with the general requirements set forth in this article; provided, however, the
city engineer or public works director may require changes in typical sections and details if unusual conditions arise to warrant such changes.
B. Standard Specifications: All improvements shall conform to the requirements contained in the city of Porterville "Standard Plans And Specifications",
"Standard Specifications For Public Works Construction", "Caltrans Standard Specifications" for street structural section components, and "Work Area
Traffic Control Handbook", as all of same now exist or are subsequently amended. Copies shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk and
the city engineer or public works director.
C. Improvement Plans: Construction of improvements shall not commence until calculations, plans, profiles, and specifications for such work have been
submitted to and approved by the city engineer. Such items shall be approved prior to recording the final map. Construction of all improvements shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 463/636
conform to the approved improvement plans and specifications and approved amendments thereto. After construction is completed, the subdivider's
engineer shall show all changes made on the original set of plans and provide them to the city marked "as built plans".
D. Improvement Construction Inspection And Supervision: All improvements shall be inspected and approved by the city engineer or public works director
or his authorized representative. The subdivider shall be responsible for the actions of his contractor. Twenty four (24) hours' minimum notice will be
required prior to an inspection by city personnel.
E. Plan Check And Inspection Fees: Subdivider shall be required to pay a plan check and inspection fee which shall include all charges for engineering
and inspection services and rendered by the city including the cost of recording maps. The plan check and inspection fee shall be as indicated in the
city comprehensive fee schedule.
The plan check fee shall be paid prior to commencement of plan checking by the city. The inspection fee shall be paid prior to any construction work
requiring inspection.
F. Required Improvements Enumerated: The subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve, all streets, highways, or ways in or adjacent to the subdivision.
All improvements shall be installed to permanent line and grade in accordance with the approved improvement plans for that subdivision on file with the
city engineer or public works director. Improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, at the cost of the subdivider, shall be as
follows:
1. Underground Utilities: All utility distribution facilities, including, but not limited to, electric, communication, and cable television lines installed in and
for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision, shall be placed underground in accordance with the utility's rules and regulations on file with
the California public utilities commission. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, streetlight poles,
pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts may be installed above the surface of the ground. The subdivider is
responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies involved for
the installation of said facilities. All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall
be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications prior to the surfacing of such street, service road, alley or highway. Service
connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers shall be placed in such length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street or
alley improvements when service connections thereto are made.
2. Streets: All streets shall be graded and surfaced to cross sections and grades approved by the city engineer or public works director.
3. Structures: Structures shall be installed as required for drainage, access and/or public safety. Such structures shall be placed to grades and shall be
of a design approved by the city engineer or public works director.
4. Grading And Drainage: Site grading and drainage taking into consideration the drainage pattern of adjacent improved and unimproved property and
treating upstream areas, where appropriate, as though fully improved.
5. Sidewalks, Curbs, Gutters And Driveway Approaches: Curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveway approaches shall be installed to grades approved by
the city engineer or public works director.
6. Sanitary Sewers: Sanitary sewer facilities connecting with the existing city sewer system shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades, locations,
design and size approved by the city engineer or public works director. No septic tanks or cesspools shall be permitted.
7. Storm Drains: Stormwater sewers shall be installed as required by the city engineer or public works director.
8. Water Supply: Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by an approved domestic water system.
9. Fire Flow And Fire Hydrants: As provided in the California fire code, an approved water supply capable of supplying required fire flow for fire
protection shall be provided to all premises upon which buildings or portions of buildings are hereafter constructed. The required fire flow shall be
determined by the fire chief.
a. The location, number, and type of fire hydrants connected to a water supply capable of delivering the required fire flow shall be provided on the
public street or on the site of the premises to be protected as required and approved by the fire chief. All hydrants shall be accessible to the fire
department by access roadways meeting California fire code requirements for "access roadways for fire apparatus". Such fire protection facilities
including all surface access roads shall be installed and made serviceable by the subdivider prior to the time of construction.
b. When fire hydrants density, as determined by the hydrant spacing requirement, is not sufficient to provide the required fire flow, additional fire
hydrants may be required by the chief.
c. Design, locations, and layout of water mains and fire hydrants shall be approved by the city engineer and the fire chief, and shall be installed by
the subdivider.
d. The location, number and type of fire hydrants connected to a water supply capable of delivering the required fire flow shall be provided on the
public street or on the site of the premises to be protected as required and approved by the chief. All hydrants shall be accessible to the fire
department apparatus by access roadways meeting California fire code requirements for access roadways for fire apparatus. Such fire protection
facilities, including all surface access roads, shall be installed and made serviceable by the subdivider prior to the time of construction.
10. Subdivision Trees: Subdivision trees and landscaping design shall be approved by the city and shall be planted at a time and in locations approved
by the city director of parks and leisure services, all in general accord with the requirements of the municipal code.
a. At least one tree shall be planted on each residential lot. Five (5) gallon trees shall be installed upon all lots abutting interior, local and collector
streets, and fifteen (15) gallon trees shall be planted upon parcels having frontage on arterial thoroughfares.
b. The subdivider shall be required to plant street trees at thirty five feet (35') on center along all parkways within and/or bordering the subdivision.
11. Street Signs: Street signs shall be installed by the city at the subdivider's expense. Any required barricades to prevent traffic access at dead end
streets shall be provided by the subdivider in accord with the standard specifications.
12. Streetlights: Streetlights shall be installed by the subdivider at locations designated by the city engineer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 464/636
13. Railroad Crossings: Provisions shall be made for any and all railroad crossings necessary to provide access to, or circulation with, the proposed
subdivision, including the preparation of all documents necessary for application to the public utilities commission of the state of California for the
establishment and improvement of such crossing.
14. Lot Corners: The subdivider's engineer shall set at all lot corners a marker consisting of a one inch (1") diameter iron pipe twenty four inches (24")
long, with the surveyor or engineer's marker thereon.
15. Bench Marks: The subdivider's engineer shall set at least two (2) bench marks in the subdivision tied to North American vertical datum of 1988.
16. Temporary Drainage Reservoir Lots: Temporary drainage reservoir lots, when approved, shall be designed and constructed to the requirements of
the city engineer or public works director and the director of parks and leisure services.
17. Others: Other improvements deemed necessary by the city council for the public health, safety or welfare.
G. Agreement For Installation Of Improvements: Prior to the approval by the city council of the final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an
agreement between the subdivider and the city, specifying a period of time, agreeable to the city engineer or public works director, which shall be not
greater than one year, within which he shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer or public works director, and
providing that if the subdivider shall fail to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the same and recover the full cost and
expense thereof from the subdivider. The agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer or public works director
or his authorized representative and reimbursement to the city by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection. Such agreements may also provide:
1. For the construction of the improvements in units.
2. For an extension of time under conditions therein specified.
3. For the termination of the agreement upon the completion of proceedings under an assessment district act for the construction of improvements
deemed by the city engineer or public works director to be at least the equivalent of the improvements specified in such agreement and required to
be constructed by the subdivider.
4. For progress payments to the subdivider, or his order, from any deposit money which the subdivider may have made in lieu of providing a surety
bond, as provided in this article; provided, however, that no such progress payment shall be made for more than ninety percent (90%) of the value of
any installment of work, and provided that each such installment of work shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer or public works
director.
5. The subdivider to arrange a preconstruction conference with the city, involving representative(s) of all contractors who are to work on the
improvements, one week prior to the initial start of construction.
6. The subdivider to give the city twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to restarting work if no construction work has been done for two (2) or more prior
workdays.
H. Construction Of Improvements Absent Subdivision Agreement: If the subdivider chooses to construct improvements absent a subdivision agreement,
pertaining to the improvements to be constructed, as specified in subsection G, "Agreement For Installation Of Improvements", of this section, then the
subdivider shall execute and file a preliminary subdivision agreement between the subdivider and the city. The preliminary subdivision agreement shall
specify a period of time, not to exceed one year, within which all improvements shall be completed, and providing that if the subdivider shall fail to
complete such work within such period, the city may increase inspection fees to recover any additional inspection costs incurred by the city. Such
agreements may also provide for:
1. The subdivider to arrange a preconstruction conference with the city, involving representative(s) of all contractors who are to work on the
improvements, one week prior to the initial start of construction.
2. The subdivider to give the city twenty four (24) hours' notice prior to restarting work if no construction work has been done for two (2) or more prior
workdays.
I. Improvement Security:
1. Security: The subdivider shall file with the agreement required by the provisions of subsections G and H of this section, to assure his full and faithful
performance thereof, a bond or security for such sum as the city engineer deems sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements.
2. Security, Form, And Amount: Such security shall be in the manner, form, and kind provided by the map act and acceptable to the city attorney. The
security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent (100%) of the estimated cost of the improvements, conditioned upon the faithful performance
of his agreement by the subdivider, and in the additional amount of one hundred percent (100%) of such sum securing the payment by the subdivider
to his contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them for improvements. The security
provided shall guarantee maintenance and/or repair of all defects in required public improvements for a period of one year following acceptance of
said improvements by the city. In lieu of a one hundred percent (100%) performance bond and one hundred percent (100%) labor and materials
bond, surety may be assured by the filing of a letter of credit, cash deposit, or deposit of negotiable bonds, which creates a trust fund in an amount
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the cost of the work estimated by the city engineer or public works director. Said trust fund shall be
maintained in a financial institution subject to regulation by the state and federal government with the trust fund limited to the following conditions:
a. Ten percent (10%) of the cost, representing a labor and materials deposit, to be retained for thirty five (35) days after the filing of the notice of
completion.
b. Funds may be discharged from the balance of the surety account from time to time as work is completed, up to ninety percent (90%) of value of
work completed, with authorization of the city engineer until all work is completed and the notice of completion is filed; at which time the remaining
funds shall be released thirty five (35) days thereafter.
c. Prior to final acceptance by the city of improvements, the subdivider shall provide the city with a one year maintenance bond in the amount of five
percent (5%) of the estimated cost of improvements.
3. Completion Of Work By City: In the event the subdivider shall fail to complete all improvement work in accordance with the provisions of this series
and the city shall have completed the same, or if the subdivider shall fail to reimburse the city for the cost of incidental expenses or to cover the cost
of replacement and the repair of existing streets or other improvements damaged in the development of the subdivision or requiring repair or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 465/636
replacement during the one year guarantee period, the city shall demand performance of the agreement by the subdivider to do such work and
reimburse itself for the cost of work agreed to be performed by the subdivider. If the amount of the surety bond or cash deposit exceeds all costs and
expenses incurred by the city, the city shall release the remainder of such bond or certification, less the cost and expense incurred by the city. The
subdivider shall be liable to the city for any costs additional to those secured in an action to be brought therefor by the city.
J. Supplemental Improvements:
1. Required: The subdivider may be required to install improvements for the benefit of the subdivision which may contain supplemental size, capacity or
number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision as a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision or parcel map, and thereafter to
dedicate such improvements to the public. "Supplemental size, capacity or number" shall mean that size, capacity or number in excess of the
minimum standard city requirements.
2. Improvement Security: When constructing off site improvements, the subdivider shall file a bond or security in accordance with subsection I of this
section for such sum as the city engineer deems sufficient to cover the cost of the improvements to assure his full and faithful performance thereof.
3. Reimbursement Agreement: The city shall enter into an agreement for reimbursement to the subdivider. However, the subdivider shall be reimbursed
only for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would cost the subdivider to install improvements
to serve the subdivision only, and the actual cost of oversize improvements or in the case of master plan facilities, the subdivider is entitled to one
hundred percent (100%) of the reimbursed cost.
4. Nonmaster Plan Reimbursement Procedures: The subdivider shall submit a written request, along with supporting documentation to the city
engineer within forty five (45) days of completion of the improvements. To pay the cost of such reimbursement, the city council may at its discretion:
a. Immediately reimburse the subdivider for the entire cost of oversizing and thereafter levy a charge upon the real property benefited thereby; or
b. Collect a reasonable use charge for the account of the subdividers from persons not within the subdivision using the oversized improvements.
5. Reimbursement Procedures: Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of completion and upon full occupancy of the
development or phased development, money shall be disbursed from the master facilities construction fund to pay for or to reimburse others for the
cost of all the work referred to in said notice of completion; said money disbursed shall be the actual value of the work completed, as determined by
the city engineer. The developer shall submit all documentation necessary to support final payment within ninety (90) days of full occupancy of the
development or phased development. Failure to do so shall void developer's right to request reimbursements.
K. Utility Fees And Off Site Charges:
1. The subdivider shall pay utility fees for sewer, water and storm drainage as may be required by applicable council resolution or ordinance.
2. Engineering plan checking, inspection fees, acreage fees and off site charges, i.e., street signs, subdivision trees, etc., shall be paid prior to approval
of the subdivision agreement by the city council. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
407.03: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
A. Streets And Highways:
1. Conformance With Various Plans: The street and highway design shall conform both in width and alignment with any general plan circulation
element, precise street plans and other precise plans adopted by the city council, and right of way for any such street or highway indicated on the
general plan or precise plans shall be dedicated to the city by the subdivider.
2. Street Classification; Width: Streets and highways not otherwise designated on the circulation element of the general plan shall not be less than
those set forth in this section, except where it can be shown by the subdivider that the topography of the land is such as to justify narrower width.
Increased widths may be required for bicycle lanes and, when determined necessary, by the city council in the public interest. Approval or
determination of street classification shall be made by the city council.
a. Major arterial rights of way shall not be less than one hundred sixteen feet (116') in width.
b. Minor arterial rights of way shall not be less than ninety four feet (94') in width.
c. Collectors without on street parking rights of way shall not be less than fifty three feet (53') in width.
d. Collectors with median and without on street parking rights of way shall not be less than sixty five feet (65') in width.
e. Collectors with on street parking rights of way shall not be less than sixty seven feet (67') in width.
f. Local residential rights of way shall not be less than forty seven feet (47') in width.
g. Local commercial street rights of way shall not be less than sixty feet (60') in width.
h. Cul-de-sac or other dead end street serving less than ten (10) homes shall not be less than forty seven feet (47') in width.
3. Relationship To Existing Streets: The street system in the proposed subdivision shall relate functionally to the existing streets in the area adjoining
the subdivision and be designed to maximize access points to existing local and collector streets.
4. Centerlines: The centerlines of all streets, wherever practicable, shall be the continuations of the centerlines of existing streets, or shall be offset at
least one hundred fifty feet (150').
5. Intersections: Each street intersection shall be as near to a right angle as is practicable, and no intersection of streets at angles less than sixty
degrees (60°) shall be approved, unless necessitated by topographical conditions as determined by the city engineer.
6. Corner Cutoffs: At street intersections, the block corners shall have a corner cutoff sufficient to accommodate a city standard street intersection
return, inclusive of a wheelchair ramp.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 466/636
7. Cul-De-Sac Or Dead End Streets: Cul-de-sac or dead end streets shall be no more than six hundred feet (600') in length and shall have a
turnaround having a minimum radius of forty seven feet (47'), measured to the property line, and minimum of forty feet (40') to curb face unless the
city engineer determines that such turnaround is not necessary.
a. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets shall be prohibited in R districts except where necessary to give access to or permit satisfactory future
development of adjoining land. If cul-de-sacs and dead end streets cannot be avoided, bicycle and pedestrian connections shall be provided from
the cul-de-sac or dead end street to nearby public areas and main streets.
b. Cul-de-sacs and dead end streets shall be avoided in all other districts. If cul-de-sacs and dead end streets cannot be avoided, bicycle and
pedestrian connections shall be provided from the cul-de-sac or dead end street to nearby public areas and main streets.
8. Curve Radius: The centerline curve radius on all streets shall be designed in accordance with acceptable safe engineering practices. In no case
shall the curve radius for an arterial be less than five hundred feet (500'). Centerline curve radius on all other streets shall not be less than two
hundred feet (200').
9. Frontage Streets: When any lots front or side on any arterial, collector, expressway or freeway, the subdivider may be required to dedicate and
improve a frontage street to provide ingress to and egress from such lots. Residential properties shall not take access to/from arterial or collector
streets.
10. Private Roads And Alleys: Private roads and alleys shall not be permitted unless a conditional use permit is approved by the city council and, if
approved, all private roads or alleys shall be constructed to city standards. Private roads and alleys shall also comply with subsection 408.01E,
"Warranty And Reserves", of this series.
11. Grades Of Streets: Streets shall not be less than 0.2 percent and not greater than seven percent (7%), unless because of topographical conditions
or other exceptional conditions the city engineer determines that a grade less than 0.2 percent, or in excess of seven percent (7%), is necessary.
12. Fire Hydrants: The position of any street within twenty feet (20') of a fire hydrant shall not have a grade in excess of seven percent (7%) to allow for
the positioning of a fire suppression unit.
13. Access On Arterials: Arterial streets shall not be used to provide direct access to individual single-family residential lots. When the rear or side of
any lot borders an arterial, the subdivider may be required to execute and deliver to the city an instrument prohibiting the right of vehicular ingress
and egress from said arterial to said lot.
14. Access On Collectors: The use of a collector as primary direct access to individual single-family residential lots shall not be allowed.
B. Alleys:
1. The city council, for any one of the following reasons, may require alleys (if alleys are required, they shall be constructed to city standards):
a. Unusual size, shape or topographical character of the property to be subdivided.
b. The relationship to existing or proposed commercial, industrial or high density residential development or adjacent railroad right of way.
c. The special nature of the design or density of a residential subdivision where dwellings are grouped in such a manner as to require access from
other than the street frontage.
d. The need to maintain continuity of existing alleys where the property to be subdivided is located immediately between existing residential blocks
where alleys are provided.
2. Residential alleys shall have a minimum dedicated width of twenty feet (20').
3. Alleys shall be provided where needed to serve existing or proposed commercial or industrial areas, and shall have a minimum dedicated width of
thirty feet (30'), with adequate provisions for ingress and egress.
4. A twenty foot (20') corner diagonal cutoff, measured along the property lines from the point of intersection, will be required where two (2) alleys
intersect. An ADA compliant accessibility ramp shall be constructed pursuant to the city design standards.
5. Alleys shall be so laid out and aligned as to provide reasonable access for utilities and other services.
6. Dead end alleys shall be prohibited.
C. Pedestrianways:
1. Pedestrianways ten feet (10') or more in width may be required:
a. Through the middle of blocks that are more than six hundred feet (600') in length;
b. To connect cul-de-sacs;
c. To provide access to playgrounds, parks, schools, shopping centers, or similar community facilities; and/or
d. To provide access to trails or bikeways shown in the general plan.
2. The subdivider shall install paving, landscaping, and fences as approved by the city council or parcel map committee unless otherwise waived.
D. Bikeways: Bikeways shall be required in all locations shown in the general plan or as approved by the city council or parcel map committee. Bikeway
width, paving, landscaping, fencing, and signs shall be as approved by the city council or parcel map committee.
E. Street Names:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 467/636
1. All street names shall be approved by the city council. Duplication of existing names shall not be allowed, unless the streets are approximately in
alignment with existing streets and not so far removed as to be confusing.
2. Names of through streets in a north-south alignment shall be followed by the designation "street", and the names of through streets in an east-west
alignment shall be followed by the designation "avenue".
3. Cul-de-sac streets in a north-south alignment shall be followed by the designations of either "place", "way" or "drive", and cul-de-sac streets in an
east-west alignment shall be followed by the designations of either "lane", "circle" or "court".
F. Blocks:
1. Block Length: Blocks shall not exceed six hundred feet (600') in length, unless existing adjacent property alignment, topographic, or traffic conditions
justify a variation. Blocks longer than six hundred feet (600') in length shall provide mid block pedestrian crossings so that there is no more than six
hundred feet (600') of continuous block without a pedestrian crossing. Blocks in the HZ overlay zone are exempt from the block length limitations and
requirement for mid block crossings.
2. Block Width: The width of each block shall be sufficient for an ultimate layout of two (2) tiers of lots therein, of a size required by the provisions of this
article, unless the conditions justify or make necessary a variation from this requirement.
G. Lots:
1. Lot Width: Each residential lot or parcel shall have frontage width of not less than that required by this chapter except as approved by the city council
as provided for in section 400.05, "Authority To Vary Regulations", of this series.
2. Lot Depth: Lot depths shall not exceed two and one-half (2.5) times the proposed lot width except where existing topography makes such
dimensions infeasible.
3. Lot Area: The area of all lots shall comply with the requirements of this chapter relative to each particular zoning district.
4. Lot Frontage: Lots shall have a single frontage on a street; double frontage lots or lots without street frontage will not be permitted except where, in
the opinion of the city council, topographic or unusual physical conditions justify a deviation from this rule.
5. Flag Lot: Residential flag lots may be permitted with a parcel map, if it meets the standard requirements for lot width and lot depth.
6. Side Lines: The side lines of lots shall, wherever practicable, be required to run at right angles or radially to the street upon which the lot faces.
7. Lot Numbering: Lot numbers shall begin with the numeral "1", and shall continue consecutively through all of the units of the tract with no omissions
or duplications, and no block numbers shall be used.
8. Division Of Lots: No lot shall be divided by a county, city, school, or any other taxing district boundary lines.
9. Suitability Of Lots: All lots shall be suitable for the purpose for which they are intended to be used. Land subject to flooding or deemed by the parcel
map committee or city council to be uninhabitable shall be indicated on the final map.
10. Land Remnants: All remnants of below minimum size left over after the subdivision of a larger tract must be added to adjacent lots rather than
allowed to remain as unusable parcels.
H. Access Limitation Strips:
1. A one foot (1') access limitation strip shall be provided at the dead end of a stubbed street or at the edge of a partial width street, and shall be
offered for dedication to the city for future street purposes.
2. Access limitation strips shall be designated on the final map of the subdivisions and shall be specifically referred to in dedication and acceptance
certificates.
I. Landscaping And Lighting Maintenance Districts: Each subdivision shall be subject to the creation of a landscaping and lighting maintenance district in
compliance with the landscaping and lighting act of 19721 to address the extension of improvements such as, but not limited to, lighting, common
landscape areas, including pocket parks, perimeter walls, drainage systems beneficial to specific subdivision, drainage reservoirs, and open space
areas, and the maintenance of such facilities through appropriate mechanisms as approved by the city attorney. If a landscaping and lighting
maintenance district, benefit assessment district, or similar district is required, the following standards apply:
1. Prior to the approval of improvement plans for a development, the applicant shall submit the following information for the establishment of a
landscaping and lighting maintenance district, the extension of the subject improvements into the assessment area, and the maintenance of the
improvements once constructed:
a. A petition on a form provided by the city requesting to have the subdivision placed in a district at the time the final map is approved by the city.
b. Completed and approved landscaping and lighting improvement plans, and legal description.
2. The district shall be established, or the annexation into an existing district concluded, and improvements completed and accepted concurrently with
the other improvements in the subdivision.
3. Exclusive of assessments for a district, the applicant shall pay all service fees and maintain all new district improvements in a safe and healthy
manner for the greater of a ninety (90) day plant establishment period following acceptance of the subdivision improvements, or until assessment
begins for the district.
J. Waiver Of Right To Protest District Formation: Prior to final map approval, each subdivider shall record a document waiving their right to protest a new
assessment or an assessment increase equal to or less than a CPI adjustment for a citywide landscaping and lighting maintenance district or other
maintenance district when at least fifty one percent (51%) of the city is already in such district under the provisions of Government Code section 53753.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 468/636
K. Grading And Erosion Control: Every map approved pursuant to this series shall be conditioned on compliance with the requirements for grading and
erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or damage to off site property, set forth in appendix J of the California building code of the
most recently adopted edition. Steep terrain and other topographical features may limit the abilities of a subdivider to perform mass grading operations.
At the discretion of the city engineer or public works director, individual grading plans for each individual lot may be submitted with the building permit in
lieu of a mass grading plan normally submitted with the improvement plans.
L. Protection Of Natural Features And Trees:
1. Natural Features: Significant rock outcroppings and other unusual landforms shall be shown and identified on the tentative map and on improvement
and landscape plans. Such features shall be preserved as required by the parcel map committee or city council.
2. Trees:
a. All existing trees six inches (6") in diameter or over shall be shown on the tentative map with a notation as to the size, species and drip line. Trees
that are part of an agricultural crop may be shown as the outer extent of the planting with a notation as to the species and average tree size and
drip line.
b. Existing trees six inches (6") or over in diameter may be required to be preserved. In cases where tree preservation is required, all grading and
necessary tree trimming shall be conducted in accordance with an arborist's recommendations for tree preservation.
c. Trees within a proposed public right of way shall be removed only for good cause to protect the public safety or to allow the installation of
adequate public facilities as may be approved by the city engineer and the zoning administrator.
M. Stormwater Management Plan: Every map approved pursuant to this series shall be conditioned to comply with the requirements of the city's
stormwater management plan, which includes measures that control construction site runoff and postconstruction runoff.
N. Watercourses:
1. In accordance with sections 66478.1 through 66478.10 inclusive of the subdivision map act, if the land division will front upon a public waterway,
river, or stream, as defined in section 66478.4(c), access routes and easements along the bank shall be provided as follows:
a. The land division shall provide, or have available, reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to that portion of the bank
of such river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed land division, as determined by the parcel map committee or city council in
accordance with section 66478.5 of the California Government Code;
b. The land division shall provide for a dedication of a public easement along a portion of the bank of such river or stream bordering or lying within
the proposed land division, as determined by the city council in accordance with section 66478.5 of the California Government Code; and
c. The parcel map committee or city council shall determine the governmental entity to which such access route or easement shall be dedicated, and
all dedications shall be in accordance with section 66478.6 of the California Government Code.
2. In accordance with section 66478.12 of the California Government Code, if the land division will front upon any lake or reservoir that is owned in part
or entirely by any public agency, including, but not limited to, the United States, state of California, or the city of Porterville, the land division shall be
provided with or have available reasonable access by fee or easement from public highways to the water of the lake or reservoir upon which the land
division borders either within the land division or a reasonable distance from the land division, as determined by the city council or the parcel map
committee, as appropriate, in accordance with said statute. The parcel map committee or city council shall determine the governmental entity to
which such dedication shall be made.
3. If a land division is traversed by a river, stream, or creek, the subdivider shall leave such river, stream, or creek in its natural condition whenever
practical. Sufficient right of way shall be dedicated to the city or other public entity and improved for flood control purposes as necessary to
accommodate flows of water that would be generated by a flood of one hundred (100) year frequency. In the event that a land division is to front
upon a river, stream, or creek, the provisions of this paragraph shall apply to that portion of the bank thereof bordering or lying within the proposed
land division. The parcel map committee or city council shall determine the governmental entity to which such dedication shall be made.
4. The city council may disapprove a tentative map because of flood hazard and inundation, and require protective improvements to be constructed as
a condition precedent to approval of the map.
O. Drainage Reservoirs:
1. Temporary drainage reservoirs will only be allowed in areas where it has been determined by the city engineer or public works director that it is not
practical to implement the intent of the latest adopted version of the storm drain master plan. Landscape and irrigation systems shall be installed as
approved by the director of parks and leisure services. Maintenance of these facilities shall be part of the maintenance district created for the benefit
of the subdivision.
2. Temporary drainage reservoirs may be approved until such time as storm drain master facilities are available for connection and shall be dedicated
to the city as an easement.
3. Drainage reservoirs designated in the storm drain master plan shall be considered permanent facilities and title of the land shall be held by the city in
fee. Property acquisitions shall be in the form of a dedication or purchased in accordance with the city's storm drain master plan and city's property
and right of way acquisitions policy and procedures manual. Landscaping and irrigation systems shall be installed as approved by the director of
parks and leisure services. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 408. COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS (CONDOMINIUMS)
408.01: NEW RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 469/636
A. Purpose: The ownership of residential condominiums is distinguished by a sharing of responsibility that is not common to most other types of residential
development. As a result, the purpose of this section is to establish criteria for the construction of new residential condominiums to prevent problems
inherent in community ownership that might be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of residents of such projects and the community at large.
B. Applicability: The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to the construction of new residential condominiums.
C. Conditional Use Permit And Maps Required: A conditional use permit and tentative map approved by the city council is required for all residential
condominium applications.
D. Application And Fees: The applicant of a proposed condominium project shall submit the required number of copies of the conditional use permit
application and tentative maps to the zoning administrator, together with the requested filing and inspection fees. In addition to the required permit and
map submittals, the applicant shall submit:
1. Development Plan: Schematic development plans with dimensions, consisting of at least a site plan, parking plan, typical floor plan, and building
elevations showing natural and proposed grades;
2. Landscaping Plan: A preliminary landscaping plan of the project indicating the types and sizes of landscaping materials and permanent irrigation
facilities;
3. Department Of Real Estate Application: A copy of the project application submitted to the state of California's department of real estate for a
subdivision public report;
4. Conditions, Covenants, And Restrictions: The proposed conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs); and
5. Additional Information: Any other information the zoning administrator finds necessary to evaluate the project.
E. Warranty And Reserves:
1. Warranty For Improvements: The subdivider shall provide to the homeowners' association and/or purchaser a one year warranty on all physical
improvements required under this chapter.
2. Long Term Reserves: Prior to approval of the final map, or parcel map if no final map is required, the subdivider shall provide evidence to the city
that a long term reserve fund for replacement has been established in the name of the homeowners' association. Such fund shall equal two (2) times
the estimated monthly homeowner's assessment for each dwelling unit.
F. Covenants, Conditions, And Restrictions: Project covenants, codes, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be developed, and shall be reviewed and approved
by the city attorney and zoning administrator prior to approval of the final or parcel map. In addition to the following provisions, the CC&Rs shall
reference by incorporation the approved conditions of approval, and shall be recorded in conjunction with the final or parcel map.
1. Conveyance Of Private Open Space: The surface area and appurtenant airspace of private open space areas, including, but not limited to, the patio,
deck, balcony, solarium, or atrium and any integral portion of that space that may exceed the minimum area requirements, shall be described and
conveyed in the grant deed as an integral part of the unit.
2. Assignment And Use Of Required Parking Spaces: Required parking spaces shall be permanently and irrevocably specifically assigned to particular
units within the project. To the maximum practicable extent, the spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private
storage area of one unit overhang or take its access from the required parking space of another unit. All studio and one bedroom units shall be
assigned one parking space and may rent additional spaces from the homeowners' association. An occupant of a unit with two (2) or more bedrooms
may rent one parking space back to the homeowners' association. All parking spaces, except those specifically designated for recreational vehicles,
shall be used solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code, and shall not be used for trailers,
unmounted campers, boats, or similar recreational vehicles.
3. Right Of Public Entry To Common Area: Officers, agents, and employees of the city, the county, the state, and the United States government, and
any department, bureau, or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all common areas at all times for the purpose of preserving
the public health, safety, and welfare, except in those instances where a common area is accessible only through a private unit.
4. Maintenance Of Common Area: Provision shall be made both for annual assessments of the owners for maintenance and special assessments for
capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment and the procedure for its change shall be specified. The manner in which
special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or
replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a
monthly basis. The remedies which the homeowners' association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include
penalties for late payment. Assignment of the maintenance responsibilities of all improvements and utility systems for each unit shall be specified.
5. Utility Easements Over Private Streets And Other Areas: Required public utility easements shall be referenced and any required access routes
necessary to assure that firefighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas.
6. Access For Construction, Maintenance, Or Repairs: Each owner and the homeowners' association shall have an easement for entry upon any
privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction, maintenance, or repair for the benefit of the common area or the owners of
the units in common.
7. Right To Terminate Management And Maintenance Contracts: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, or any local, state, or federal regulation, reference
shall be made to the homeowners' association's right to terminate the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform
management or maintenance duties three (3) months after the homeowners' association assumes control of the project, or at that time renegotiate
any such contracts.
8. CC&R Amendments: A statement that the CC&Rs shall not be amended, modified, or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the city.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 470/636
408.02: RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums and to reduce
the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion.
B. Applicability: The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums. This
section shall not apply to a "limited equity housing cooperative" as defined in section 11003.4 of the California Business And Professions Code.
C. Conditional Use Permit And Maps Required: A conditional use permit and tentative map approved by the city council is required for all residential
condominium conversion applications.
D. Application And Fees: The applicant of a proposed condominium conversion project shall submit the required number of copies of the conditional use
permit application and tentative maps to the zoning administrator, together with the requested filing and inspection fees. In addition to the required
permit and map submittals, the applicant shall submit:
1. Physical Elements Report: A report prepared by a registered engineer or architect or licensed qualified contractor describing the physical elements
of all structures and facilities. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Structural Condition Of Elements: A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property, including foundations, electrical,
plumbing, utilities, walls, roofs, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking
facilities and appliances. The report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of
each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate date upon which said element will require replacement; the cost of replacing said
element; and any variation of the physical condition of said element from the current zoning and from the building code in effect on the date that
the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed
corrective measures to be employed.
b. Pest Control: A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure.
c. Soil Conditions: A report on soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, faults, and groundwater in the vicinity of the project and a
statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the
site and a copy submitted with said report.
d. Repairs And Improvements: A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project
to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety.
2. Covenants, Conditions And Restrictions: The proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs).
3. Demographic Characteristics: Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. Square footage and number of rooms in each unit;
b. Rental rate history for each type of unit for previous five (5) years;
c. Monthly vacancy rate for each month during preceding two (2) years;
d. Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants, and whether receiving federal or state rent
subsidies;
e. Proposed sale price of units;
f. Proposed homeowners' association fee;
g. Financing available; and
h. Names and addresses of all tenants.
4. Notice Of Intent To Convert: Signed copies from each tenant of notice of intent to convert, as specified in subsection G of this section. The subdivider
shall submit evidence that a letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of said notice is not submitted. This requirement
shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.
5. Additional Information: Any other information the zoning administrator finds necessary to evaluate the project.
E. Filing And Processing:
1. Acceptance Of Reports: The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their
acceptable form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be
referenced in the subdivision report to the review authority.
2. Submittal Of Budget: Prior to final map approval, the subdivider shall provide the city with a copy of the proposed budget for maintenance and
operation of common facilities, including needed reserves. The budget shall show estimated monthly costs to the owner of each unit, projected over
a five (5) year period, or such time as is required by the department of real estate. Such budget shall be prepared or reviewed and analyzed by a
professional management firm, experienced with management of condominium complexes. The management firm shall submit a statement of
professional qualifications.
3. Copy To Buyers: The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all submittals (in their final, acceptable form) required by subsection D
of this section prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project, and said developer shall
give the purchaser sufficient time to review said information. Copies of the submittals shall be made available at all times at the sales office and shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 471/636
be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. Copies shall be provided to the homeowners' association upon its
formation.
4. Final Information Submitted: No later than six (6) months from the date the subdivider closes escrow on the first sale of a unit, the subdivider shall
submit the following information to the community development department:
a. Name, address and phone number of homeowners' association;
b. Actual sale price of units;
c. Actual homeowners' association fee;
d. Number of prior tenants who purchased units; and
e. Number of units purchased with intent to be used as rentals.
F. Development Standards: All condominium conversions must conform to the municipal code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as
otherwise provided in this series. The building official shall perform an assessment of building conditions prior to tentative map approval. A report of
violations shall be specified in the tentative map staff report to the city council, as the case may be. A physical inspection of every unit shall be required
prior to final map approval or tentative map approval if no final map is required.
1. Modification Of Development Standards: The base district development standard requirements of series 200, "Base Districts", of this chapter, may
be modified by the city council based on findings that the quality of life accommodated by the project will not be compromised and that residents will
benefit from other amenities that are located in close proximity to the project site.
2. Warranty For Improvements: The subdivider shall provide to the homeowners' association and/or purchaser a one year warranty on all physical
improvements required under this section.
3. Long Term Reserves: Prior to approval of the final map, or parcel map if no final map is required, the subdivider shall provide evidence to the city
that a long term reserve fund for replacement has been established in the name of the homeowners' association. Such fund shall equal two (2) times
the estimated monthly homeowner's assessment for each dwelling unit.
G. Tenant Provisions: Notices to tenants shall be provided as required in section 66427.1 of the subdivision map act. All written notices to tenants required
by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. In addition, at least three (3) days
before any hearing or action on a proposed tentative map for a conversion, the community development department shall provide a copy of the staff
report to the subdivider and to each tenant of the property.
1. Notice Of Intent: A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the subdivider to each tenant at least sixty (60) days prior to filing of the tentative
map. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined in section 66452.18 of the subdivision map act and approved by the zoning administrator.
2. Notice Of Public Report: Each tenant shall receive ten (10) days' written notice that an application for a public report will be or has been submitted to
the department of real estate and that such report will be available on request.
3. Notice Of Final Map Approval: Each tenant shall receive written notification within ten (10) days of approval of a final map for the proposed
conversion.
4. Tenant's Right To Purchase: Any present tenant shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit
upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall
run for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report unless the tenant gives prior written notice
of his or her intention not to exercise the right. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map.
5. Vacation Of Units: Each tenant not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he/she occupies his/her unit shall be
given one hundred eighty (180) days' written notice of intention to convert his or her unit prior to termination of tenancy. The subdivider shall notify
each tenant immediately prior to the time of final map approval of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit. Evidence of receipt by each tenant
shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map.
6. No Increase In Rents: The rents charged tenants at the time when a completed tentative map application was accepted by the community
development department shall not be increased for two (2) years from that acceptance time, or until the unit is sold or the subdivision is denied,
withdrawn or reverted to acreage. The increase in rent on a unit which has been vacated after receipt of the application by the community
development department shall not be subject to control.
7. Notice To New Tenants: At least thirty (30) days prior to the filing of the tentative map, the subdivider shall give notice of the filing of the map to each
person applying after such date for rental of a unit immediately prior to acceptance of any rent or deposit. The notice shall be in the form outlined in
section 66452.17(b) of the subdivision map act and shall advise the prospective tenant that notice will be provided at least one hundred eighty (180)
days prior to the actual conversion. If the subdivider fails to give notice in accordance with this section, he or she shall pay to each prospective tenant
who becomes a tenant and who was entitled to such notice and who does not purchase his or her unit, an amount equal to two (2) times monthly
rent for moving expenses.
H. Covenants, Conditions, And Restrictions: Project covenants, codes, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be developed, and shall be reviewed and approved
by the city attorney and zoning administrator prior to approval of the final or parcel map. In addition to the following provisions, the CC&Rs shall
reference by incorporation the approved conditions of approval, and shall be recorded in conjunction with the final or parcel map.
1. Conveyance Of Private Open Space: The surface area and appurtenant airspace of private open space areas, including, but not limited to, the patio,
deck, balcony, solarium, or atrium and any integral portion of that space that may exceed the minimum area requirements, shall be described and
conveyed in the grant deed as an integral part of the unit.
2. Assignment And Use Of Required Parking Spaces: Required parking spaces shall be permanently and irrevocably specifically assigned to particular
units within the project. To the maximum practicable extent, the spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous. In no case shall the private
storage area of one unit overhang or take its access from the required parking space of another unit. All studio and one bedroom units shall be
assigned one parking space and may rent additional spaces from the homeowners' association. An occupant of a unit with two (2) or more bedrooms
may rent one parking space back to the homeowners' association. All parking spaces, except those specifically designated for recreational vehicles,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 472/636
shall be used solely for the purpose of parking motor vehicles as defined by the California Vehicle Code, and shall not be used for trailers,
unmounted campers, boats, or similar recreational vehicles.
3. Right Of Public Entry To Common Area: Officers, agents, and employees of the city, the county, the state, and the United States government, and
any department, bureau, or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all common areas at all times for the purpose of preserving
the public health, safety, and welfare, except in those instances where a common area is accessible only through a private unit.
4. Maintenance Of Common Area: Provision shall be made both for annual assessments of the owners for maintenance and special assessments for
capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment and the procedure for its change shall be specified. The manner in which
special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or
replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a
monthly basis. The remedies which the homeowners' association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include
penalties for late payment. Assignment of the maintenance responsibilities of all improvements and utility systems for each unit shall be specified.
5. Utility Easements Over Private Streets And Other Areas: Required public utility easements shall be referenced and any required access routes
necessary to assure that firefighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas.
6. Access For Construction, Maintenance, Or Repairs: Each owner and the homeowners' association shall have an easement for entry upon any
privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction, maintenance, or repair for the benefit of the common area or the owners of
the units in common.
7. Right To Terminate Management And Maintenance Contracts: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, or any local, state, or federal regulation, reference
shall be made to the homeowners' association's right to terminate the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform
management or maintenance duties three (3) months after the homeowners' association assumes control of the project, or at that time renegotiate
any such contracts.
8. CC&R Amendments: A statement that the CC&Rs shall not be amended, modified, or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the city.
I. Required Findings: In addition to any other findings that this subdivision ordinance requires, the city council shall not approve a final map for conversion
unless it finds that each tenant has been given and received notice in compliance with the requirements of section 66427.1 of the subdivision map act.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
408.03: NEW COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONDOMINIUMS:
A. Purpose: The ownership of commercial and industrial condominiums is distinguished by a sharing of responsibility that is not common to most other
types of development. As a result, the purpose of this section is to establish criteria for the construction of new commercial and industrial
condominiums to prevent problems inherent in community ownership that might be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of residents of such
projects and the community at large.
B. Applicability: The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to the construction of new commercial and industrial condominiums.
C. Condominium Combination: If a commercial or industrial condominium is proposed in combination with a residential condominium, the requirements of
this section and section 408.01, "New Residential Condominiums", of this article, shall be read together, with the relevant requirements applying to the
portions of the project.
D. Conditional Use Permit And Maps Required: A conditional use permit and tentative map approved by the city council is required for all commercial and
industrial condominium applications.
E. Application And Fees: The applicant of a proposed commercial or industrial condominium project shall submit the required number of copies of the
conditional use permit application and tentative maps to the zoning administrator, together with the requested filing fee. In addition to the required
permit and map submittals, the applicant shall submit:
1. Development Plan: A development plan of the project including location and sizes of structures, exterior elevations, parking layout, and access
areas;
2. Landscaping Plan: A preliminary landscaping plan of the project indicating the types and sizes of landscaping materials and permanent irrigation
facilities;
3. Reserve Fund Study: A reserve study showing the amount which must be set aside as long term reserves for capital and maintenance replacement;
4. Conditions, Covenants, And Restrictions: The proposed conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs); and
5. Additional Information: Any other information the zoning administrator finds necessary to evaluate the project.
F. Development Standards: In addition to the development standards contained in the applicable zoning district that permit commercial and industrial
condominiums, the following development standards shall apply:
1. Sound Transmission:
a. Shock Mounting Of Mechanical Equipment: All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors, which
is determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or
bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official.
b. Noise Standards: Common walls and floors between dwelling units shall comply with the building code provisions governing noise resistance for
newly constructed common wall and floors.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 473/636
G. Trash And Recycling Collection Areas: Trash and recycling collection areas shall be provided within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the units they are
designed to serve, and shall comply with the city of Porterville or its contracted solid waste and recycling collector(s) specifications for trash enclosures.
H. Utilities: All units shall have separate gas and electric meters and provisions for individual shutoff of all utility valves, including water.
I. Warranty For Improvements: The subdivider shall provide to the condominium association and/or purchaser a one year warranty on all physical
improvements required under this section.
J. Long Term Reserves: Prior to approval of the final map, or parcel map if no final map is required, the subdivider shall provide evidence to the city that a
long term reserve fund for replacement has been established in the name of the condominium association. Such fund shall be based on a reserve
study showing the amount which must be set aside monthly for the reserve account.
K. Covenants, Conditions, And Restrictions: Project covenants, codes, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be developed, and shall be reviewed and approved
by the city attorney and zoning administrator prior to approval of the final or parcel map. In addition to the following provisions, the CC&Rs shall
reference by incorporation the approved conditions of approval, and shall be recorded in conjunction with the final or parcel map.
1. Right Of Public Entry To Common Area: Officers, agents, and employees of the city, the county, the state, and the United States government, and
any department, bureau, or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all common areas at all times for the purpose of preserving
the public health, safety, and welfare, except in those instances where a common area is accessible only through a private unit.
2. Maintenance Of Common Area: Provision shall be made both for annual assessments of the owners for maintenance and special assessments for
capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment and the procedure for its change shall be specified. The manner in which
special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or
replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a
monthly basis. The remedies which the condominium association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include
penalties for late payment. Assignment of the maintenance responsibilities of all improvements and utility systems for each unit shall be specified.
3. Utility Easements Over Private Streets And Other Areas: Required public utility easements shall be referenced and any required access routes
necessary to assure that firefighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas.
4. Access For Construction, Maintenance, Or Repairs: Each owner and the condominium association shall have an easement for entry upon any
privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction, maintenance, or repair for the benefit of the common area or the owners of
the units in common.
5. Right To Terminate Management And Maintenance Contracts: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, or any local, state, or federal regulation, reference
shall be made to the condominium association's right to terminate the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform
management or maintenance duties three (3) months after the condominium association assumes control of the project, or at that time renegotiate
any such contracts.
6. CC&R Amendments: A statement that the CC&Rs shall not be amended, modified, or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the city.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
408.04: COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS:
A. Purpose: The ownership of commercial and industrial condominiums is distinguished by a sharing of responsibility that is not common to most other
types of development. As a result, the purpose of this section is to establish criteria for the conversion of existing buildings to commercial or industrial
condominiums to prevent problems inherent in community ownership that might be detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of residents of such
projects and the community at large.
B. Applicability: The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to the conversion of existing buildings into commercial or industrial condominiums.
If a commercial or industrial condominium conversion is proposed in combination with a residential condominium, the requirements of this section and
section 408.03, "New Commercial And Industrial Condominiums", of this article, shall be read together, with the relevant requirements applying to the
portions of the project.
C. Conditional Use Permit And Maps Required: A conditional use permit and tentative map approved by the city council is required for all commercial and
industrial condominium conversion applications.
D. Application And Fees: The applicant of a proposed commercial or industrial condominium conversion project shall submit the required number of copies
of the conditional use permit application and tentative maps to the zoning administrator, together with the requested filing fee. In addition to the required
permit and map submittals, the applicant shall submit:
1. Physical Elements Report: A report prepared by a registered engineer or architect or licensed qualified contractor describing the physical elements
of all structures and facilities. The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Structural Condition Of Elements: A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property, including foundations, electrical,
plumbing, utilities, walls, roofs, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmission of each building, mechanical equipment, parking
facilities and appliances. The report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of
each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate date upon which said element will require replacement; the cost of replacing said
element; and any variation of the physical condition of said element from the current zoning and from the building code in effect on the date that
the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed
corrective measures to be employed.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 474/636
b. Pest Control: A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure.
c. Soil Conditions: A report on soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, faults, and groundwater in the vicinity of the project and a
statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the
site and a copy submitted with said report.
d. Repairs And Improvements: A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project
to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety;
2. Notice To Tenants: Evidence of written notice provided to each tenant explaining that the owner intends to apply to the city for a condominium
conversion. The notice to tenants must be sent at least six (6) months before the application is submitted to the city, and further notice must be given
to any tenant who occupies the building after the original notice was sent;
3. Plot Plan: A plot plan of the project including location and sizes of structures, square footage of each building and unit, exterior elevations, parking
layout, and access areas;
4. Budget: A proposed budget for maintenance and operation of common facilities, including needed reserves. The budget shall show estimated
monthly costs to the owner of each unit, projected over a five (5) year period. Such budget shall be prepared or reviewed and analyzed by a
professional management firm, experienced with management of similar condominium complexes. The management firm shall submit a statement of
professional qualifications;
5. Conditions, Covenants, And Restrictions: The proposed conditions, covenants, and restrictions (CC&Rs); and
6. Additional Information: Any other information the zoning administrator finds necessary to evaluate the project.
E. Filing And Processing:
1. Acceptance Of Reports: The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the city. The reports in their
acceptable form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be
referenced in the subdivision report to the review authority.
2. Copy To Buyers: The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all submittals (in their final, acceptable form) required by subsection D,
"Application And Fees", of this section, prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project,
and said developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said information. Copies of the submittals shall be made available at all times at
the sales office and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. Copies shall be provided to the condominium
association upon its formation.
F. Development Standards: All condominium conversions must conform to the municipal code in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as
otherwise provided in this section. The building official shall perform an assessment of building conditions prior to tentative map approval. A report of
violations shall be specified in the tentative map staff report to the city council. A physical inspection of every unit shall be required prior to final map
approval or tentative map approval if no final map is required. In addition to the requirements required in other sections of the municipal code, the
conversion shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Sound Transmission:
a. Shock Mounting Of Mechanical Equipment: All permanent mechanical equipment, such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors, which
is determined by the building official to be a source of structural vibration or structure borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or
bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the building official.
b. Noise Standards: The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of the municipal code. In such cases where
present standards cannot reasonably be met, the applicant may be required to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing
within these units.
2. Trash And Recycling Collection Areas: Trash and recycling collection areas shall be provided within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the units they are
designed to serve, and shall comply with the city of Porterville or its contracted solid waste and recycling collector(s) specifications for trash
enclosures.
3. Utilities: All units shall have separate gas and electric meters and provisions for individual shutoff of all utility valves, including water.
4. Warranty For Improvements: The subdivider shall provide to the condominium association and/or purchaser a one year warranty on all physical
improvements required under this section.
5. Long Term Reserves: Prior to approval of the final map, or parcel map if no final map is required, the subdivider shall provide evidence to the city
that a long term reserve fund for replacement has been established in the name of the condominium association. Such fund shall be based on a
reserve study showing the amount which must be set aside monthly for the reserve account.
G. Covenants, Conditions, And Restrictions: Project covenants, codes, and restrictions (CC&Rs) shall be developed, and shall be reviewed and approved
by the city attorney and zoning administrator prior to approval of the final or parcel map. In addition to the following provisions, the CC&Rs shall
reference by incorporation the approved conditions of approval, and shall be recorded in conjunction with the final or parcel map.
1. Right Of Public Entry To Common Area: Officers, agents, and employees of the city, the county, the state, and the United States government, and
any department, bureau, or agency thereof, shall have the right of immediate access to all common areas at all times for the purpose of preserving
the public health, safety, and welfare, except in those instances where a common area is accessible only through a private unit.
2. Maintenance Of Common Area: Provision shall be made both for annual assessments of the owners for maintenance and special assessments for
capital improvements. The amount of the regular annual assessment and the procedure for its change shall be specified. The manner in which
special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, the cost of any construction, reconstruction, repair, or
replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. Both annual and special assessments may be collected on a
monthly basis. The remedies which the condominium association may bring for the nonpayment of assessments shall be specified and may include
penalties for late payment. Assignment of the maintenance responsibilities of all improvements and utility systems for each unit shall be specified.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 475/636
3. Utility Easements Over Private Streets And Other Areas: Required public utility easements shall be referenced and any required access routes
necessary to assure that firefighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas.
4. Access For Construction, Maintenance, Or Repairs: Each owner and the condominium association shall have an easement for entry upon any
privately owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction, maintenance, or repair for the benefit of the common area or the owners of
the units in common.
5. Right To Terminate Management And Maintenance Contracts: Unless otherwise prohibited by law, or any local, state, or federal regulation, reference
shall be made to the condominium association's right to terminate the contract of any person or organization engaged by the developer to perform
management or maintenance duties three (3) months after the condominium association assumes control of the project, or at that time renegotiate
any such contracts.
6. CC&R Amendments: A statement that the CC&Rs shall not be amended, modified, or changed without first obtaining the written consent of the city.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 409. AMENDMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT
409.01: CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF MAPS:
A. Applicability: The city may approve corrections and amendments to the following maps:
1. Tentative Maps:
a. Minor Changes: Minor changes in an approved tentative map may be approved by the zoning administrator and city engineer upon application by
the subdivider or on the city's own initiative provided that:
(1) No lots, units or building sites or structures are added;
(2) Changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; and
(3) There are no resulting violations of the municipal code.
b. Substantive Changes: Amendments of an approved tentative map for a subdivision that, in the opinion of the zoning administrator and city
engineer are not minor, shall be presented to the city council for approval subject to the procedures for processing a tentative map set forth in
article 402, "Tentative Maps", of this series. The zoning administrator and city engineer may approve substantive changes to an approved tentative
parcel map in the same manner set forth in article 405, "Parcel Maps", of this series.
c. Effect Of Amendments: Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map.
2. Final Map: Amendments to a final map or parcel map may be made in any of the following instances without providing public notice:
a. To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the map.
b. To show any course or distance that was omitted from the map.
c. To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map.
d. To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, replacement or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with
responsibilities for setting monuments.
e. To show the proper location of any monument that has been changed in location, or character, or that was originally shown at the wrong location
or incorrectly as to its character.
f. To correct any additional information filed or recorded as part of the final map in accordance with section 66434.2 of the subdivision map act, if the
correction does not impose any additional burden on the present owners of the property and does not alter any right, title, or interest in the
property reflected on the recorded map.
g. To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the city engineer that does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions
may include, but not be limited to, lots and numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include
changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final map.
h. To make modifications when there are changes that make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and:
(1) The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the owners of the property;
(2) The modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and
(3) The city finds that the map as modified does not meet the findings in section 400.04, "Grounds For Denial", of this series.
B. Form And Contents: Amendments to either tentative or final maps may be made with a certificate of correction or an amending map. The amending
map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending maps
shall conform to the applicable requirements of this series. The amending map shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the
owners of the property affected by the correction or omission as of the date of the filing or recording of the original recorded map.
C. Review And Approval:
1. General Review: The amending map or certificate of correction shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval, accompanied by the
required fee. The city engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and, if the only changes are those set forth in subsection
A of this section, the city engineer shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 476/636
2. Certificate Of Correction: The city engineer shall have twenty (20) days to examine the certificate of correction for compliance with subsections A
and B of this section, endorse a statement on it of his or her examination and certification, and present it to the county recorder for recordation. If the
city engineer determines that the certificate of correction fails to comply with this section, the city engineer shall return the certificate to the applicant
with a written statement of the changes necessary. The city engineer shall have ten (10) days after resubmission and approval of the amended
certificate of correction to present it to the county recorder for recordation.
D. Filing With The County Recorder: The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the city engineer shall be filed in the office of the Tulare
County recorder in which the original map was filed. Upon such filing, the county recorder shall index the names of the fee owners and the appropriate
subdivision designation shown on the amending map or certificate of correction in the general index and map index, respectively. The original map
shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and shall impart constructive notice of all the corrections in the same manner as though upon
the original map. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
409.02: ENFORCEMENT AND JUDICIAL REVIEW:
A. Purpose: This section establishes procedures the city will use to enforce the requirements of this series, including compliance with any conditions of
approval imposed to protect public health, safety, and welfare and promote development in accordance with the general plan.
B. Prohibition:
1. No Sale Or Lease Until Final Maps Are In Full Compliance: No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property, or
commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof, for which a final map is
required by this series or the subdivision map act, until a map, in full compliance with the provisions of this series and the subdivision map act, has
been filed with the Tulare County recorder.
2. No Conveyances Made By Parcel Number Until Final Maps Are Filed: Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final map is
required shall not be made by parcel number, letter or other designation, unless and until the final map has been filed for record with the Tulare
County recorder.
3. Exceptions:
a. This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in
compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was
established.
b. Subsections B1 and B2 of this section shall not prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease, or finance real property or to construct improvements
where the sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final or parcel
map.
c. This section shall not, in any way, modify or affect the provisions of section 11018.2 of the Business And Professions Code.
C. Remedies:
1. Voidable Sale: Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property that has been divided, or that has resulted from a division, in violation
of the provisions of this series or the subdivision map act, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, any
heir, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation. The deed of
conveyance, sale, or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than
those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his or her assignee, heir or devisee.
2. Action In Superior Court: Any grantee, or successor in interest, of real property that has been divided, or that has resulted from a division, in violation
of the provisions of this series or the subdivision map act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the
superior court to recover any damages suffered by reason of the division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the
property in violation and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.
3. Exceptions:
a. Certificate Of Compliance: The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of
compliance filed in accordance with subsection E of this section, or identified in a recorded final map, from and after the date of recording.
b. Other Provisions Of Law: The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any
other provision of law.
4. Limitation Period: For purposes of this section, the limitation period for commencing an action, either civil or criminal, against the subdivider or owner
of record at the time of a violation of this series or the subdivision map act, shall be tolled for any time period during which there is no constructive
notice of the violation, because the owner of record, at the time of the violation or at any time thereafter, failed to record a deed, lease, or financing
document with the county recorder.
D. Effect On City Permits And Approvals:
1. No Issuance Of Permit Or Approval: The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property that has been
divided, or that has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this series or the subdivision map act if it finds that development of the
real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant was the
owner of the real property at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is the current owner of the real property, with or without actual or
constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of interest in the real property.
2. Imposing Additional Conditions: If the city issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, it may
impose only those conditions that would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest in
the property, and that had been established at such time by this series. If the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation, the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 477/636
city may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in
accordance with subsection E of this section, only those conditions stipulated in that certificate shall be applicable.
E. Certificate Of Compliance: Any person owning real property or in contract of sale of the real property may request the zoning administrator to determine
whether such property complies with the provisions of this series and the subdivision map act. A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a
certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described.
1. Form And Contents: An application for a determination of compliance shall be submitted to the community development department together with a
plat map, required fee, and such information the city deems necessary, including, but not limited to:
a. The name or names of owners of the parcel.
b. The assessor parcel number or numbers of the parcel.
c. The number of parcels for which the certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance is being issued and recorded.
d. The legal description of the parcel or parcels for which the certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance is being issued and
recorded.
e. A notice stating:
This certificate relates only to issues of compliance or noncompliance with the Subdivision Map Act and local ordinances enacted pursuant
thereto. The parcel described herein may be sold, leased, or financed without further compliance with the Subdivision Map Act or any local
ordinance enacted pursuant thereto. Development of the parcel may require issuance of a permit or permits, or other grant or grants of approval.
f. Any conditions to be fulfilled and implemented prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property,
as specified in the conditional certificate of compliance.
2. Determination Of Compliance: If the zoning administrator determines that the real property complies with this series and the subdivision map act, the
zoning administrator shall forward a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall
identify the real property and shall state that the division of land complies with this series and the subdivision map act.
3. Determination Of Noncompliance: If the zoning administrator determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this series or
the subdivision map act, the zoning administrator may issue a conditional certificate of compliance by imposing any conditions that would have been
applicable to the division of land at the time the applicant acquired his or her interest and that had been established at that time by this series and the
subdivision map act.
4. Recording The Certificate: Upon making a determination and establishing the conditions, the zoning administrator shall file a conditional certificate of
compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate, a
grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions
shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with these
conditions shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property is issued.
F. Notice Of Violation:
1. Notice Of Intention: If the zoning administrator has knowledge that real property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this series or the
subdivision map act, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail to the current owner of record. The notice
shall describe the property in detail, name the owner, describe the violation, and state that the owner will be given opportunity to present evidence.
The notice shall specify the date, time and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the zoning administrator why a notice of
violation should not be recorded.
2. Determination By The Zoning Administrator: The meeting shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than sixty (60) days from the date
of mailing. If, within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice, the owner fails to notify the zoning administrator objecting to the recording of the notice
of violation, the zoning administrator shall record it. If, after the owner presents evidence, the zoning administrator determines that the property has
in fact been illegally divided, the zoning administrator shall record the notice of violation. If, after the owner presents evidence, the zoning
administrator determines that there has been no violation, the zoning administrator shall mail a clearance letter to the owner.
3. Notice Of Violation: The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in the property.
G. Penalties: A violation of this series by a person who is the subdivider or an owner of record, at the time of the violation, of property involved in the
violation is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding one year or in the state prison, by a fine not exceeding ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), or by both fine and imprisonment. Every other violation of this series is a misdemeanor.
H. Judicial Action: Any action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the decision of the city engineer, zoning administrator, or city council
concerning a subdivision, or of any of the proceedings, acts or determinations taken, done or made prior to such decision, or to determine the
reasonableness, legality or validity of any condition attached thereto, shall not be maintained by any person unless the action or proceeding is
commenced and service of summons effected within ninety (90) days after the date of the decision. Thereafter, all persons are barred from any such
action or proceeding or any defense of invalidity or unreasonableness of the decision or of the proceedings, acts or determinations. Any such
proceeding shall take precedence over all matters of the calendar of the court except criminal, probate, eminent domain and forcible entry and unlawful
detainer proceedings.
I. Other Legal Action: This series does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or
corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the superior court of
Tulare County, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease or financing in violation of this series or the subdivision map
act. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 478/636
Chapter Series 500
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
ARTICLE 500. AIRPORT ENVIRONS (AE) OVERLAY DISTRICT
500.01: PURPOSE:
As used herein, "airport" means the Porterville Municipal Airport. The airport environs (AE) overlay district is established to:
A. Protect land uses around the airport from potential hazards of airport operations;
B. Identify a range of uses compatible with airport accident hazard and airport noise exposure;
C. Prohibit the development of incompatible uses that are detrimental to the general health, safety and welfare and to existing and future airport
operations;
D. Require noise attenuated construction within the airport environs; and
E. Comply with federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.02: APPLICABILITY:
The standards and regulations of this article apply to all lands within the AE overlay district mapped on the official zoning map.
Regulations in the AE overlay district modify and supplement the underlying zoning district regulations. Within the AE overlay district, noise impact zones,
airport safety zones, and airspace protection zones apply. Where a proposed use, building, or land is impacted by more than one zone, the use, building
and/or land shall conform to the requirements of all applicable zones. Where zones impose conflicting requirements, the most restrictive of the
requirements shall apply. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.03: USE RESTRICTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land or water within the AE overlay district in such a manner that would:
A. Create a "hazard to air navigation" as determined by the FAA;
B. Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport;
C. Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others;
D. Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport;
E. Create steam or other emissions that cause thermal plumes or other forms of unstable air;
F. Create electrical interference with navigation signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft;
G. Create an increased attraction for wildlife. Of particular concern are landfills and certain recreational or agricultural uses that attract large flocks of birds
which pose bird strike hazards to aircraft in flight; or
H. Otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.04: DEVELOPMENT BY RIGHT:
Nothing in this article prohibits:
A. Construction of a single-family home, and a second unit, outside of safety zone 1, on a legal lot of record as of the date of adoption hereof if such use is
permitted in the underlying zoning district.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 479/636
B. Lot line adjustments provided that new developable parcels would not be created and the resulting intensity or density of the affected property would not
exceed the applicable criteria indicated in section 500.06, table 500.06A of this article.
C. The construction of buildings, the development of facilities, and the establishment of uses other than residential uses in a permanent building or facility,
within the "aviation" area as defined on the FAA's "approved conditionally" airport layout plan and which are determined "airport supporting" by the
airport manager or city council. Crew quarters in a permanent building or facility may be allowed with conditional use permit approval.
D. Uses and facilities in place at the adoption of this chapter within the "aviation" area as defined on the FAA's "approved conditionally" airport layout plan.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.05: REGULATIONS FOR NOISE EXPOSURE:
A. Noise Exposure; Compatibility Criteria: In regard to noise exposure levels, land uses are classified as being either "normally compatible", "conditional"
or "incompatible" as defined below. All land uses are compatible at noise exposure less than CNEL fifty five (55) dB.
1. Normally compatible:
a. Indoor Uses: Either the activities associated with the land use are inherently noisy or standard construction methods will sufficiently attenuate
exterior noise to an acceptable indoor community noise equivalent level (CNEL); for land use types that are compatible because of inherent noise
levels, sound attenuation must be provided for associated office, retail, and other noise sensitive indoor spaces sufficient to reduce exterior noise
to an interior maximum of CNEL fifty (50) dB.
b. Outdoor Uses: Except as noted in the table, activities associated with the land use may be carried out with minimal interference from aircraft noise.
2. Conditional:
a. Indoor Uses: Building structure must be capable of attenuating exterior noise to the indoor CNEL indicated by the number in the table cell.
b. Outdoor Uses: Caution shall be exercised with regard to noise sensitive outdoor uses; these uses are likely to be disrupted by aircraft noise
events; acceptability is dependent upon characteristics of the specific use. Noise sensitive land uses are ones for which the associated primary
activities, whether indoor or outdoor, are susceptible to disruption by loud noise events. The most common types of noise sensitive land uses
include, but are not limited to, the following: residential, hospitals, nursing facilities, intermediate care facilities, educational facilities, libraries,
museums, places of worship, childcare facilities, and certain types of passive recreational parks and open space.
3. Incompatible:
a. Indoor Uses: Unacceptable noise interference if windows are open; at exposures above CNEL sixty five (65) dB, extensive mitigation techniques
required to make the indoor environment acceptable for performance of activities associated with the land use.
b. Outdoor Uses: Severe noise interference makes the outdoor environment unacceptable for performance of activities associated with the land use.
B. Noise Exposure; Land Use Compatibility: Table 500.05B of this section describes the compatibility of various land uses within the noise impact zones as
shown in section 500.10, map 500-1, "Airport Impact Map: Future Noise", of this article. Land uses not specifically listed in table 500.05B of this section
shall be evaluated by the zoning administrator based on the criteria for the most similar comparable use.
The "conditional criteria" column lists the criteria to be met by uses listed as "conditional". The note numbers refer to criteria listed at the end of the
table.
When a proposed building lies within multiple CNEL range zones (e.g., partly in 60 to 65 dB and partly in 65 to 70 dB), the higher range zone applies
for the purposes of determining sound attenuation requirements unless less than twenty five percent (25%) of the building floor area is within that zone.
In such case, the lower range zone may be used.
TABLE 500.05B: LAND USE COMPATIBILITY BY NOISE EXPOSURE LEVEL
NC = Normally compatible C = Conditional I = Incompatible
Land Use
Exterior Noise Exposure
(CNEL dB)
Conditional
Criteria
55 -
60
60 -
65
65 -
70
70 -
75
75 -
80
Outdoor uses (limited or no activities in buildings):
Natural land areas: woods, brush lands, desert NC NC NC NC NC See note 1
Water: floodplains, wetlands, lakes, reservoirs NC NC NC NC NC
Agriculture (except residences and livestock): crops, orchards, vineyards, pasture, rangeland
NC NC NC NC NC
Livestock uses: feedlots, stockyards, breeding, fish hatcheries, horse stables C C C C I See note 2
Outdoor major assembly facilities (capacity .1,000 people): spectator oriented outdoor
stadiums, amphitheaters, fairgrounds, zoos
C C C I I See note 3
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 480/636
Group recreation (limited spectator stands): athletic fields, water recreation facilities, picnic
areas
NC NC C I I See note 3
Small/nongroup recreation: golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges NC C C I I See note 3
Local parks: children oriented neighborhood parks, playgrounds NC C I I I See note 3
Camping: campgrounds, recreational vehicle/motor home parks NC NC I I I
Cemeteries (excluding chapels) NC NC NC NC I See note 4
Residential and lodging uses:
Single-family residential: individual dwellings, townhouses, mobile homes, bed and breakfast
inns
C,
40
C,
40
I I I See note 5
Multi-family residential C,
40
C,
40
I I I See note 5
Long term lodging (>30 nights): extended stay hotels, dormitories NC C,
45
I I I
Short term lodging (.30 nights): hotels, motels, other transient lodging (except
conference/assembly facilities)
NC C,
45
I I I
Congregate care: retirement homes, assisted living, nursing homes, intermediate care
facilities
NC C,
45
I I I
Educational and institutional uses:
Family daycare homes (.14 children) NC I I I I
Children's schools: K - 12, daycare centers (>14 children); school libraries NC I I I I
Adult education classroom space: adult schools, colleges, universities NC C,
45
C,
45
I I See note 6
Community libraries NC C,
45
I I I
Indoor major assembly facilities (capacity .1,000 people): auditoriums, conference centers,
concert halls, indoor arenas, casinos
NC C,
45
C,
45
I I
Indoor large assembly facilities (capacity 300 to 999 people): movie theaters, places of
worship, cemetery chapels, mortuaries
NC C,
45
C,
45
I I
Indoor recreation: gymnasiums, clubhouses, athletic clubs, dance studios NC NC C,
50
I I
Inpatient medical: hospitals, mental hospitals NC C,
45
NC I I
Outpatient medical: healthcare centers, clinics NC C,
45
C,
45
I I
Penal institutions: prisons, reformatories NC C,
45
C,
45
I I
Public safety facilities: police, fire stations NC NC C,
50
C,
50
I
Commercial, office and service uses:
Major retail: regional shopping centers, "big box" retail NC NC C,
50
I I
Local retail: community/neighborhood shopping centers, grocery stores NC NC C,
50
I I
Eating/drinking establishments: restaurants, fast food dining, bars NC NC C,
50
I I
Limited retail/wholesale: furniture, automobiles, heavy equipment, lumberyards, nurseries NC NC C,
50
I I
Offices: professional services, doctors, finance, civic; radio, television and recording studios,
office space associated with other listed uses
NC NC C,
50
I I
Personal and miscellaneous services: barbers, car washes, print shops NC NC C,
50
I I
Vehicle fueling: gas stations, trucking and transportation terminals NC NC NC C,
50
C,
50
Industrial, manufacturing, and storage uses:
Hazardous materials production: oil refineries, chemical plants NC NC NC NC NC
Heavy industrial NC NC NC NC NC
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 481/636
Light industrial, high intensity: food products preparation, electronic equipment NC NC NC C,
50
C,
50
Light industrial, low intensity: machine shops, wood products, auto repair NC NC NC C,
50
C,
50
Research and development NC NC C,
50
C,
50
I
Indoor storage: wholesale sales, warehouses, mini/other indoor storage, barns, greenhouses
NC NC NC NC NC
Outdoor storage: public works yards, automobile dismantling NC NC NC NC NC
Mining and extraction NC NC NC NC NC
Transportation, communication, and utilities:
Airport terminals: airline, general aviation NC NC NC C,
50
I
Rail and bus stations NC NC NC C,
50
I
Transportation routes: road and rail rights of way, bus stops NC NC NC NC NC
Auto parking: surface lots, structures NC NC NC NC NC
Communications facilities: emergency communications, broadcast and cell towers NC NC NC NC NC
Power plants NC NC NC NC NC
Electrical substations NC NC NC NC NC
Wastewater facilities: treatment, disposal NC NC NC NC NC
Solid waste disposal facilities: landfill, incineration NC NC NC NC NC
Solid waste transfer facilities, recycle centers NC NC NC NC NC
Notes:
Conditional Criteria:
1. Compatible at levels indicated, but noise disruption of natural quiet will occur.
2. Exercise caution with uses involving noise sensitive animals.
3. Exercise caution if clear audibility by users is essential.
4. Compatible at levels indicated, but noise disruption of outdoor activities will occur.
5. Only on existing residential parcels; no subdivisions are allowed.
6. Applies only to classrooms; offices, laboratory facilities, gymnasiums, outdoor athletic facilities, and other uses to be evaluated as indicated
for those land use categories.
C. Single Event Noise Levels: Single event noise levels shall be considered when evaluating the compatibility of highly noise sensitive land uses such as
residences, schools, libraries, and outdoor theaters. Susceptibility to speech interference and sleep disturbance are among the factors that make
certain land uses noise sensitive. Single event noise levels are especially important in areas that are regularly overflown by aircraft, but that do not
produce significant CNEL contours (helicopter overflight areas are a particular example). Flight patterns for Porterville Municipal Airport shall be
considered in the review process. Acoustical studies or on site noise measurements may be required to assist in determining the compatibility of
sensitive uses.
D. Maximum Acceptable Interior Noise Levels: Land uses for which interior activities may be easily disrupted by noise shall comply with the following
maximum, aircraft related, interior noise level criteria:
1. CNEL forty (40) dB in any habitable room of single- or multi-family residences.
2. CNEL forty five (45) dB for: hotels, motels, and other lodging; hospitals and nursing homes; places of worship, meeting halls, theaters, and
mortuaries; and schools, libraries, and museums.
3. CNEL fifty (50) dB in offices and office areas of industrial facilities.
E. Residential Interior Noise Level Reduction: New dwellings exposed to CNEL above sixty (60) dB shall incorporate the following noise reduction design
measures unless alternative designs that achieve and maintain an interior noise level of CNEL forty (40) dB are incorporated and verified by a board
certified acoustical engineer:
1. All facades must be constructed with substantial weight and insulation;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 482/636
2. Sound rated windows providing noise reduction performance similar to that of the facade must be included for habitable rooms;
3. Sound rated doors or storm doors providing noise reduction performance similar to that of the facade must be included for all exterior entries;
4. Acoustic baffling of vents is required for chimneys, fans, and gable ends;
5. Installation of a mechanical ventilation system affording comfort under closed window conditions; and
6. Double stud construction, double doors, and heavy roofs with ceilings of two (2) layers of gypsum board on resilient channels. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
500.06: REGULATIONS FOR SAFETY:
A. Development Standards: Table 500.06A of this section describes the development standards for all development within the airport safety zones as
shown in section 500.10, map 500-2, "Airport Impact Map: Safety", of this article. Additional standards follow the table.
TABLE 500.06A: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS -
AIRPORT SAFETY ZONES
Standard
Safety Zones
1 2 3 4 5 6
Maximum lot coverage (% of site) 0 40 60 70 70 100
Nonresidential development:
Maximum sitewide average intensity (people/acre) 10 60 100 160 160 n/a
Maximum single acre intensity (people/acre) 20 120 250 400 400 n/a
Residential development:
Maximum sitewide average density (units/acre) n/a n/a 4 4 n/a n/a
Maximum single acre density (units/acre) n/a n/a 12 12 n/a n/a
1. Intensity Calculation:
a. Nonresidential Development: Usage intensity calculations shall include all people (e.g., employees, customers/visitors) who may be on the
property at any single point in time, whether indoors or outdoors. The city may make exceptions for rare special events (e.g., an airshow at the
airport) for which a facility is not designed and normally not used and for which extra safety precautions can be taken as appropriate.
b. Residential Development:
(1) The maximum allowable residential densities are intended to include density bonuses and any other bonuses or allowances that the city may
provide for affordable housing developed in accordance with the provisions of state and/or local law or regulation. The overall density of a
development project, including any bonuses or allowances, must comply with the allowable density criteria in table 500.06A of this section.
(2) Second units are excluded from density calculations.
c. Mixed Use Development:
(1) Where the residential and nonresidential uses are proposed to be situated on separate parts of the project site, the project shall be evaluated
as separate developments. The residential density shall be calculated with respect to the area(s) to be devoted to residential development and
the nonresidential intensity calculated with respect to the area(s) proposed for nonresidential uses.
(2) Development in which residential uses are proposed to be located in conjunction with nonresidential uses in the same or nearby buildings on
the same site must meet both residential density and nonresidential intensity criteria. The number of dwelling units shall not exceed the density
limits indicated in table 500.06A of this section. Additionally, the normal occupancy of the residential portion shall be added to that of the
nonresidential portion and the total occupancy shall be evaluated with respect to the nonresidential usage intensity criteria cited in table 500.06A
of this section.
B. Airport Safety; Compatibility Criteria: In regard to airport safety, land uses are classified as being either "normally compatible", "conditional" or
"incompatible" as defined below.
1. Normally compatible: Normal examples of the use are compatible under the presumption that usage intensity and maximum lot coverage criteria in
table 500.06A of this section will be met. Atypical examples may require review to ensure compliance with usage intensity and lot coverage criteria.
Noise, airspace protection, and/or overflight limitations may apply.
2. Conditional: Use is compatible if indicated floor area ratio (FAR), lot coverage, and other listed conditions are met.
3. Incompatible: Use shall not be permitted under any circumstances.
C. Airport Safety; Land Use Compatibility: Table 500.06C of this section describes the compatibility of various land uses within the airport safety zones as
shown in section 500.10, map 500-2, "Airport Impact Map: Safety", of this article. Land uses are classified as being either "normally compatible",
"conditional" or "incompatible".
Land uses not specifically listed in table 500.06C of this section shall be evaluated by the zoning administrator based on the criteria for the most similar
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 483/636
comparable use.
Numbers in table cells refer to the maximum allowable FAR.
Notes in table cells refer to criteria to be met by uses listed as "conditional". The note numbers refer to criteria listed at the end of the table.
TABLE 500.06C: LAND USE COMPATIBILITY - AIRPORT SAFETY ZONES
NC = Normally compatible C = Conditional I = Incompatible
Land Use
Safety Zones
1 2 3 4 5 6
Outdoor uses (limited or no activities in buildings):
Natural land areas: woods, brush lands, desert C1
NC NC NC NC NC
Water: floodplains, wetlands, lakes, reservoirs C1
NC NC NC NC NC
Agriculture (except residences and livestock): crops, orchards, vineyards, pasture, rangeland C2
NC NC NC NC NC
Livestock uses: feedlots, stockyards, breeding, fish hatcheries, horse stables I NC NC NC NC NC
Outdoor major assembly facilities (capacity .1,000 people): spectator oriented outdoor
stadiums, amphitheaters, fairgrounds, zoos
I I I I I C3
Group recreation (limited spectator stands): athletic fields, water recreation facilities, picnic
areas
I I C3 NC C3,4 NC
Small/nongroup recreation: golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges I NC NC NC NC NC
Local parks: children oriented neighborhood parks, playgrounds I NC C3 NC C3,4 NC
Camping: campgrounds, recreational vehicle/motor home parks I I C5 C5 C4,5 NC
Cemeteries (except chapels) I NC NC NC NC NC
Residential and lodging uses:
Single-family residential: individual dwellings, townhouses, mobile homes, bed and breakfast
inns
I C6 C C C6 NC
Multi-family residential I I I I I NC
Long term lodging (>30 nights): extended stay hotels, dormitories I I I I I NC
Short term lodging (.30 nights): hotels, motels, other transient lodging (except
conference/assembly facilities)
I I C, 0.46 C, 0.74 I NC
Congregate care: retirement homes, assisted living, nursing homes, intermediate care facilities
I I I I I NC
Educational and institutional uses:
Family daycare homes (.14 children) I I I I I NC
Children's schools: K - 12, daycare centers (>14 children); school libraries I I C7 C7 I NC
Adult education classroom space: adult schools, colleges, universities I I C,
0.09 8
C,
0.15 8
I NC
Community libraries I I C, 0.23 C, 0.37 I NC
Indoor major assembly facilities (capacity .1,000 people): auditoriums, conference centers,
concert halls, indoor arenas, casinos
I I I I I C3
Indoor large assembly facilities (capacity 300 to 999 people): movie theaters, places of
worship, cemetery chapels, mortuaries
I I C, 0.03 C, 0.05 I NC
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 484/636
Indoor recreation: gymnasiums, clubhouses, athletic clubs, dance studios I I C, 0.14 C, 0.22 I NC
Inpatient medical: hospitals, mental hospitals I I C7 C7 I NC
Outpatient medical: healthcare centers, clinics I I C, 0.55 C, 0.88 I NC
Penal institutions: prisons, reformatories I I I I I NC
Public safety facilities: police, fire stations I I C3 C C3,4 NC
Commercial, office, and service uses:
Major retail: regional shopping centers, "big box" retail I I C,
0.25 9,10
C,
0.40 9,10
I NC
Local retail: community/neighborhood shopping centers, grocery stores I I C,
0.39 10
C,
0.62 10
I NC
Eating/drinking establishments: restaurants, fast food dining, bars I I C, 0.14 C, 0.22 C,
0.22 4
NC
Limited retail/wholesale: furniture, automobiles, heavy equipment, lumberyards, nurseries I C,
0.34 11
NC NC C,
0.92 11
NC
Offices: professional services, doctors, finance, civic; radio, television and recording studios,
office space associated with other listed uses
I C,
0.30
C, 0.49 C, 0.79 C,
0.79 4
NC
Personal and miscellaneous services: barbers, car washes, print shops I C,
0.28
NC NC NC NC
Vehicle fueling: gas stations, trucking and transportation terminals I I NC NC C12 NC
Industrial, manufacturing, and storage uses:
Hazardous materials production: oil refineries, chemical plants I I I I I C3
Heavy industrial I I C13 C13 I NC
Light industrial, high intensity: food products preparation, electronic equipment I I C,
0.46 13
C,
0.74 13
I NC
Light industrial, low intensity: machine shops, wood products, auto repair I C,
0.41 13
NC NC C,
1.10 13
NC
Research and development I I C,
0.69 13
C,
1.10 13
I NC
Indoor storage: wholesale sales, warehouses, mini/other indoor storage, barns, greenhouses I C,
1.38
NC NC NC NC
Outdoor storage: public works yards, automobile dismantling I NC NC NC NC NC
Mining and extraction I NC NC NC NC NC
Transportation, communication, and utilities:
Airport terminals: airline, general aviation I NC NC NC NC NC
Rail and bus stations I C3 NC NC C3 NC
Transportation routes: road and rail rights of way, bus stops C2
NC NC NC NC NC
Auto parking: surface lots, structures C2
NC NC NC NC NC
Communications facilities: emergency communications, broadcast and cell towers I C3 C3 C3 C3 C3
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 485/636
Power plants I I C14 C14 I NC
Electrical substations I C3 NC NC C3 NC
Wastewater facilities: treatment, disposal I NC NC NC NC NC
Solid waste disposal facilities: landfill, incineration I NC NC NC NC NC
Solid waste transfer facilities, recycle centers I NC NC NC NC NC
Notes:
Conditional Criteria:
1. Objects above runway elevation not allowed in object free area (OFA), the dimensions of which are established by FAA airport design
standards for the runway.
2. Not allowed in OFA.
3. Allowed only if site outside safety zone would not serve intended function.
4. Not allowed within 1,000 feet of runway centerline.
5. Allowed only if intensity criteria listed in table 500.06A of this section are met.
6. Accessory buildings only. Dwelling must be located outside of safety zone.
7. No new sites or land acquisition. Building replacement and expansion allowed for existing facilities. School expansion is limited to 50
students.
8. Also subject to limitations of individual components of campus facilities (e.g., assembly facilities, offices, gymnasiums).
9. Building capacity limited to 1,000 people.
10. Eating and drinking establishments that make up 10 percent or more of the total floor area shall be evaluated separately.
11. Design site to locate buildings outside of safety zone whenever possible. Parking areas may be located within safety zone.
12. No fuel tanks within 1,000 feet of runway centerline.
13. Avoid bulk storage of hazardous materials. Permitting agencies to evaluate possible need for special measures to minimize hazards if struck
by aircraft.
14. Peaker plants only. Primary plants not allowed.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.07: REGULATIONS FOR AIRSPACE PROTECTION:
A. Height Limitations: The criteria for determining the acceptability of a project with respect to height shall be based upon the standards set forth in federal
aviation regulations (FAR) part 77, subpart C, objects affecting navigable airspace. Additionally, where an FAA aeronautical study of a proposed object
is required in accordance with FAR part 77, subpart C, the results of that study shall be taken into account by the city.
1. Maximum Height:
a. Except as provided below, no object, including a mobile or temporary object such as construction crane, shall have a height that would result in
penetration of any obstruction surface depicted for Porterville Municipal Airport in section 500.10, map 500-4, "Airport Impact Map: Airspace
Protection", of this article.
b. Within the primary surface and beneath the approach or transitional surfaces, objects shall be limited in height consistent with the airspace
protection surfaces defined by FAR part 77.
2. Exception: Outside the primary surface and the approach or transitional surfaces, no object shall be limited to a height of less than thirty five feet
(35') above the ground even if the object would penetrate an FAR part 77 surface and thus constitute an obstruction.
B. FAA Notification: Any person proposing construction or alteration within the AE overlay district shall submit notification of the proposal to the FAA if such
construction or alteration exceeds any of the following height standards:
1. Two hundred feet (200') above ground level.
2. The plane of an imaginary surface extending outward and upward at a slope of one hundred to one (100:1) for a distance of twenty thousand feet
(20,000') from the nearest point of any runway. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 486/636
500.08: SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS:
A. Avigation Easement Dedication: An avigation easement shall be dedicated to the city of Porterville for the following development:
1. Any residential development within the CNEL fifty five (55) dB contour shown in section 500.10, map 500-1, "Airport Impact Map: Future Noise", of
this article.
2. Any residential or nonresidential development within safety zones 1 through 5 as shown in section 500.10, map 500-2, "Airport Impact Map: Safety",
of this article.
3. Any residential or nonresidential development within an area beneath a transitional surface or the inner ten thousand feet (10,000') of an approach
surface.
B. Overflight Notification: If no avigation easement is otherwise provided, residential development within the primary or secondary overflight area indicated
in section 500.10, map 500-3, "Airport Impact Map: Overflight", of this article, an overflight notification consistent with the following standards shall be
recorded:
1. The notification shall contain the following language dictated by state law with regard to real estate transfer disclosure:
NOTICE OF AIRPORT IN VICINITY: This property is presently located in the vicinity of an airport, within what is known as an airport influence
area. For that reason, the property may be subject to some of the annoyances or inconveniences associated with proximity to airport operations (for
example: noise, vibration, or odors). Individual sensitivities to those annoyances can vary from person to person. You may wish to consider what
airport annoyances, if any, are associated with the property before you complete your purchase and determine whether they are acceptable to you.
2. The notification shall be made evident to prospective purchasers of the property and shall appear on the property deed. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.09: NONCONFORMING USES:
Lawful nonconforming structures may be continued and maintained without being required to conform to the requirements of this article in accordance with
the following:
A. Residential Single-Family: A nonconforming single-family dwelling may be maintained, remodeled, reconstructed, or expanded in size as long as there
is no increase in the number of dwelling units. Secondary dwelling units may be constructed. The lot line of an existing single-family residential parcel
may be adjusted as long as it does not result in an increase of allowable density.
B. Residential Multi-Family: Nonconforming multi-family residential dwellings may be maintained, remodeled, or reconstructed. The size of individual
dwelling units may be increased, but additional dwelling units may not be added. Sound attenuation and avigation easement dedication requirements
established by this article shall apply.
C. Nonresidential: Nonconforming nonresidential facilities may be maintained, altered, or reconstructed. However, any such work must not result in
expansion of either the portion of the site devoted to the nonconforming use or the floor area of the buildings and must not result in an increase in the
usage intensity (the number of people per acre) above the levels existing at the time of adoption of this chapter. Sound attenuation and avigation
easement dedication requirements established by this article shall apply. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
500.10: AIRPORT IMPACT MAPS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 487/636
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 488/636
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 489/636
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 490/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 501. HILLSIDE ZONE (HZ) OVERLAY DISTRICT
501.01: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
A. The hillside zone (HZ) overlay district is established to achieve the city's objective to facilitate and permit the orderly development of property within the
hillside areas through a set of hillside development standards aimed at protecting the public health, safety and welfare; protecting and preserving
natural and biological resources for the long term benefit of the Porterville community and the broader community; recognizing the inherent value in the
properties subject to this article; allowing size, type, location, density, and intensity of development based on available infrastructure, the geographic
steepness of terrain, presence of unique geographic conditions and constraints, and presence of environmentally sensitive areas; and optimizing the
use of sensitive site design, grading, landscape architecture, and architecture, all to achieve the city's objectives.
B. The HZ overlay district and the regulations contained in this article are intended to provide development that is consistent with and serves to implement
the goals and policies of the general plan for properties classified in the HZ overlay district. Specific regulations and standards address the following
city objectives:
1. To uphold the value of the community and the subject property by protecting ridgelines, prominent landforms, rock outcroppings, open space areas,
hydrologic features, wildlife communities, unique and sensitive habitat and vegetation communities, and other natural, biological, and scenic
resources.
2. Enable property owners to select suitable development sites on their real property for new hillside development projects founded on science based
conclusions, including the use of slope density calculations and maximum land holding capacity, to determine the appropriate density and intensity of
a structure that can be built on a particular hillside slope.
3. To provide for hillside development that maintains the integrity of the hillsides' natural characteristics and features.
FIGURE 501.01B1: HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENTS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 491/636
4. To ensure the ridgelines that frame the city of Porterville will be preserved to the greatest extent possible.
FIGURE 501.01B2: RIDGELINES
5. To facilitate the protection of existing views from vantage points within public open spaces, rights of way, public parks, and private development from
encroachment by new development.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 492/636
6. To minimize grading and cut and fill operations where possible to retain the natural character of the hillside areas.
7. Minimize water runoff and soil erosion incurred in adjusting the terrain to meet on site and off site development needs.
8. To encourage all the characteristics and qualities of a cohesive neighborhood that promotes a "sense of place" within a hillside setting.
9. To promote and encourage a variety of high quality, alternative architectural and development designs and concepts appropriate for hillside areas.
10. To preserve the public health, safety, and welfare and specifically protect the public and property from hazards such as seismic, geologic,
hydrologic and fire, including damage to property from landslides, erosion, earth creep, and stormwater runoff, and other hazards in and near
hillsides.
11. To reflect the city's design goals and policies expressed in the general plan.
12. To require that infrastructure such as, but not limited to, roads, utilities, drainage, and sound attenuation barriers serve both a utilitarian and
aesthetic purpose.
13. To ensure that open space is an integral part of subdivision design.
FIGURE 501.01B3: LANDSCAPING
14. To provide areas where residents can enjoy active and passive recreation.
FIGURE 501.01B4: OPEN SPACE AREAS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 493/636
15. To ensure that proper landscape setbacks are provided to separate residential uses from nonresidential uses and to allow for transitions between
natural open space and development.
FIGURE 501.01B5: BIOSWALES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 494/636
16. To ensure that the circulation system is a beneficial element in the hillside development setting and maintains, to the greatest extent possible, the
natural characteristics of a hillside environment.
17. To ensure quality development that blends with the hillside environment, and to create neighborhoods that display a cohesive and harmonious form
and complementary architectural styles.
18. To minimize resource consumption through the use of a drought tolerant native plant palette. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.02: APPLICABILITY:
The HZ overlay district shall be applied to all properties within the incorporated boundaries of the city of Porterville, as well as those properties within the
city's official sphere of influence, as may be amended from time to time, that are designated hillside development zone on the Porterville 2030 general plan
land use diagram.
The regulations of this chapter and requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not supersede any other regulations or requirements
adopted or imposed by the Porterville city council, the state of California, or any federal agency that has jurisdiction by law over uses and development
authorized by this chapter, including the urban wildland interface code. Where conflict occurs between the provisions of this chapter and any other city
ordinance, chapter, resolution, guideline or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall control, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.03: REQUIRED PLANS AND MATERIALS:
The following information is supplemental to the basic requirements for submittal of subdivision maps, information and/or other entitlement applications
required for review by the zoning administrator and city council. The specified data shall be submitted concurrently with all required application forms and
fees, provided that the zoning administrator may waive submission of items deemed unnecessary. Where appropriate, the following information may be
combined onto submittal exhibits. The submittal of applications for parcel maps, containing four (4) or fewer lots, shall only require items in subsections A,
B, D and E of this section.
A. Topographical Map: A topographical map at a scale specified in development applications. This map shall identify all existing slope banks, ridgelines,
canyons, natural drainage courses, federally recognized blue line streams or waters of the United States, rock outcroppings, existing manmade
features, mines, and existing vegetation. The topographic map shall include areas of protected plant or animal communities identified in the biological
resource survey report described in subsection G2 of this section. Also depicted shall be known landslides and other existing geologic conditions.
B. Conceptual Grading Plan: A conceptual grading plan, which shall include the following items in addition to those required by the municipal code:
1. Top of walls.
2. Top of curbs.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 495/636
3. High point and low point elevations.
4. Pad and/or finished floor elevations.
5. Areas of cut and fill, calculated as a percentage of the total site area.
6. Contours for existing and proposed topography. Existing contours shall be depicted with a dashed line with every fifth contour darker, and proposed
contours shall be depicted as above except with a solid line. Contours shall be shown at minimum intervals of five feet (5') of change in elevation,
with two foot (2') contours shown in the flatter areas below ten percent (10%).
7. Lot and pad dimensions, along with a statistical summary of lot and pad sizes.
8. Design of roads and driveways, including average grades indicated, as well as areas of the steepest grade.
9. Lot drainage, including the gradient of the drainage and flow velocities.
C. Cut And Fill Map: A cut and fill map identifying proposed fill areas colored blue and cut areas colored red, with depths of such areas clearly shown in
ten foot (10') major contour lines. Quantities of each cut and fill area shall also be clearly specified on the map.
D. Slope Analysis Map:
1. A detailed slope analysis map to use in determining the average slope and the amount and location of land as it exists in its natural state. For the
slope analysis map, the applicant shall use a base topographical map of the subject site, prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor. The map shall have a scale of not less than one inch to one hundred feet (1":100') and a two foot (2') contour interval. This
interval may be adjusted with the approval of the zoning administrator and city engineer on the basis of good engineering principles. This base
topographical map shall include all adjoining properties to the extent necessary to determine impacts to neighboring properties to portray the site's
context. The slope map shall delineate slope bands, with monochromatic but distinct colors for the following slope ranges:
a. Up to five and nine-tenths percent (5.9%).
b. Six percent (6%) to ten and nine-tenths percent (10.9%).
c. Eleven percent (11%) to twenty and nine-tenths percent (20.9%).
d. Twenty one percent (21%) to twenty five and nine-tenths percent (25.9%).
e. Twenty six percent (26%) to thirty and nine-tenths percent (30.9%).
f. Thirty one percent (31%) to fifty percent (50%).
g. Greater than fifty percent (50%).
2. Also included shall be a tabulation of the land/area by slope percentage specified in acres. Such slope map shall be prepared using CAD based or
GIS based software specifically designed for such purpose and approved for such use by the city engineer.
3. A calculation of the average slope of the entire parcel pursuant to section 103.07, "Determining Average Slope", of this chapter.
4. Calculations of average slope percent shall be based upon accurate topographic surveys using a two foot (2') contour interval and a horizontal map
scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1":100') or larger.
5. The slope analysis shall be stamped and signed by a registered or licensed professional to provide such analysis and indicating the datum, source,
and scale of topographic data used in the slope analysis.
E. Future House Plotting Map: In the event that no grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be filed with a plan that shows possible future
house plotting and driveway design for each parcel proposed. This future house plotting map shall be prepared on a topographic map at the scale
required in the development application. Access drive and street elevations must be provided.
F. Site Sections: Sufficient number of site sections to clearly illustrate the extent of the proposed grading. The sections shall:
1. All be drawn at the same scale and indexed, or keyed, to the existing topography, grading plan, and project site map. Both vertical and horizontal
scales shall be indicated and not overly exaggerated. The site section shall extend at least one hundred fifty feet (150') outside the project site
boundary to clearly show impact on adjacent property.
2. The site sections shall be stamped and signed by a licensed professional registered in the state of California indicating the datum, source, and scale
of topographic data used in the slope profiles.
3. The site sections shall be stamped and signed by a registered civil engineer indicating the datum, source, and scale of topographic data used in the
slope profiles, and attesting to the fact that the slope profiles have been accurately calculated and identified.
G. Technical Reports: The following technical reports:
1. A geologic and soils report prepared by a licensed professional, in sufficient detail to substantiate and support the design concepts presented in the
application as submitted.
2. A biological resource survey report identifying all existing plant communities, with sensitive or protected species or communities clearly delineated,
as well as known habitat area for protected animal species, including the location of sensitive biological resources. All sensitive species surveys shall
be conducted in accordance with any applicable protocols established by the U.S. fish and wildlife service and the California department of fish and
game. The applicant shall engage in a third party agreement with the city and the selected biological consultant and provide the funding for purposes
of payment to the consultant. The report shall be signed by the person preparing such report, with the signature intended to verify that the mandatory
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 496/636
protocols were conformed to in the analysis as per the city's local guidelines for implementing the California environmental quality act (CEQA). The
submission of the biological survey may be deferred until after initial project submittal as approved by the environmental coordinator.
3. An archaeological survey subject to the same terms as provided in subsection G2 of this section.
H. Architectural And Landscaping Design Guidelines Manual: A comprehensive architectural and landscaping design guideline manual shall be part of the
development application. Such manual shall be required for all hillside development permit applications except those involving the construction of one
single-family dwelling unit on an existing lot, in which case subsection I of this section shall apply. Such manual shall be approved as part of the
applicable hillside development permit and shall be binding upon all subsequent development authorized by that applicable hillside development
permit. The manual shall include the following, but the applicant/landowner may include additional information at his/her discretion:
1. Illustrative, color drawings, photos or similar representations of the various architectural styles to be used with text and visual descriptions on the
overall architectural theme of the project.
2. A neighborhood design diagram depicting the locations of proposed vehicular and pedestrian circulation, utility easements, developable pad,
property lines, perimeter setbacks, parks, and recreation centers.
3. Identification of exterior building materials (structure and trim), roofing materials, and colors for primary structures.
4. Illustrations and descriptions of permitted fencing and wall materials.
5. Illustrations and descriptions of permitted/proposed signage and entry treatments.
6. Description and illustrative drawings or similar representations of how the architecture and building approaches established in the manual implement
the architectural standards set forth in subsection 501.11G, "Architectural Standards; General", of this article.
7. Identification of landscaping approaches and plant palettes for all common open space areas, roadway medians, edge and berm treatments,
common slopes, and private front yard areas.
8. Description of how the landscaping approaches and plant palettes established in the manual implement the landscape standards set forth in section
501.10, "Landscaping And Irrigation", of this article.
I. Single Lot Applications: For applications involving one single-family dwelling unit residence on an existing lot or a second unit on a single lot,
architectural and landscaping treatment materials shall be provided.
J. Additional Analysis: The following items shall also be required as part of an application, unless waived or conditionally waived by the zoning
administrator or the city council to aid in the analysis of the proposed project to illustrate existing or proposed conditions or both:
1. A topographic model and/or large scale detailed partial model at a one to one (1:1) vertical to horizontal relationship.
2. A line of site or view analysis as described in subsection L of this section.
3. Visual simulation of the postdevelopment condition, including use of photographic and/or computer generated graphic renderings as described in
subsection L of this section.
K. Landscape And Irrigation: Preliminary landscape and irrigation plans for all common areas showing project compliance with the provisions of this article
and requirements of the city fire chief for fire hazard mitigation and brush management zones in chapter 12, article III of the municipal code and the
state code regarding wildland interface in state response areas.
L. Visual Simulation:
1. Photography: The requirement for a visual simulation provides decision makers with a pictorial representation of the future condition of a
development project as close to reality as possible. The photograph is the basis of view simulation, and care shall be taken in the camera selection.
The goal is to provide an analysis that, as closely as possible, represents site views from a variety of locations distant from the project and from
surrounding areas that will have a direct view of the project.
2. Control Data: The location of the camera shall be recorded as accurately as possible at the time the photograph is taken.
3. Computer Modeling: Depending on the project site location, the proposed project may be required to be modeled based on subdivision design,
architectural, and landscape data. Existing terrain, buildings, survey data, and any field notes shall be included in the modeling effort. The level of
detail included in the computer model will be determined by the intended use of the simulation.
4. Staging: The computer model shall be aligned to the photographs in the rendering software utilizing the alignment data and the lens and focal length
of the camera used. The model shall be lighted according to the time of day and year and the views rendered.
5. Rendering: The rendering process shall be completed after aligning the model to the photograph. The subject matter shall be colored and textured to
simulate the proposed project as closely as possible.
6. Photocomposition: Any retouching undertaken to make foreground objects visible shall be done in such a way so as to preserve the original
photograph and the rendered image intact. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.04: LAND USE REGULATIONS:
A. Uses Requiring A Hillside Development Permit: The following uses require a hillside development permit:
Any subdivision of land.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 497/636
Detached garages and other accessory structures containing more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in gross floor area.
Lighting of tennis courts, basketball courts, and similar sports courts.
Stables, corrals, and similar facilities for the private noncommercial keeping and containment of animals.
B. Uses Requiring An Administrative Hillside Development Permit: The following uses of land are permitted after review and approval of an administrative
hillside development permit:
Detached garages and other accessory structures, up to a maximum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet in gross floor area.
Landscaped parkways and medians, landscaped slopes, and similar other open spaces.
Public and private parks.
Riding and hiking trails for pedestrians, equestrians and nonmotorized vehicles.
Second dwelling units.
Single-family dwelling unit, detached or attached.
Swimming pools, spas, ponds, and associated hardscape and landscape improvements that involve the construction of any retaining walls over three
feet (3') in height, subject to the issuance of a grading permit and required building permits.
Tennis courts, basketball courts, and similar sports courts, subject to the issuance of a grading permit and required building permits.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses: The following are permitted as accessory uses clearly subordinate to the principal use of the property:
Animal raising.
Crop cultivation. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.05: RIDGELINES:
A. Significant Ridgelines: The official significant ridgeline map, incorporated herein by reference and identified on the Porterville 2030 general plan land
use diagram, identifies crests of significant ridgelines in the city for the purpose of this article. The precise delineation of a ridgeline shall be determined
at the time a development application is received based on official significant ridgeline map and the following criteria. Significant ridgelines are those
ridgelines characterized by any combination of the criteria specified below:
1. The ridgelines that surround or visually dominate the surrounding valley landscape either through their size in relation to the hillside or mountain
terrain of which they are a part.
2. Their visual dominance as characterized by a silhouetting appearance against the sky.
3. A significant natural backdrop feature or separation of communities.
4. Visual dominance due to proximity and view from existing development or major corridors.
5. As an area of significant ecological, historical, or cultural importance, such as those that connect park or trail systems.
B. Ridgeline Preservation:
1. No grading or improvements shall occur within one hundred feet (100') of a designated and delineated significant ridgeline area, as measured
horizontally on a topographic map prior to any grading or improvements. No portion of any structure shall be closer to a designated and delineated
significant ridgeline area, as measured fifty feet (50') vertically from a cross section of the area.
2. No engineered slopes, housing construction, streets, utilities, excavation, or other permanent humanmade features shall be permitted within any
significant ridgeline area. Exceptions may be granted as part of the hillside development permit process if findings are made that:
a. The encroachment into a significant ridgeline area will be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and the specific criteria set forth
herein; and
b. Conditions of approval applied via the hillside development permit will implement the provisions of this article.
FIGURE 501.05B1: RIDGELINE SETBACKS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 498/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.06: GRADING:
A. General Grading Requirements:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 499/636
1. Landform grading techniques such as varying slope height, rounding tops and toes of slopes, and incorporating variable gradients shall be used to
ensure that manufactured slopes mimic natural hill forms. Landform grading shall be used for all postdisturbance conditions unless determined by
the zoning administrator and the city engineer that landform grading is not feasible due to soils conditions, encroachment into sensitive biological
resource areas, protection of watersheds or watercourses, or other similar considerations. Findings shall be recorded as part of the hillside
development permit record as to why landform grading is not feasible. Grading shall be kept to a minimum and shall be preformed in a way that
preserves significant natural features and visually blends with adjacent properties. Factors to be considered include the natural features of the site,
slope and soil characteristics, vegetative cover, access to the site and orientation and visibility of both the site and the proposed development.
FIGURE 501.06A1: GRADING
2. Construction of artificial ridgelines shall be used to mask the view of dwelling from off site locations, to preserve the appearance of a natural
undeveloped hillside, and to preserve the appearance of open space.
3. A combination of berming and landscaping shall be used to screen utilitarian features such as, but not limited to, water tanks and detention basins.
4. Slopes which are readily visible from existing or proposed public right of way shall be landform graded.
5. Grading of any site shall conform to the following grading standards, based upon the percent of average slope:
a. Six (6) to fifteen percent (15%): Redistribution of earth over large areas may be permitted.
b. Fifteen (15) to twenty percent (20%): Some grading may occur, but landforms shall retain their natural character. Padded building sites may be
allowed, but custom foundations, split level designs, stacking and clustering are expected to mitigate the need for large padded building areas.
c. Twenty (20) to twenty five and nine-tenths percent (25.9%): Grading will be minimal, custom homes sites and access shall follow the natural slope
of the ground, custom foundations and split level design required to reduce disturbance.
d. Twenty six percent (26%) and steeper: No grading shall be allowed other than house pad and access to pad.
e. Minimize pad size to accommodate the structure and a reasonable amount of open space. A maximum of the remaining lot area shall be kept in
the natural state of the original slope.
f. Sloping lot designs, such as split level building terraces are encouraged to reduce pad size.
g. Minimize grading within twenty feet (20') of all perimeter property lines of the project site, unless the grading naturally conforms to the existing
adjacent slopes or to the planned grading of the adjacent slopes.
B. Prohibited Grading Practices:
1. The cutting of significant ridgelines is prohibited.
2. Graded slopes that are characterized by linear (in plan), planar slope surfaces with unvarying gradients and angular slope intersections are
prohibited.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 500/636
3. Manufactured slopes shall complement the adjacent natural slopes in terms of hill form and slope height.
C. Berming:
1. Any berm three feet (3') or greater in vertical height shall be landform graded no steeper than three to one (3:1).
2. All berms shall have varying slope gradients and rounded tops with a horizontal dimension half the vertical height of the berm.
3. A combination of berming and landscaping shall be used to screen utilitarian features such as, but not limited to, water tanks and detention basins.
4. Landscaping materials used on berms shall be drought tolerant and fire resistant and must be approved by the parks and leisure services director.
FIGURE 501.06C: BERMING
D. Slopes Between Residential Pads: Where there is at least a four foot (4') elevation difference between residential flat pads, slopes shall be contour
graded no steeper than two to one (2:1).
FIGURE 501.06D: SLOPES BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL PADS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 501/636
Corner lot setbacks are 10 feet from right of way to privacy wall. Side slopes against public roads shall be landform graded.
E. Road Systems Along Project Edges: Road systems shall be placed along project edges to the greatest extent practicable to maximize the use of
aesthetic landscape buffers surrounding a development and to buffer residential neighborhoods from vehicular traffic. Project edges along roadway
systems shall consist of varied slope and landscape treatments to provide visual interest.
FIGURE 501.06E: ROAD SYSTEMS ALONG PROJECT EDGES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 502/636
F. Use Of Loffelstein And Similar Living Walls: The use of Loffelstein walls and other similar living wall systems that allow for landscaping opportunities with
planting pockets and stepped designs is required. Such wall shall be subject to the following development standards:
1. The minimum height shall be fifteen feet (15'), with a maximum height of thirty feet (30').
2. Such walls shall utilize a curvilinear slope pattern to mimic the appearance of natural hillside terrain.
3. Such walls shall be planted with landscape material suitable for the climate, wall exposure relative to the sun, and taking into consideration the
landscape aesthetic effect to be achieved by the overall development. The color palette and materials selected for the retaining wall shall blend in
with adjacent hillsides and landscape plant palette.
FIGURE 501.06F: USE OF LOFFELSTEIN AND SIMILAR LIVING WALLS
G. Contour Construction And Materials: Retaining walls shall follow the natural contours of the slope to the greatest degree practicable, and all materials
used to construct retaining walls shall consist of native stone, poured in place concrete, precast concrete block, and shall be of a color and texture that
mimic the color and texture of surrounding native plant materials.
H. Retaining Wall Height Standards: The cumulative height of any retaining wall built to retain a cut slope or fill slope shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
"Cumulative height" shall mean the combined height of any wall or series of walls required to retain a single slope. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.07: SITE DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS:
A. General: Site and subdivision features required and designed to control and retain stormwater and other runoff pursuant to the requirements of city
ordinances and other pertinent regulations shall be fully integrated into the design of the subdivision. Such features shall be designed and located to
account for natural drainage patterns, integration of open space into overall subdivision design, location of trails and other mobility corridors, and
placement of subdivision entry enhancements or other aesthetic features.
FIGURE 501.07A: RUNOFF CONTROL
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 503/636
B. Materials And Color: Water retention and detention features shall consist of natural earth and plant materials that must be approved by the parks and
leisure director. Concrete or similar hardscape materials shall not be permitted unless determined by the city engineer to be the only feasible method of
capturing and conveying runoff. Wherever concrete or similar structures are necessary, per drainage and stormwater control plans approved by the city
engineer, such structures shall use integral color concrete to blend with surrounding color palette that blend with the natural environment.
C. Detention Basins:
1. A detention basin area with gentle slopes (defined as 3:1 or less) and lined with turf or natural material such as rock may be used as an entry
feature. Detention basins shall not be eligible for open space, park credit, or any fee credit.
2. Detention basin side slope ratios greater than three to one (3:1) are prohibited.
D. Bioswales:
1. Bioswales shall be used to collect surface runoff before it crosses pavement areas and to reduce ponding and damage to walkways. Bioswales shall
be graded to direct water away from paved areas into detention basins prior to conveyance to the city drainage system per master plan.
FIGURE 501.07D1: USE OF BIOSWALES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 504/636
2. Bioswales shall consist of primarily herbaceous plants whose stems and leaves retard water flow and help settle pollutants, and which, with the aid
of the roots, decompose into the soil.
FIGURE 501.07D2: LANDSCAPING OF BIOSWALES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 505/636
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.08: STREET REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN:
A. Minimum Number Of Access Points: New hillside development projects shall have a minimum of two (2) points of vehicular access, one of which may
be established for emergency access only, as determined by the fire chief through the hillside development permit review process.
B. Street Design Standards: All streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the following standards:
1. Street sections shall be designed in accordance with street standards and specifications adopted by the city and as revised from time to time. In
addition to such adopted standards, the following street standards shall apply to development in the hillside residential zone:
a. The maximum length of any cul-de-sac street shall be six hundred feet (600') unless approved otherwise by the fire chief and city engineer.
b. All streets shall contain two (2) clear twelve foot (12') travel lanes.
2. Where split level streets are used, the following standards shall apply:
a. The use of split level roads is permitted to reduce the amount and visual effect of grading (figure 501.08B of this section).
b. The ground slope between the two (2) trafficways shall be of a ratio lesson more than two to one (2:1).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 506/636
FIGURE 501.08B: SPLIT LEVEL ROADWAYS
3. Street grades shall not exceed the following except as may be modified by the city council in compliance with the municipal code. The maximum
length of street runs at the maximum specified grade shall be subject to the review and approval of the fire chief and city engineer, or their respective
designees. Minor adjustments to street grades shall be subject to the review and approval of the fire chief and the city engineer.
a. Major arterials shall be no steeper than eight percent (8%).
b. Minor arterials shall be no steeper than ten percent (10%).
c. Collector streets shall be no steeper than ten percent (10%).
d. Local streets shall be no steeper than ten percent (10%).
e. Loaded local streets shall be no steeper than eight percent (8%).
f. Intersections shall be at six percent (6%) grade or less.
g. Local streets can have a minimum centerline radius of one hundred fifty feet (150') provided minimum sightline distances are met.
h. Street grades at fire hydrant locations shall be no steeper than seven percent (7%) for no less than twenty feet (20') on each side of hydrant.
C. Private Streets:
1. Private streets and alleys shall not be permitted unless approved by the city council and, if approved, all private streets or alleys shall be constructed
to city standards.
2. Driveway grades shall not exceed ten percent (10%) unless otherwise approved by the fire chief and city engineer. The finished grade of the
driveway shall conform to the finished grade of the lot. Proper design consideration shall be given to vertical curves and parking landings.
3. Common drives in single-family hillside residential development shall be considered if grading is reduced by their use. Common easement
maintenance agreements are required for common driveways.
D. Driveways:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 507/636
1. Driveways that are less than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length shall be a minimum of twelve feet (12') wide.
2. Driveways between one hundred fifty feet (150') and four hundred feet (400') shall be a minimum of sixteen feet (16') wide.
3. Driveways that are greater than four hundred feet (400') in length shall be subject to the approval of the fire chief.
4. Grade changes through driveway approaches and transitions shall not exceed ten degrees (10°).
5. Driveways shall be paved with asphalt or portland cement concrete (PCC). PCC or an approved alternative shall be used when grades exceed ten
percent (10%).
6. Private driveway gates are prohibited. All automatic gates across emergency access roads shall be equipped and maintained with a city of
Porterville approved key operated switch overriding all command functions and openings of gate(s). (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.09: OPEN SPACE:
A. Requirement To Provide Developed Open Space: Developed open space shall be provided for attached residential development as set forth in section
501.11, table 501.11C4 of this article and as otherwise required for this article to meet general landscaping, slope treatment, and parkway landscaping
requirements.
1. Types Of Open Space: Open space in the HZ overlay district shall consist of two (2) general types of open space:
a. "Natural open space", which shall be defined as undeveloped areas retained in their naturally occurring condition with regard to landform,
vegetation, and water features; with the exception of walking trails and viewing platforms.
b. "Developed or improved open space", which shall be defined as any area not occupied by structures that has been improved with landscaping,
trails, recreation amenities, and similar features that provide opportunities for active and passive recreation, and that provide landscape
improvements that enhance the overall appearance and character of a development.
2. Use Of Natural Open Space: Undeveloped open space shall be left in its natural state, with permitted improvements limited to the establishment of
trails and associated viewing areas established as community open space.
B. Deed Restrictions: Any lands dedicated for open space purposes shall contain covenants and recordable deed restrictions burdening the subject
property, in a form and content approved by the city attorney, ensuring that:
1. The open space area will not be subdivided in the future;
2. The use of the open space will continue in perpetuity for the purpose specified;
3. Appropriate provisions will be made for the maintenance of the open space that clearly define future maintenance responsibilities; and
4. Common undeveloped open space shall not be turned into a commercial enterprise admitting the general public at a fee, unless otherwise
authorized by policy or law.
C. Open Space Ownership:
1. The fee title owner or easement holder of an interest in the land that is dedicated for open space purposes shall be selected by the property owner,
developer, or subdivider, subject to the approval by the zoning administrator or city council. The ownership may vest in, but not be limited to, the
following:
a. The city, subject to acceptance by the city council of a recordable interest.
b. Other public jurisdictions or agencies, subject to their acceptance.
c. Quasi-public and nonprofit organizations, subject to their acceptance.
d. Homeowners' associations, landscape maintenance districts or other similar organizations.
2. The city may, in its reasonable discretion, require that the applicant establish a mechanism to fund the long term maintenance of such open space,
which may include a cash deposit, an assessment district, trust, or other appropriate funding mechanism.
D. Maintenance: The person or entity identified as having the right of ownership or control over the open space shall be responsible for its continuing
upkeep and proper maintenance as set forth in subsection B, "Deed Restrictions", of this section, unless the city authorizes alternate maintenance
strategies.
E. Required Planting Areas: Slopes requiring retaining at a height greater than three feet (3') shall be terraced for planting areas. Such planting areas shall
have a minimum width of six feet (6'). No more than two (2) terraces of retaining walls shall be permitted on one manufactured slope.
FIGURE 501.09E: PLANTING AREAS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 508/636
F. Irrigation Systems Required: All planting areas shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system.
G. Landscaped Parkways Required:
1. All public streets shall include a landscaped parkway as indicated in the general plan.
2. Such required parkways shall be landscaped as set forth in section 501.10, "Landscaping And Irrigation", of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.10: LANDSCAPING AND IRRIGATION:
Landscaping is an essential part of the site development by assisting in adapting the development into the natural backdrop of the hills, by providing areas
of open space for use by residents and for assisting in slope stabilization, erosion control and filtering of pollutants from stormwater.
A. Landscape And Irrigation Plan:
1. All proposed new development shall require approval of a conceptual landscape plan. Complete landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted as
part of the building permit application process. Such plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the parks and leisure services director and
the fire chief.
2. All landscape and irrigation plans shall include all information required by this chapter and shall be designed to ensure slope stability, fire safety, and
design quality, as well as a tree removal and retention plan with the following information:
a. Identification of the extent of vegetation removal required for site preparation and development; and
b. The location and species of individual trees of six inch (6") caliper or more. Maximum effort shall be exercised to retain existing trees in place.
3. The zoning administrator may waive the landscape and irrigation plan requirement for additions and remodeling where no or only minor alterations to
the existing landscape or topography are proposed.
4. All landscaping shall be planted and maintained in compliance with approved plans.
B. General Landscaping Standards:
1. All portions of a site where existing vegetative cover is damaged or removed, or consists primarily of weeds (typically unwanted plants that grow
aggressively and are damaging to landscaping), and are not otherwise covered with new improvements, must be successfully revegetated with a
substantial mix of native and/or drought tolerant grasses and ground covers. The density of the reestablished vegetation must be adequate to
prevent soil erosion and invasion of weeds after one growing season.
2. A combination of berming and landscaping shall be used to screen utilitarian features such as, but not limited to, water tanks and detention basins.
3. Plants with similar water requirements shall be grouped together in hydrozones.
4. Prior to planting, consideration of soil compaction shall be used to determine planting pit depths and drainage.
5. The zoning administrator and the parks and leisure services director shall have the authority to require other improvements such as the removal of
dead or diseased trees and the thinning of trees or other vegetation to encourage desirable growth.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 509/636
C. Tree Removal And Replacement: For each existing native tree or shrub removed or damaged with a combined caliper equal to or greater than six
inches (6") at four feet (4') above finish grade, a twenty four inch (24") box minimum replacement tree or shrub of the same genus and species or as
otherwise approved by the parks and leisure director shall be planted on the site. For trees equal to or in excess of an eight inch (8") combined caliper,
the replacement tree shall be a forty eight inch (48") box or larger of the same genus and species. Should a tree of the same genus and species not be
available, the applicant shall submit reasonable proof of general unavailability in the region, and a list of no less than five (5) substitutes, one of which
shall be of the same genus, for approval by the parks and leisure services director. The parks and leisure services director may approve a substitute or
may require provisions, including, but not limited to, bonds or similar security, to assure the installation and maintenance of the specific genus desired.
FIGURE 501.10C: STANDARDS FOR TREE PROTECTION
D. Setbacks/Slopes Along Roadway Edges:
1. The following setbacks from the curb face, or line that would be the location of the curb face, to the property line shall be required from the following
roadways:
a. Major arterial: Eighty feet (80').
b. Minor arterial: Sixty feet (60').
c. Parkway: Forty feet (40').
d. Collector: Thirty five feet (35').
e. Local residential street: Twenty feet (20').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 510/636
2. Setbacks and slopes along edges between roadways and rear property lines shall be fully landscaped with materials consistent with all other
common open space areas. The landscape material shall transition in height to provide low vegetation immediately adjacent to the right of way edge
to taller trees on the slope.
FIGURE 501.10D1: LANDSCAPE PLANTING SENSITIVE TO VIEWS
3. Any manufactured slope in excess of four feet (4') vertical that abuts any public or private street or other right of way or open space use intended for
public use and/or enjoyment shall be fully landscaped in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall be maintained by a homeowners'
association or other entity required as part of the tentative map approval process for the maintenance of common open space.
FIGURE 501.10D2: LANDSCAPING ALONG RIGHT OF WAY
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 511/636
E. Drought Tolerant/Native Vegetation:
1. All landscape plans must use native and/or drought tolerant plant materials appropriate for their location and soil type, as identified in standard
agricultural suitability soils test. Preferred landscaping materials shall consist of native plants. Landscape and irrigation plans shall comply with the
city's water efficient landscape requirements contained in article 303, "Landscaping", of this chapter.
2. All native vegetation outside the impact area shall be preserved and protected from damage during construction. Oak trees shall have a preservation
zone of the drip line plus ten feet (10') surrounding the tree. Any project impact within this preservation zone shall be considered as damaging to the
tree.
F. Interface Between Natural Open Space Areas And Development:
1. The area between a structure and wildfire hazard areas, as contained within the general plan and defined by the fire chief, shall be planted and
maintained as consistent with the provisions of subsection J of this section. The transition between manufactured areas and natural areas shall be
established beyond residential structures so as to permit the development to meet the state code regarding wildland interface in state response
areas.
2. Climatically suitable shrubs and trees shall be used as windbreaks as appropriate.
G. Landscaping As Focal Points: Significant landscaping, such as signature trees (i.e., large or unique trees), hedges, and flowering plants shall be used
to provide focal points within a development, including and specifically as entry statements that shall require the following setbacks measured
diagonally from face of curb, or the line that would be the location of the curb face:
1. Major arterial: One hundred feet (100').
2. Minor arterial: Eighty feet (80').
3. Parkway: Fifty feet (50').
4. Collector: Fifty feet (50').
5. Local residential street: Twenty feet (20').
A landscape area shall then be provided generally matching the depictions within figure 501.10G of this section. Provisions for maintenance of said
landscape areas shall be an integral component of project approval. No landscaping or other features shall interfere with the established sight
distance needed for safe vehicular access at intersections.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 512/636
FIGURE 501.10G: LANDSCAPED ENTRIES AND FOCAL POINTS
H. Slope Maintenance And Erosion Control:
1. All cut and fill slopes shall be planted with native and/or drought tolerant vegetation and irrigated with an automatic irrigation system to prevent
erosion.
2. All cut or fill slopes exceeding five feet (5') in vertical height shall be planted with adequate plant material to protect the slope against erosion.
Planting shall be in the ratio of at least one shrub per sixteen (16) square feet of natural slope area and one tree per four hundred (400) square feet
of actual slope area, with ground cover to completely cover the slope within twelve (12) months from planting.
3. All shrubs shall be a minimum one gallon size.
4. All trees shall be minimum fifteen (15) gallon size.
5. Slopes less than five feet (5') in vertical height shall be planted with ground cover to cover the slopes completely within twelve (12) months of
planting.
6. Landscape coverage and stabilization of graded slopes shall be selected and designed to be compatible with surrounding natural vegetation. A city
approved irrigation system shall be utilized for plant establishment. A minimum three feet (3') flat area from top or toe of slope of twenty feet (20') or
greater in height shall be maintained to face of wall or fence on common area maintenance slopes.
7. Shrubs on manufactured slopes shall be heavily concentrated along the drainage flow of swales.
8. Lawns and sod shall not be installed on slopes steeper than four to one (4:1). Low maintenance bunch grasses can be used on slopes steeper than
four to one (4:1).
I. Irrigation:
1. Irrigation shall be designed to conserve water and to protect existing native vegetation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 513/636
2. Drip irrigation shall be required in appropriate areas to reduce overspray and runoff.
3. Irrigation needs shall be reduced by careful control of drainage pattern on a slope and selection of appropriate plant material.
4. Technological irrigation equipment, such as humidity sensors, that control irrigation settings and run times due to seasonal weather changes shall be
used.
J. Fuel Modification Zones:
1. A permanent fuel modification area and fire prevention plan shall be required, subject to the determination of the fire chief, around development
projects, or portions thereof, that are adjacent or exposed to hazardous fire areas for the purpose of fire protection. The recommended width of the
fuel modification area shall be based on applicable building and fire codes and the state code regarding wildland interface in state response areas
and the recommendations of the fire chief, with consideration given to:
a. The natural nongraded slope of the land within the project and in the areas adjacent to the project.
b. Fuel loading.
c. Access to the project by fire suppression equipment, and access directly to the fuel modified area, and egress out of the project in case of
evacuation.
d. The on site availability of water that can be used for firefighting purposes with regard to fire flows, water pressure, and duration.
e. "Built-in" fire protection within structures.
FIGURE 501.10J: FUEL MODIFICATION ZONES
2. Adequate provisions shall be made for the continual maintenance of such areas, and the fire chief may require brush, vegetation, or debris to be
removed and cleared consistent with the provisions of section 12-1.1 of the municipal code, which adopts the uniform fire code as the city's fire code.
K. Private Yard Landscaping: The paving of over forty percent (40%) of either the front yard or rear yard shall not be permitted.
L. Screening:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 514/636
1. Landscaping shall be designed to screen the view of downslope building elevations. The landscape plan for individual residential dwellings shall
specifically consider the downslope elevation and demonstrate that portions of elevations below the bottommost floor are screened from view.
Downslope elevations visible from any adjacent property or public right of way shall be landscaped with a selection of shrubs and trees that screen
the downslope portion from view to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.
2. Visual screening and privacy within side and rear yards shall be provided; front yards and building entrances shall be substantially visible for security
purposes.
M. On Lot Tree Program:
1. A minimum of two (2) trees shall be installed and permanently maintained in each rear yard.
2. One additional tree shall be installed along the side yard adjacent to the street on corner lots with uphill visibility from roads.
3. Tree sizes shall be a minimum of twenty four inch (24") box for rear yards with fifteen foot (15') depths or less and thirty six inch (36") box for rear
yards that are greater than fifteen feet (15') deep.
4. Minimum distance between tree trunk and adjacent property line shall be five feet (5').
5. Soil compaction and drainage shall be considered when determining planting pit depths.
FIGURE 501.10M: ON LOT TREE PROGRAM
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
501.11: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
A. Allowable Density Calculation Procedures: For the purposes of this article, "allowable density" is defined as the maximum number of dwelling units
permitted per gross acre of land. The maximum allowable density shall be based upon and established by the average slope of a property, calculated
in compliance with subsection 501.03D3 of this article. The maximum allowable density based on the average slope shall be as set forth in table
501.11A of this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 515/636
TABLE 501.11A: MAXIMUM ALLOWED DENSITY
BASED ON AVERAGE SLOPE
Average Slope Maximum Allowable Density
Less than 5.9 percent inclusive 2.4 units/acre
6 to 10.9 percent 2.2 units/acre
11 to 20.9 percent 1.8 units/acre
21 to 25.9 percent 1.0 units/acre
26 to 30.9 percent 1 unit/20 acres
31 to 50 percent 1 unit/80 acres
1. The maximum dwelling unit yield based on the maximum allowable density mathematical sum shall be considered maximum potentials and not an
entitlement, right or vested right to develop. Other factors and individual property characteristics will affect and may reduce the yield, including, but
not limited to: physical constraints, floor area ratio, compliance with design guidelines, engineering design standards, hillside development standards;
and performance criteria such as access, emergency response standards, and sensitive grading techniques and volumes.
2. Calculating the maximum allowable density for any parcel or group of parcels under common development application within the HZ overlay district
shall involve the following steps:
a. Establish allowed density based on average slope:
(1) Alternative 1; average slope of the parcel or group of parcels: For alternative 1, the average slope shall be calculated in compliance with
subsection 501.03D3 of this article. For example, a one hundred (100) acre parcel which has an average slope for the entire parcel of twenty
five percent (25%) would yield a maximum of one hundred (100) units.
(2) Alternative 2; recalculation alternative: The largest contiguous area of the least steep slope category may be used to calculate average slope in
compliance with the method established in subsection 501.03D2 of this article. For example, on a one hundred (100) acre parcel, of which sixty
(60) acres has an average slope of more than twenty five and nine-tenths percent (25.9%), thirty (30) acres are between twenty one (21) to
twenty five and nine-tenths percent (25.9%) slope, and there is a contiguous ten (10) acre area of between eleven (11) to twenty and nine-tenths
percent (20.9%), the ten (10) acres with an average slope of eleven (11) to twenty and nine-tenths percent (20.9%) can be used to recalculate
allowable density (1.8 units/acre x 10 acres = 18 units).
3. For the purposes of this article, "floor area ratio (FAR)" is defined as the ratio of the total gross square footage of the dwelling unit excluding both
attached and detached garage square footage and any accessory structure on a lot to the square footage of the pad or that portion of the lot
containing the dwelling and having a gradient of five percent (5%) or less. After constraints and performance criteria have been addressed to develop
a maximum yield, the maximum yields for a parcel is further affected by average FAR and are based on table 501.11A3 of this section.
TABLE 501.11A3: UNIT YIELD BASED
ON FLOOR AREA RATIO
Dwelling Unit Yield Maximum FAR
Maximum units 0.4
80 percent of maximum 0.5
70 percent of maximum 0.6
60 percent of maximum 0.7
4. Physical constraints are the on site circumstances and resources that will be protected consistent with policies in the general plan or other regulatory
requirements. Factors that require special consideration are as follows:
a. USGS blue line streams, sensitive biological resource areas identified in the biological resource survey report completed for the project, and
archaeological resources identified in the archaeological survey conducted for the project.
b. Areas greater than twenty five and nine-tenths percent (25.9%) slope greater than one acre as determined by subsection 501.03D, "Slope
Analysis Map", of this article.
c. Liquefiable soils, shallow hard rock, and faulting.
d. Large, mature native trees including: coastal live oak, sycamores, or willow.
B. Detached Dwellings: Standards for detached dwelling units will provide assurance that development will be appropriate to the hillside setting. The
following standards combined with the standards for grading and drainage, subdivision and landscaping design will result in adaptive hillside
development:
FIGURE 501.11A: HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENTS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 516/636
1. Density: Density limitations shall be determined as set forth in table 501.11A of this section.
2. Minimum Pad Size: The minimum area of a pad on a lot, including the summation of multiple pad areas where split level construction is proposed,
shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet.
3. Building Setbacks: Building setbacks shall be set forth in table 501.11B3 of this section.
TABLE 501.11B3: BUILDING SETBACKS
DETACHED DWELLINGS
Pad Size In Square Feet
6,000 to 7,999 8,000 to 9,999 10,000 And Greater
Setbacks:
Front yard 20' 30' 40'
Side yard 7.5' 7.5' 10'
Rear yard 20' 20' 30'
Corner setbacks:
Face of curb to privacy wall1 20' 20' 25'
Privacy wall to structure 10' 10' 15'
Note:
1. Setbacks are measured from face of curb or for rolled curbs, from the flowline.
FIGURE 501.11B: BUILDING SETBACKS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 517/636
4. Floor Area Ratios: Maximum allowable floor area ratios shall be as set forth in table 501.11A3 of this section.
5. Building Height; Primary Structure: Each proposed single-family detached structure in the HZ overlay district shall comply with the following height
limits:
a. Height Measurement: The maximum allowable building height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the existing or planned grade of the
site at the point of the building foundation to an imaginary plane located at the allowed number of feet above and parallel to the grade. For split
level construction, each building component shall be measured from the lowest elevation of the site pad area on which that component is located.
FIGURE 501.11B5: BUILDING HEIGHT
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 518/636
b. General Height Limit: No structure shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35').
c. Height Of Lowest Floor Level: The vertical distance between the lowest point where the foundation wall meets grade and the lowest floor line of
the structure shall not exceed six feet (6').
C. Attached Dwellings:
1. Density: Density limitations shall be determined as set forth in table 501.11A of this section. Where attached housing is proposed, the overall
permitted density of a development site shall determine the maximum number of units allowed, and all such units may be clustered or attached on a
lot or lots restricted to a limited area of the development site, with the density calculation applicable to the site as a whole. However, in compliance
with the provisions of section 501.09, "Open Space", of this article, any remainder open space lot or lots shall be deed restricted against further
residential development and shall be permanently maintained as required by the provisions of this article.
2. Building Height: Each proposed attached or clustered dwelling unit structure shall comply with the following height limits:
a. Height Measurement: The maximum allowable building height shall be measured as in compliance with subsection 501.11B5, "Building Height;
Primary Structure", of this article.
b. General Height Limit: No structure or group of structures shall exceed a height of thirty five feet (35').
c. Height Of Lowest Floor Level: The vertical distance between the lowest point where the foundation meets grade and the lowest floor line of the
structure shall not exceed six feet (6').
3. Building Setbacks: Buildings shall be set back from lot lines as indicated in table 501.11C3 of this section.
TABLE 501.11C3: ATTACHED BUILDING
SETBACKS FROM LOT LINES
Yard Lot Line Minimum Setback
Front yard 20'
Side yard 15'
Rear yard 20'
Face of curb to privacy wall1 20'
Privacy wall to structure 10'
Note:
1. Setbacks are measured from face of curb or for rolled curbs, from the flowline.
a. Building To Building: The minimum setback between structures shall be no less than twenty feet (20').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 519/636
b. Building To Street Or Parking Area: The minimum building setback to street or parking area shall be no less than twenty feet (20'), measured from
face of curb.
c. Building To Privacy Wall: The minimum building setback to privacy wall shall be no less than twenty feet (20').
FIGURE 501.11C1: BUILDING SEPARATION AND SETBACKS
FIGURE 501.11C2: REAR YARD AND SIDE YARD SETBACKS
4. Required Common Open Space Area: Every attached or cluster development project shall be required to provide common open space areas
accessible to all dwelling units within such development project. The required area shall be as set forth in table 501.11C4 of this section. Such
common open space area may consist of passive landscaped area, common recreation facilities such as a swimming pool or sports court, or any
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 520/636
combination of such improvements. The minimum dimensions of such common open space area shall be twenty feet by twenty feet (20' x 20'). Such
common open space shall be centrally located and equally accessible to all dwelling units within the development.
TABLE 501.11C4 REQUIRED COMMON OPEN SPACE
FOR ATTACHED DWELLINGS
Numbers Of Dwelling Units Within Development Required Open Space Area
0 - 20 100 sq. ft. per dwelling unit
21 - 40 150 sq. ft. per dwelling unit
40+ 200 sq. ft. per dwelling unit
5. Location Of Garages: Garage structures for attached and cluster developments are not required to be attached to the dwelling units they serve.
Common garage structures may be developed, providing parking and open space are provided for as required by this chapter.
D. Custom Lot Design And Development Standards:
1. Design Standards; General:
a. Roadways, driveways, and individual building pads shall be designed to conform to the natural hillside contours, blending into the environment
rather than forcing building sites and infrastructure upon the land. An emphasis shall be placed on limiting grading to individual flat graded pad
areas for residential building sites and any roads accessing the residential building sites, ensuring a minimal cut and fill situation.
b. Any areas that require grading shall incorporate landform grading techniques to further encourage the natural appearance of custom pads.
c. For any standard not specifically indicated in this section as applying to custom lot development, the general standards applicable to all
development in the HZ overlay district shall apply.
2. Landscape Standards: Custom lot development shall implement landscape standards that avoid harsh or abrupt transitions between open space and
development while providing a combination of landscape materials that blend into the adjoining natural open space. Landscape setbacks along roads
and along flat pads of custom lots shall be required to ensure that suitable transitions from residential development to natural open space are
accomplished.
3. Architectural Standards: Individual houses on custom lots shall be visually compatible with the surrounding area, with architecture that complements
the adjacent natural environment and any adjoining residential structures and/or neighborhoods.
4. Grading Standards:
a. Unless otherwise specified in this section, the landform grading practices set forth in section 501.06, "Grading", of this article, shall apply.
b. Retaining walls shall be screened from public view to the greatest extent possible.
5. Development Standards:
a. The minimum pad size shall be no less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet unless the site is over fifteen percent (15%) average slope in which
case smaller padded building sites are allowed to reduce grading impacts as set forth in section 501.06, "Grading", of this article.
b. Maximum building height, as measured from finished grade to top of building, shall be as follows:
(1) Eighteen feet (18'): Single-story portion of structure.
(2) Twenty eight feet (28'): Two-story portion of structure.
(3) Thirty five feet (35'): Three-story portion of structure.
c. Setbacks shall be provided as set forth in table 501.11C3 of this section.
d. No fence or walls shall exceed a height of six feet (6'), and all fences and walls shall comply with the regulations set forth in subsection G6,
"Fencing And Privacy Walls", of this section.
e. Walls and opaque fencing shall be permitted only on the flat pad of a custom lot.
f. The minimum landscape setback of twenty feet (20') shall be provided between developed pad and natural vegetation.
g. The maximum step in foundation wall shall be no higher than ten feet (10') to account for homes built in a hillside setting.
h. Where no standard is specifically indicated in this subsection, the development standards set forth in subsection A, "Allowable Density Calculation
Procedures", of this section, shall apply.
E. Accessory Structures:
1. Accessory structures shall either be constructed as an integral part of the main dwelling unit or be within the setbacks set forth in table 501.11C3 of
this section.
2. The height of any accessory structure shall be limited to sixteen feet (16').
3. Accessory structures shall not be permitted within any front yard area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 521/636
4. Accessory structures shall maintain a minimum five foot (5') setback from rear and side pad edges. For pads on lots adjacent to a street, a minimum
twenty foot (20') setback from any pad edge to the street shall be maintained. A side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall maintain a minimum
twenty foot (20') setback from pad edge.
F. Other Regulations:
1. Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting shall be provided and properly shielded to avoid glare and the spill of light to surrounding areas. Low level lighting
and the use of multiple low profile fixtures is encouraged, as opposed to the use of fewer, but taller fixtures. Emphasis for exterior lighting shall be on
safety and landscape lighting as opposed to building lighting. The applicant shall present descriptions of exterior lighting in the design guideline
manual required by subsection 501.03H, "Architectural And Landscaping Design Guidelines Manual", of this article.
2. Decks: No portion of the walking surface of a deck with visible underpinnings shall exceed a height of six feet (6') above grade. Decks shall be
integrated into the architecture of the house and not appear as an add-on to the primary building mass. The applicant shall present illustrations and
descriptions of decks in the design guideline manual required by subsection 501.03H, "Architectural And Landscaping Design Guidelines Manual", of
this article.
3. Utilities: All newly installed utilities shall be placed underground unless, in the determination of the authority responsible for approving the hillside
development permit, such requirement would result in unsafe conditions. All existing electric power lines of capacity sixty six (66) kilovolts or less
shall be relocated underground. All utilities shall be placed underground unless, in the determination of the authority responsible for approving the
hillside development permit, such requirement would result in unsafe conditions.
4. Gated Communities Prohibited: Gated communities shall be prohibited.
5. Private Gates At Driveway Prohibited: All gates or other structures or devices, which could obstruct emergency access or otherwise hinder
emergency operations, shall be prohibited. Private gates at driveways that do not hinder emergency access or operations shall be set back a
minimum of thirty feet (30') from the front property line.
G. Architectural Standards; General: To achieve hillside compatible development, the city recognizes the importance of having architectural design that
incorporates rooflines and other building elements that reflect the naturally occurring ridgeline silhouettes and topographical variation.
1. Conformance With Project Design Manual: The applicant shall demonstrate how the architectural criteria of this section are met in the design
guideline manual required by subsection 501.03H, "Architectural And Landscaping Design Guidelines Manual", of this article.
2. Architectural Themes:
a. For subdivisions consisting of production style development, whereby dwelling units are constructed by a single developer utilizing a limited
number of floor plans and building architectural styles, the architectural styles throughout the development shall be thematically consistent with
one another. Varying floor plans, colors, materials, and building forms shall be utilized such that within a single development project, a minimum of
nine (9) different elevations are available. However, where attached units are provided, a more unified architectural scheme is permitted.
b. For custom lot developments consisting of a subdivision of more than one lot, the requirement for a design guideline manual, as set forth in
subsection 501.03H, "Architectural And Landscaping Design Guidelines Manual", of this article, shall apply.
c. For a development consisting of one home on an existing lot, such homes shall comply with the requirements of subsection B, "Detached
Dwellings", of this section.
3. Required Treatments:
a. Architectural treatments on all exterior walls of any building shall be designed to avoid a monotonous or continuous facade of the exterior wall.
Under no circumstance shall the front and rear facade of any building be in one continuous vertical or horizontal plane. Architectural features and
details shall be located on all exterior walls of the building, including the rear and sides of the building. Buildings shall utilize wall articulation (i.e.,
insets, pop outs, etc.) and roof orientation as a means to prevent massing.
b. The apparent size of exterior wall surfaces visible from off the site shall be minimized through the use of single-story elements, building face
setbacks, overhangs, landscaping, and/or other means of horizontal and vertical articulation to create changing shadow lines and break up of
massive forms.
FIGURE 501.11G3: BUILDING FACADES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 522/636
4. Finish Materials/Color: Building materials and colors shall be compatible with the natural setting. Exterior colors shall be limited to earth tones found
in nearby natural vegetation and/or soil, or come from natural sources (e.g., rock, stone, wood), or resemble a natural appearance.
5. Support Structures:
a. Support structures (e.g., columns, pilings, etc.) below the lowest floor on the downhill side of a house, if and where permitted as part of the hillside
development permit review process, shall be enclosed unless visible structural members are an integral feature of the architectural design.
b. A support structure wall surface shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
FIGURE 501.11G5: SUPPORT STRUCTURES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 523/636
6. Fencing And Privacy Walls:
a. All fences and masonry walls adjacent to or fronting on public roads or major public spaces shall be of decorative masonry or other approved
materials that have a natural appearance (e.g., masonry walls, prefabricated modular concrete) and shall be a color that blends with the natural
surrounding environment and complements the landscaping. The use of indigenous rock and colors or materials which blend with the surrounding
natural landscape shall be preferred. The applicant shall present illustrations and descriptions of fencing and wall materials in the design guideline
manual required by subsection 501.03H, "Architectural And Landscaping Design Guidelines Manual", of this article.
b. Any fence or privacy wall adjacent to a public road or major public space shall be placed at the top of a slope.
c. All fences and privacy walls, whether or not visible from a public road or major public open space, shall be limited in height to six feet (6'), as
measured from the grade on which the bottom of the fence or wall is placed to the uppermost extent of such fence or wall.
d. Solid fences and walls in a required front yard area, or within the street side yard on a reverse corner lot shall not exceed a height of forty two
inches (42").
e. Open work fences, whereby the fence is ninety percent (90%) open or more, shall not exceed a height of forty eight inches (48") within the front
setback or within the street side yard on a reverse corner lot, otherwise the height limitations specified in subsections G6c and G6d of this section
shall apply.
f. The provisions of subsection 407.03A6 of this chapter regarding corner rounding areas shall apply.
g. A minimum setback distance of twenty feet (20') shall be provided between any fence or privacy wall adjacent to a public right of way, with the
distance measured from the fence or privacy wall to the face of curb.
h. Any fence or wall that runs along the top of a landform and silhouettes against the sky shall be transparent to allow views from off site to be
unobstructed.
FIGURE 501.11G6: SETBACK FROM PRIVACY WALL
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 502. SINGLE STORY (S) OVERLAY DISTRICT
502.01: PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 524/636
The single story (S) overlay district is intended to ensure the scale of new development is compatible with existing development and uses in transitional
zones. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
502.02: APPLICABILITY:
The standards of this article apply to all lands within the S overlay district mapped on the official zoning map.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
502.03: BUILDING HEIGHT AND NUMBER OF STORIES:
Building height shall not exceed thirty five feet (35'). All buildings are limited to single story construction. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
Chapter Series 600
ADMINISTRATION AND PERMITS
ARTICLE 600. PLANNING AGENCY
600.01: PURPOSE:
This article identifies the bodies, officials, and administrators, with designated responsibilities under various parts and articles of this chapter. Subsequent
articles of this series provide detailed information regarding various procedures, applications, and permits including zoning, and general plan text and map
amendments, fees, and enforcement. When carrying out their assigned duties and responsibilities, all bodies, administrators, and officials shall interpret
and apply the provisions of this chapter as minimum requirements adopted to implement the policies and achieve the objectives of the general plan. (Ord.
1801, 12-3-2013)
600.02: CITY COUNCIL:
The city council has the following powers and duties under this chapter:
A. Initiate, consider and adopt, reject or modify amendments to the general plan pursuant to the provisions of article 607, "Amendments To General Plan",
of this series;
B. Initiate, consider and adopt, reject or modify amendments to the text of this chapter pursuant to the provisions of article 608, "Amendments To Zoning
Map And Text", of this series and the state Government Code;
C. Approve, conditionally approve, modify or deny conditional use permits and variances pursuant to the provisions of articles 604, "Conditional Use
Permits", and 606, "Variances", of this series;
D. Approve, conditionally approve, or deny tentative subdivision maps pursuant to the provisions of article 402, "Tentative Maps", of this chapter;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 525/636
E. Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the zoning administrator on temporary use permits, minor modifications of approved conditional use permits,
administrative approvals, environmental review, and any other permits that can be appealed pursuant to the provisions of article 612, "Appeals", of this
series and other applicable requirements;
F. Hear and decide appeals from decisions of the parcel map committee on tentative parcel maps pursuant to the provisions of article 612, "Appeals", of
this series and other applicable requirements;
G. Enter into development agreements with property owners pursuant to the provisions of article 609, "Development Agreements", of this series and the
state Government Code;
H. Establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees and deposits for the various applications and services provided pursuant to this chapter;
I. Initiate proceedings to revoke or amend conditional use permits pursuant to the provisions of article 613, "Enforcement", of this series; and
J. Determine which incentives the city should grant to developers proposing projects that are eligible for such incentives under this chapter and the
provisions of state law applicable to affordable housing and childcare facilities. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
600.03: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The zoning administrator is the community development director or his designated appointee. The zoning administrator has the following powers and
duties under this chapter:
A. Provide professional recommendations to the city council, other appointed officials and city management on matters related to the planning and
development of the community;
B. Administer the provisions of the California environmental quality act (CEQA) and the national environmental policy act (NEPA);
C. Approve, conditionally approve, modify, or deny applications reviewed by the project review and parcel map committees;
D. On behalf of the city execute indemnification and cost recovery agreement for projects requiring discretionary permits and/or those evaluated under the
provisions of CEQA and NEPA;
E. Hear and decide applications for temporary use permits, minor modifications of approved conditional use permits, and administrative approvals subject
to appeal to the city council;
F. Hear and decide applications for adjustments pursuant to provisions of article 610, "Adjustments", of this series;
G. Make determinations of zoning conformance pursuant to article 602, "Zoning Conformance Review", of this series;
H. Make environmental determinations on any approvals it grants that are subject to environmental review under the California environmental quality act
and the procedures in article 611, "Environmental Review", of this series;
I. Negotiate the components and provisions of development agreements for recommendation to the city council;
J. Issue administrative regulations for the submission and review of applications;
K. Administratively approve or deny a use or occupancy where authority to do so is provided for in this chapter;
L. Make determinations of uncertainty of boundaries on the official zoning map pursuant to subsection 101.02B of this chapter;
M. Determine whether a legally approved permit has lapsed due to lack of implementation or an extension as provided for in subsections 601.08A,
"Expiration", and B, "Extensions", of this series; and
N. Act as the environmental coordinator in administering the provisions of the California environmental quality act. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
600.04: PROJECT REVIEW COMMITTEE:
The project review committee consists of the zoning administrator, city planner, city engineer, chief building official, and fire chief or their designees. The
project review committee shall review development proposals for the following projects through the project review process:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 526/636
A. All new or additions of five hundred (500) square feet or more to commercial or industrial structures;
B. Multi-family residential developments of four (4) or more units or consisting of two (2) or more structures;
C. A change in occupancy or where the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant;
D. Any project that requires a discretionary approval, including, but not limited to, conditional use permits, variances, zoning change, general plan
amendment, subdivision, and annexation; and
E. Preliminary review of a map application. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
600.05: PARCEL MAP COMMITTEE:
The parcel map committee shall review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove subdivision maps for tentative parcel maps as defined in article
402, "Tentative Maps", of this chapter, unless other related discretionary permits require approval by the city council. In this case, the parcel map
committee actions will be in the form of a recommendation to the city council. The parcel map committee shall also make environmental determinations on
any approvals it grants that are subject to environmental review under the California environmental quality act and the procedures in article 611,
"Environmental Review", of this series. Said parcel map committee shall include the zoning administrator, city engineer and fire chief or their designees.
The zoning administrator shall serve as committee chairman. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 601. COMMON PROCEDURES
601.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes procedures that are common to the application and processing of all permits and approvals provided for in this chapter unless
superseded by specific requirement of this chapter or state law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.02: APPLICATION FORMS AND FEES:
A. Applicants: The following persons may file applications:
1. The owner of the subject property; and
2. An agent representing the owner, duly authorized to do so in writing by the owner, including a person with a duly executed written contract or
exclusive option to purchase the subject property or a lessee in possession of the subject property.
B. Application Forms And Supporting Materials:
1. Application Forms: The zoning administrator shall prepare and issue application forms and lists that specify the information that will be required from
applicants for projects subject to the provisions of this chapter, as required by the California permit streamlining act.
2. Supporting Materials: The zoning administrator may require the submission of supporting materials as part of the application, including, but not
limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, renderings, material samples and other items necessary to describe existing conditions and the
proposed project. The zoning administrator may require sufficient information to determine the level of environmental review that shall be required
pursuant to the California environmental quality act and the city's adopted environmental review guidelines. Unless otherwise specified, all
renderings shall depict the proposed structure, landscaping, other improvements, and surrounding land uses as they would appear one month after
project completion.
3. Availability Of Materials: All material submitted becomes the property of the city, may be distributed to the public, and shall be made available for
public inspection. Upon reasonable request, and during normal business hours, any person may examine an application and materials submitted in
support of or in opposition to an application in the community development department. Unless barred by law, copies of such materials shall be made
available at a reasonable cost to be established by city council resolution.
4. Indemnification And Cost Recovery Agreement: Applicants shall submit an executed indemnification agreement which indemnifies and holds the city
harmless from any action in connection with the project being reviewed and commits to cost recovery relating to an appeal as well as all court costs
relating to legal challenges. Costs associated with implementing mitigation monitoring shall be included in the agreement.
a. Failure or refusal by any or all of the applicant(s) to enter into the indemnification and cost recovery agreement in favor of the city of Porterville, in
a form provided by the community development department, planning division, shall result in and be deemed an abandonment of the application
and application approval, and all rights accrued to the applicant(s) to proceed under the city's actions in such regard shall be deemed immediately
revoked, and the city will be entitled to seek all remedies available to it under law, including, but not limited to, breach of contract and/or
enforcement of any code violations.
C. Payment And Waiver Of Application Fees:
1. Schedule Of Fees: The council shall establish fees for permits, informational materials, copying, and other such items by resolution. Applications for
permits shall be accompanied by the required fees. Payment of the fee is required in order for an application to be complete under the permit
streamlining act.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 527/636
2. Fee Waiver: No fee shall be required when the applicant is the city, or if it is waived under any other provision of the municipal code. (Ord. 1801, 12-
3-2013)
601.03: PROJECT REVIEW:
Project review is a process that is intended to provide information on relevant general or specific plan policies, zoning and subdivision regulations, and
procedures related to projects pursuant to this chapter.
A. Projects Requiring Project Review: Review is required for the following projects:
1. All new commercial or industrial structures and additions of five hundred (500) square feet or more;
2. Multi-family developments of four (4) or more units or consisting of two (2) or more structures;
3. A change in occupancy or where the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant; and
4. Any project that requires a discretionary approval, including, but not limited to: conditional use permits, variances, planned developments, mixed use
projects, zoning changes, general plan amendments, subdivisions, and annexations.
5. Preliminary review of a map application.
B. Payment Of Fee: No application will be accepted for project review without payment of a fee established by resolution of the city council and submission
of materials that the zoning administrator has determined necessary to conduct such review.
C. Submittal Requirements: The applicant shall submit to the zoning administrator nine (9) copies, or as may be determined necessary at the time of
submittal, of a preliminary map, site plan drawn to scale and dimensioned, and other materials to indicate the essential characteristics of the project.
For tentative subdivisions, the preliminary map shall be in compliance with article 401, "Preliminary Map", of this chapter.
D. Review: The zoning administrator will then, within twelve (12) days, schedule a meeting of the project review committee with the applicant on the
proposed project. The project review committee will make such general recommendations to the applicant as shall seem proper regarding such
proposed project and shall recommend consultations by the applicant with such other public or private agencies as it shall designate.
E. Summary Of Recommendations: The project review committee shall furnish written copies of its recommendations to the applicant.
F. Permit Streamlining Act: An application that is accepted for project review shall not be considered complete pursuant to the requirements of the
California permit streamlining act unless it has been reviewed and determined to be complete in compliance with the requirements of section 601.02,
"Application Forms And Fees", of this article. If an application requires the submittal of an application(s) for discretionary permit approval, the
application will not be deemed complete until such time as a completed application and fees are submitted for the discretionary review. (Ord. 1801, 12-
3-2013)
601.04: REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS:
The zoning administrator shall determine whether an application is complete within thirty (30) days of the date the application is filed with the required fee.
A. Incomplete Application: If an application is incomplete, the zoning administrator shall provide written notification to the applicant listing the applications
for permit(s), forms, information and any additional fees that are necessary to complete the application.
B. Complete Application: When an application is determined to be complete, the zoning administrator shall make a record of that date. If an application
requires a public hearing, the zoning administrator shall schedule it and notify the applicant of the date and time.
C. Concurrent Processing: Applications requiring multiple approvals, permits, adjustments, or entitlements under this chapter shall be heard and acted
upon at the same time. Those items requiring public notification shall be notified together.
D. Extensions: The zoning administrator may, upon written request and to provide reasonable accommodation, grant extensions of any time limit for review
of applications imposed by this chapter in compliance with applicable provisions of state law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.05: PUBLIC NOTIFICATION:
Whenever the provisions of this series require public notice, notification shall be provided in compliance with the requirements of state law and as follows:
A. Mailed Notice: At least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing, the zoning administrator shall provide notice by first class mail delivery to:
1. The applicant, the owner, and any occupant of the subject property;
2. All property owners of record within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the subject property as shown on the latest available assessment roll; and
3. Any person or group who has filed a written request for notice regarding the specific application.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 528/636
B. Newspaper Notice: At least ten (10) days before the date of the public hearing, the zoning administrator shall provide notice by at least one publication
in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city.
C. Alternate Method For Large Mailings: If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered is greater than one thousand (1,000),
instead of mailed notice, the zoning administrator may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth (1/8) page in at least one
newspaper of general circulation at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing.
D. Contents Of Notice: The notice shall include the following information:
1. A general description of the proposed project or action and the location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the application;
2. The date, time, location, and purpose of the public hearing;
3. The identity of the hearing body;
4. The names of the applicant and the owner of the property that is the subject of the application;
5. The location at which the complete application and project file may be viewed by the public;
6. A statement that any interested person or authorized agent may appear and be heard; and
7. A statement describing where to submit written comments.
E. Failure To Notify Individual Properties: The validity of the proceedings shall not be affected by the failure of any property owner, resident or interested
party to receive such mailed notice.
F. Continuance Of Public Hearing: The body conducting the public hearing may by motion continue the public hearing, even in the absence of a quorum, to
a fixed date, time and place, and no further notice shall be required as prescribed by law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.06: SCOPE OF APPROVALS:
A. Scope: An approval permits only those uses and activities actually proposed in the application, and excludes other uses and activities. The approved
use and/or construction is subject to, and shall comply with, all applicable city ordinances and laws and regulations of other governmental agencies.
Unless otherwise specified therein, any approval terminates all other uses at the location subject to the approval.
B. Conditions Of Approval: Unless otherwise specified or required by the zoning administrator or city council, the site plan, floor plans, building elevations
and/or any additional information or representations indicating the proposed structure or manner of operation submitted with an application or
submitted during the approval process or by minute order shall be deemed conditions of approval. Any approval may be subject to requirements that
the permittee guarantees, warranties or ensures that he will comply with permit's plans and conditions in all respects.
C. Actions Voiding Approval: If the construction of a building or structure or the use established is contrary to the description or illustration in the
application, so as to either violate any provision of this chapter or require additional permits, then the approval shall be deemed null and void.
D. Periodic Review: All approvals may be subject to periodic review to determine compliance with the permit and applicable conditions. If a condition
specifies that activities or uses allowed under the conditional use permit are subject to periodic reporting, monitoring or assessments, it shall be the
responsibility of the permit holder, the property owner or successor property owners to comply with such conditions. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.07: EFFECTIVE DATES:
A final decision on an application for any zoning administrator approval is subject to appeal and shall not become effective until after the expiration of the
ten (10) day appeal period following the date of action. No building permit or business license shall be issued until the eleventh day following the date of
the action. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.08: EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION:
A. Expiration: The city council, in the granting of any permit, or the zoning administrator, in the granting of any application, permit modification, or
adjustment, may specify the time within which the proposed use must be undertaken and actively and continuously pursued. The city council or zoning
administrator may impose upon the permit a term of such period of time as is found to be consistent with the purposes of the use and necessary to
safeguard the public safety, health and welfare. If no time period is otherwise specified, any permit granted under this chapter may be declared lapsed
and of no further force and effect if it is not exercised or extended within two (2) years of its issuance.
1. A permit for the use of a building or a property is exercised when, if required, a valid city business license has been issued, and the permitted use
has commenced on the property.
2. A permit for the construction of a building or structure is exercised when a valid city building permit, if required, is issued, and construction has
lawfully commenced.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 529/636
B. Extensions: The city council may approve a one year extension of any permit or approval granted under this chapter upon receipt of a written
application with the required fee before the permit expires. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.09: MODIFICATION OF APPROVALS; CHANGED PLANS:
A. Modifications Of Approvals: The zoning administrator may approve minor modifications to approved plans that are consistent with the original findings
and conditions approved by the city council and would not intensify any potentially detrimental effects of the project.
B. Changed Plan: A request for changes in conditions of approval of a discretionary permit or a change in an approved site plan or building plan that would
affect a condition of approval shall be treated as a new application, except that such changes determined to be minor, in the opinion of the zoning
administrator, may be approved by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.10: REVOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF APPROVALS:
Any permit granted under this article may be revoked or modified if any of the conditions or terms of such permit are violated or if any law or ordinance is
violated in connection therewith. Notwithstanding this provision, no lawful residential use can lapse regardless of the length of time of the vacancy.
A. Initiation Of Proceeding: The city council, by its own action, or following a recommendation from the zoning administrator, may initiate revocation or
modification proceedings.
B. Public Notice: The zoning administrator shall give notice of the hearing before the city council pursuant to the requirements of section 601.05, "Public
Notification", of this article.
C. Public Hearing: The public hearing regarding the revocation or modification of a conditional use permit or variance shall be conducted in the same
manner as for conditional use permits pursuant to article 604, "Conditional Use Permits", of this series.
D. Decision Of The City Council: The city council may revoke the permit if it makes any of the following findings:
1. That approval was obtained by means of fraud or misrepresentation of a material fact;
2. That the use in question has ceased to exist or has been suspended for one year or more;
3. That there is or has been a violation of or failure to observe the terms or conditions of the permit or variance, or the use has been conducted in
violation of the provisions of this chapter, law or regulation; or
4. That the use to which the permit or variance applies has been conducted in a manner detrimental to the public safety, health and welfare, or so as to
be a nuisance. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
601.11: APPEALS:
All final decisions of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the city council pursuant to article 612, "Appeals", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 602. ZONING CONFORMANCE REVIEW
602.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes procedures for conducting zoning conformance review to ensure that each new or expanded use or structure complies with the
applicable requirements of this chapter. Having made such determination, the zoning administrator shall establish a record of the zoning conformance
approval that document the initial establishment of a use, or the construction of a structure, which is allowed as a matter of right. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
602.02: APPLICABILITY:
Zoning conformance approval is required for buildings, structures, or signs erected, constructed, altered, repaired or moved, the use of vacant land,
changes in the character of the use of land or building, or for substantial expansions in the use of land or building, which are allowed as a matter of right by
this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
602.03: PROCEDURES:
Prior to obtaining any business license, building permit, subdivision approval, or lot line adjustment, the applicant shall request the zoning administrator to
determine whether the use, building, or change in lot configuration complies with all provisions of this chapter or any conditional use permit or variance
approval issued pursuant to the ordinance's requirements and that all conditions of such permits and approvals have been satisfied. The following
requirements apply to such determinations:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 530/636
A. Application: Applications and fees for zoning conformance review shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions set forth in section 601.02,
"Application Forms And Fees", of this series. The zoning administrator may request that the application be accompanied by plans and related materials
necessary to show that the proposed development, alteration, or use of the property complies with all provisions of this chapter and the requirements
and conditions of any applicable conditional use permit or variance approval.
B. Determination: The zoning administrator shall determine whether the development ordinance allows the proposed uses or structures by right.
C. Exceptions: No zoning certificate shall be required for the continuation of previously approved or permitted uses and structures, uses and structures
that are not subject to any building or zoning regulations, or other uses or buildings already subject to conditional use permits, variances, or other
discretionary approvals in the district in which they are located. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
602.04: REQUEST FOR OTHER ZONING ADMINISTRATOR DETERMINATIONS:
Requests for interpretations of this chapter, verifications of zoning regulations, or verifications related to previous permits shall be made in writing to the
zoning administrator. Requests shall be accompanied by payment of fees established in the city's adopted fee schedule. The zoning administrator shall
provide a zoning administrator determination in writing within thirty (30) days of a complete submittal. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 603. HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
603.01: PURPOSE:
This article describes the process and general requirements applicable to those uses for which a hillside development permit or an administrative hillside
development permit is required by this chapter. These uses require special consideration to ensure that they can be designed, located, and operated in a
manner that will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. The process for review of hillside development permit and
administrative hillside development permit applications is designed to evaluate possible adverse impacts and to minimize them where possible through the
imposition of specific conditions or requirements. Approval of a hillside development permit or an administrative hillside development permit requires
careful review of the location, design, configuration, and special impacts of a proposed use to determine, against standards and criteria, the desirability of
permitting its establishment on a particular site.
A. Hillside Development Permits: No person shall grade, erect, or construct into, over or on top of property within the HZ overlay district without first
obtaining a hillside development permit, except as otherwise provided for in this article.
B. Administrative Hillside Development Permits: If no other development permits are required by this chapter or other provisions of the municipal code,
then the property owner or duly authorized agent may submit an application for an administrative hillside development permit. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
603.02: APPLICABILITY:
This article is applicable to uses or developments on properties within the incorporated boundaries of the city of Porterville, as well as those properties
within the city's official sphere of influence, as may be amended from time to time, that are designated hillside development zone on the general plan land
use diagram, except the activities listed below:
A. Construction that does not require a grading permit or a building permit.
B. The construction and installation (trenching, utility construction, and backfilling) of underground utility systems.
C. The regrading of existing yard areas for landscaping installation provided such regraded yard area does not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet in area.
D. Swimming pools, spas, ponds, and associated hardscape and landscape improvements that do not involve the construction of any retaining walls over
three feet (3') in height, subject to the issuance of a grading permit and required building permits.
E. Additions to existing structures and/or construction of accessory structures located entirely on the existing pad area and are less than five hundred
(500) square feet in area, unless a grading permit for establishment of same is required.
F. Any project that has received final approval for construction prior to the effective date hereof, provided that such permit or approval has not expired or is
not otherwise revoked. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
603.03: DECISION MAKING AUTHORITY:
A. Hillside Development Permit: The city council shall consider and render a decision on any application for a hillside development permit.
B. Administrative Hillside Development Permit: The zoning administrator shall consider and render a decision on any application for an administrative
hillside development permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 531/636
C. Referral Of Application To City Council: The zoning administrator or designee may, at his or her discretion, refer an application for an administrative
hillside development permit to the city council for a decision rather than acting on it individually. In this case, the application shall be processed as a
hillside development permit. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
603.04: PROCEDURES:
A. Filing: Written applications for hillside development permits or administrative hillside development permits shall be filed with the community
development department in accordance with the application procedures in article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series.
B. Review Procedures:
1. The zoning administrator shall review all applications within thirty (30) days to determine if they are complete as provided for in article 601, "Common
Procedures", of this series. No application shall be deemed complete until the applicant has applied for any conditional use permit, variance, or other
zoning or subdivision approval required pursuant to this chapter.
2. After determining that an application is complete, the zoning administrator shall review the application for compliance with the applicable HZ overlay
district requirements.
3. After determining that an application is complete, if it is not exempt from environmental review, the zoning administrator shall conduct the hillside
development review process concurrently with the required environmental review. When a project requiring review by the city council is subject to
environmental review, the zoning administrator shall submit the proposed negative declaration or environmental impact report to the city council for
review and action pursuant to CEQA requirements before the city council takes action on the hillside development application. The application for a
hillside development permit should be processed concurrently with the appropriate environmental document.
4. Hillside development permit:
a. The zoning administrator shall prepare a report and recommendation.
b. If an application is exempt from environmental review and does not otherwise require a hearing by the city council, a public hearing shall be held
before the city council within thirty (30) days of the date the application is deemed complete.
c. No separate notice or public hearing is required for a hillside development permit for a project that requires a conditional use permit, variance,
tentative map or other discretionary approval subject to a public hearing by the city council.
5. Administrative hillside development permit:
a. The zoning administrator may conduct a public hearing for any application that may be approved by the zoning administrator. The zoning
administrator shall act on a project with a complete application within thirty (30) days of the date the application is received. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
603.05: APPEALS, EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS:
A. Appeals:
1. Administrative hillside development permits: The decision by the zoning administrator is subject to the appeal provisions of article 612, "Appeals", of
this series.
2. Hillside development permits: The decision of the city council shall be final.
B. Expiration And Extension: Hillside development permit and administrative hillside development permit approvals are effective and may only be extended
or modified as provided for in article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 604. CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
604.01: PURPOSE:
This article describes the process and general requirements applicable to those uses for which a conditional use permit is required. These uses require
special consideration to ensure that they can be designed, located, and operated in a manner that will not interfere with the use and enjoyment of
surrounding properties. The process for review of conditional use permit applications is designed to evaluate possible adverse impacts and to minimize
them where possible through the imposition of specific conditions. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
604.02: APPLICABILITY:
Conditional use permit approval is required for uses or developments specifically identified in the series 200, "Base Districts", and 500, "Overlay Districts",
of this chapter or any other section of this chapter which requires a conditional use permit. Some conditional uses that have been identified by the city
council to require less staff review time are titled "minor conditional use permits", and such uses are identified in series 200, "Base Districts", of this
chapter. Minor conditional use permits shall conform to all applicable criteria required of conditional use permits. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
604.03: PROCEDURES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 532/636
A. Application: Written applications for conditional use permits shall be filed with the community development department in accordance with article 601,
"Common Procedures", of this series.
B. Public Hearing: Within thirty (30) days after determining that an application is complete, the zoning administrator shall schedule a public hearing before
the city council. Notice shall be provided in compliance with the requirements in article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
604.04: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
A conditional use permit shall only be granted if the city council determines that the project as submitted or as modified conforms to all of the following
criteria. If the city council determines that it is not possible to make all of the required findings, the application shall be denied. The specific basis for denial
shall be established for the record.
A. Approval of the proposed project will advance the goals and objectives of and is consistent with the policies of the general plan and any other applicable
plan that the city has adopted; and
B. The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed project are consistent with the purposes of the district where it is located and
conforms in all significant respects with the general plan, this development ordinance and with any other applicable plan adopted by the city council.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
604.05: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
A. In approving a conditional use permit, the city council may impose conditions reasonably related to the application and deemed necessary to achieve
the findings for a conditional use permit identified in section 604.04 of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
604.06: DECISION; EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS; MODIFICATIONS:
A. Decision: The decision of the council shall be final. The zoning administrator shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the applicant within ten
(10) days from the date of adoption thereof.
B. Expiration, Extension, And Modifications: Conditional use permits are effective and may only be extended or modified as provided for in article 601,
"Common Procedures", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 605. TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
605.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes a process for review and approval of certain uses that are intended to be of limited duration of time and will not permanently alter
the character or physical facilities of the site where they occur. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
605.02: APPLICABILITY:
Temporary use permit approval is required for temporary uses as described in section 301.19, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter. The zoning administrator
may refer an application for a temporary use permit to the city council if the zoning administrator finds that the temporary use may have substantial and
detrimental impacts to surrounding land that warrant council review. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
605.03: PROCEDURES:
A. Application: Any person may apply to the zoning administrator for approval of a temporary use not less than thirty (30) days before the use is intended
to begin in accordance with the provisions in article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series.
B. Determination: Within ten (10) days of accepting an application for a temporary use permit as complete, the zoning administrator shall render a written
decision. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
605.04: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
The zoning administrator may approve an application for a temporary use permit to allow a temporary use for a period of time, only upon making all of the
following findings:
A. The proposed use will not unreasonably affect adjacent properties, their owners and occupants, or the surrounding neighborhood, and will not in any
other way constitute a nuisance or be detrimental to the health, safety, peace, comfort, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the area of
such use or to the general welfare of the city;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 533/636
B. The proposed use will not unreasonably interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or circulation in the area surrounding the proposed use, and will not
create a demand for additional parking that cannot be safely and efficiently accommodated by existing parking areas; and
C. Appropriate controls are in place that will ensure the premises will be kept clean, sanitary, and free of litter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
605.05: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
In approving a temporary use permit, the zoning administrator may impose any conditions reasonably related to the application and deemed necessary to
achieve the findings for a temporary use permit listed in section 605.04 of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 606. VARIANCES
606.01: PURPOSE:
This article is intended to provide a mechanism for relief from the strict application of this chapter where strict application will deprive the property owner of
privileges enjoyed by similar properties because of the subject property's unique and special conditions. Variances may be granted with respect to
dimensional and performance standards, but variances from the use regulations of this chapter are not allowed. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
606.02: PROCEDURES:
A. Application: Applications for variances shall be filed in accordance with article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series. In addition to any other
application requirements, the application for a variance shall include data or other evidence supporting the proposed variance.
B. Public Notice And Hearing: All applications for variances shall require public notice and a hearing before the city council pursuant to article 601,
"Common Procedures", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
606.03: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
A variance shall only be granted if the city council makes all of the following findings:
A. There are special circumstances or conditions applicable to the property such as its size, shape, topography, location, surroundings, or existing
structures, which do not apply generally to uses, land or structures in the vicinity and same zoning district;
B. Due to the special circumstances applicable to this property, strict application of the respective zoning regulation would deprive the property owner of
privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the same zoning district;
C. Special circumstances applicable to the property were or are not self-imposed by the property owner; and
D. The authorization of the variance will substantially meet the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which the subject property is located and will not
be detrimental to persons residing or working in the vicinity, to adjacent property, to the neighborhood, or the public welfare in general. (Ord. 1801, 12-
3-2013)
606.04: USE VARIANCES PROHIBITED:
The city council shall not approve any changes in the uses permitted in any zoning classification or zoning district or approve any modification of the
requirements of this chapter that would have the effect of allowing the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted. This restriction shall not affect the
authority otherwise to grant variances pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
606.05: CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL:
A. In approving a variance, the city council may impose reasonable conditions necessary to ensure that the variance shall not constitute a grant of special
privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is located. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
606.06: DECISION; EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS; MODIFICATIONS:
A. Decision: The decision of the council shall be final. The zoning administrator shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the applicant within ten
(10) days from the date of adoption thereof.
B. Expiration And Extension: Variances are effective and may only be extended or modified as provided for in article 601, "Common Procedures", of this
series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 534/636
ARTICLE 607. AMENDMENTS TO GENERAL PLAN
607.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes procedures for making changes to the general plan as provided for in state law when there are compelling reasons to do so as a
result of changes in conditions or circumstances unforeseen at the time of adoption or last amendment of the general plan. These circumstances include,
but are not limited to, changes in state or federal law and problems and opportunities that were unanticipated at the time of adoption or last amendment.
This amendment process is not intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make
adjustments necessary in light of changed conditions or changes in public policy. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
607.02: APPLICABILITY:
The procedures of this article shall apply to all proposals to change the text of the general plan and the diagrams that illustrate the application of its
provisions. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
607.03: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT:
An amendment may be initiated by the city council or by application of any interested person. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
607.04: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application: A qualified applicant shall submit an application for a general plan amendment on a form prescribed by the zoning administrator
accompanied by the required fee. The zoning administrator may require an applicant to submit such additional information and supporting data as
considered necessary to process the application.
B. Coordination With Other Applications: Related applications to be processed concurrently unless the zoning administrator shall otherwise allow any
necessary applications for amendments to zoning regulations or for approval of discretionary permits, to be processed simultaneously with the
proposed general plan amendment. However, an application for a general plan amendment is not considered to be a development project and so the
approval of any associated discretionary permit shall not be subject to the time limits specified in state law for processing such applications until the
council approves the general plan amendment and any necessary amendments to this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
607.05: REVIEW OF APPLICATION AND DETERMINATIONS BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
After determining that an application is complete and environmental review has been conducted, the zoning administrator shall prepare a report and
recommendation to the city council on the application for a general plan amendment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
607.06: PUBLIC HEARING SCHEDULING:
The zoning administrator shall schedule the application for hearing by the city council in accordance with the council's schedule for considering general
plan amendments. Notice shall be provided in accordance with article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
607.07: CITY COUNCIL HEARING AND ACTION:
A. Hearing: The city council shall conduct a public hearing in conformance with the provisions of article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series.
B. Action: After the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may approve, modify or disapprove the proposed general plan amendment. (Ord. 1801, 12-
3-2013)
ARTICLE 608. AMENDMENTS TO ZONING MAP AND TEXT
608.01: PURPOSE:
This article provides procedures by which changes may be made to the text of this chapter and to the zoning map. The zoning amendment process is not
intended to relieve particular hardships nor to confer special privileges or rights upon any person, but only to make adjustments necessary in light of
changed conditions or changes in public policy. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
608.02: APPLICABILITY:
The procedures in this article shall apply to all proposals to change the text of this chapter or to revise a zoning district classification or zoning district
boundary line shown on the zoning map. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 535/636
608.03: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT:
An amendment may be initiated by the city council or by application of any interested person. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
608.04: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
A. Application: A qualified applicant shall submit an application for a zoning amendment on a form prescribed by the zoning administrator accompanied by
the required fee. The zoning administrator may require an applicant to submit such additional information and supporting data as considered necessary
to process the application.
B. Coordination With Other Applications: Related applications to be processed concurrently unless the zoning administrator shall otherwise allow any
necessary applications for amendments to zoning regulations or for approval of discretionary permits, to be processed simultaneously with the
proposed zoning amendment. However, an application for a zoning amendment is not considered to be a development project and so the approval of
any associated discretionary permits shall not be subject to the time limits specified in state law for processing such applications until the council
approves the zoning amendment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
608.05: REVIEW OF APPLICATION AND DETERMINATIONS BY ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
After determining that an application is complete and environmental review has been conducted, the zoning administrator shall prepare a report and
recommendation to the city council on the application for a zoning amendment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
608.06: CITY COUNCIL HEARING AND ACTION:
A. Hearing: The city council shall conduct a public hearing in conformance with the provisions of article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series.
B. Action: After the conclusion of the hearing, the city council may approve, modify or disapprove the proposed zoning amendment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-
2013)
ARTICLE 609. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
609.01: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this article is to provide a mechanism that assures the applicant of a development project that upon approval, the applicant may proceed
with the project in accordance with existing policies, rules and regulations, and conditions that were applicable at the time of project approval, and in a
manner consistent with section 65864 et seq., of the Government Code. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.02: OBJECTIVE:
The objective of a development agreement is to strengthen the public planning process, encourage private participation in comprehensive planning,
reduce the economic costs of development and promote the construction of public improvements by the private sector by providing for provisions in the
agreement whereby the applicant is reimbursed over time for the financing of the public improvements. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.03: REQUIREMENTS:
To enter into a development agreement, the city shall find that:
A. A person has a legal or equitable interest in real property for the development of such property; and
B. The development project is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.04: CONTENTS:
A development agreement shall specify the duration of the agreement, the permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum
height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land or facilities for public purposes. The development agreement
may include conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that such conditions, terms, restrictions, and
requirements shall not prevent development of the land for uses and to the density or intensity of development set forth in the agreement. The agreement
may require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a specified time.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.05: APPLICATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 536/636
An application for a development agreement shall be made to the zoning administrator on a form prescribed by the department. The application shall be
accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the city council and will be processed in conjunction with other associated discretionary permits. (Ord. 1801, 12-
3-2013)
609.06: HEARINGS AND NOTICE:
Upon receipt of a development agreement application, the zoning administrator shall initiate and notice the public hearing pursuant to the provisions of
article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.07: REPORT AND FINDINGS:
The zoning administrator shall prepare a report on the development agreement application and provide a recommendation to the city council based on the
following findings:
A. The project is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan.
B. The project is authorized by the ordinance as it relates to use and development standard regulations.
C. The project will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.
D. The project will provide sufficient benefit to the city to justify entering into the development agreement.
E. The project will not have a significant impact on the environment. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.08: ACTION OF CITY COUNCIL:
Following a public hearing, the city council shall consider staff's recommendation and shall take action on the development agreement. The council can
approve, approve with modifications or deny the development agreement. If the council approves or approves with modification the development
agreement, it shall initiate proceedings to adopt an ordinance. After the ordinance takes effect, the city may enter into the agreement with the applicant.
(Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.09: INITIATION OF AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION:
Either party may propose an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement previously entered into. If proposed by the
applicant, the procedure shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement. However, where the city council initiates the proposed
amendment to or cancellation of the development agreement, it shall first give at least thirty (30) days' notice to the applicant of its intention to initiate such
proceedings in advance of giving notice of the public hearing. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.10: RECORDATION:
A. Within ten (10) days after the city enters into the development agreement, the city shall have the agreement recorded with the county recorder.
B. If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement, or if the city terminates or modifies the agreement for
failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the city shall have notice of such action recorded with the
county recorder. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
609.11: REVIEW:
A. The zoning administrator shall review the development agreement at least once every twelve (12) months from the date the agreement is entered into.
The community development department shall report the findings to the city council. The time for review may be modified by agreement between the
parties.
B. Should the zoning administrator find that the developer is in noncompliance or not performing consistent with the development agreement, the director
shall report this finding to the city council. The city council may terminate the development agreement consistent with section 609.09, "Initiation Of
Amendment Or Cancellation", of this article. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 610. ADJUSTMENTS
610.01: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 537/636
This article establishes a process for making and acting upon requests for reasonable accommodation to provide an alternate means of granting relief
from this chapter's requirements when so doing would be consistent with this chapter's objectives. It is the policy of the city to comply with the federal fair
housing act, the Americans with disabilities act and the California fair employment and housing act to provide reasonable accommodation by modifying the
application of its zoning and subdivision regulations for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to housing. This article authorizes the zoning
administrator to grant administrative relief from this chapter's dimensional requirements to achieve these and other objectives and also allows the city
council to grant adjustments when necessary to accommodate uses protected by state or federal law. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
610.02: PROCEDURES:
A. Application: An application for relief shall be filed with the zoning administrator in accordance with article 601, "Common Procedures", of this series. The
application shall state in writing the nature of the adjustment requested and explain why the findings necessary to grant the adjustment are satisfied.
The applicant shall also submit plans delineating the requested adjustment.
B. Relief Granted By The Zoning Administrator: The zoning administrator may grant relief from the dimensional requirements specified in this chapter to
the following extent:
1. Setbacks: Front and rear yard setback adjustments not exceeding two feet (2'). Side yard setback adjustments not exceeding one foot (1').
2. Building Site Coverage: Building site coverage adjustments not exceeding five percent (5%).
3. Height: Maximum building height or other height limitations not exceeding five feet (5').
C. Referral To City Council: The zoning administrator may refer to the city council any request for an adjustment necessary to comply with the reasonable
accommodation provisions of federal law based on a determination that there is a compelling public interest requiring such an accommodation.
D. Concurrent Processing: If a request for relief is being submitted in conjunction with an application for another approval, permit, or entitlement under this
chapter, it shall be heard and acted upon at the same time and in the same manner as that application. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
610.03: REQUIRED FINDINGS:
A. Findings For Approval: A decision to grant an adjustment shall be based on the following findings, supported by information in the record:
1. The adjustment is necessary due to the physical characteristics of the property and the proposed use or structure or other circumstances, including,
but not limited to, topography, noise exposure, irregular property boundaries, or other unusual circumstance;
2. The granting of the requested adjustment would not be detrimental to the health or safety of the public or the occupants of the property or result in a
change in land use or density that would be inconsistent with the requirements of this chapter; and
3. The granting of the adjustment will substantially meet or advance the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which the subject property is
located.
B. Additional Finding For Reasonable Accommodations: If the adjustment requested is to provide reasonable accommodation pursuant to federal or state
statute, the responsible decision maker must find that denial of the requested adjustment would impose a substantial burden on religious exercise or
would conflict with any federal or state statute requiring reasonable accommodation of persons with disabilities. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 611. ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
611.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes procedures for conducting environmental review to meet requirements of the California environmental quality act (CEQA) and the
national environmental policy act (NEPA). These provisions are intended to ensure that responsible decision makers and the public are informed about the
potentially significant environmental effects of proposed activities and that environmental review is integrated with the discretionary review provisions that
this article establishes to promote incorporation of environmental considerations into the design, planning, and review of projects. These procedures apply
to all projects sponsored or assisted by the city and to all private projects requiring any discretionary approvals from the city. In the event of a conflict
between these environmental review regulations and applicable federal or state regulations or guidelines, the applicable federal or state regulations shall
prevail. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
611.02: PROCEDURES:
A. Filing Of Forms: Concurrent with the submittal of project applications, the applicant shall prepare and file an environmental information form and project
plans with the community development department.
B. Preliminary Review: Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the zoning administrator shall conduct a preliminary environmental review. As
part of this review, the zoning administrator will identify issues to help decide if the applicant proposes a project that is subject to environmental review
and may require the applicant to submit additional information needed to support this determination.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 538/636
C. Preparation And Processing Environmental Documents: A determination of the appropriate level of environmental review by the zoning administrator
shall trigger the preparation of an environmental document in compliance with the most current regulations and guidelines of the environmental quality
act, whether it be exempt from CEQA, require negative declaration, mitigated negative declaration or an environmental impact report (EIR). Further, in
concert with the requirements of an applicable federal agency(ies), the zoning administrator will cause to have prepared the appropriate NEPA
environmental documentation.
D. Review For Exemption:
1. Determinations of exemption shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date the application is deemed complete.
2. If the zoning administrator has determined that a project is exempt from environmental review under CEQA, such determination shall be announced
in any required public notice for discretionary permits. The notice shall include a citation to the CEQA guidelines or CEQA section under which it is
found to be exempt.
3. Following approval of a project that is exempt from CEQA review, a notice of exemption shall be filed with the county clerk as provided for in CEQA
and the applicable state and city guidelines.
4. A determination of exemption by any decision making authority other than the city council may be appealed to the city council in the same manner
provided in article 612, "Appeals", of this series.
E. Initial Study: If the proposed project is subject to CEQA and is not exempt from environmental review, an initial study shall be prepared in compliance
with CEQA and local CEQA guidelines.
F. Determination Of Environmental Significance: Based on the initial study, the zoning administrator will make one of the following findings:
1. The project will have "no significant impacts" on the environment, and a negative declaration will be prepared;
2. The project has been modified or mitigation measures have been incorporated to mitigate potential environmental impacts to a level of insignificance
and a mitigated negative declaration will be prepared; or
3. The proposed project will have, or may have, significant impact(s) that may not be mitigated, and an EIR will be required.
G. Environmental Determination: If the zoning administrator has determined that the proposed project will not have a significant effect on the environment,
a negative declaration shall be prepared for public review in conformance with the requirements of CEQA and applicable state and city environmental
review guidelines.
H. Public Notice Of Environmental Determination: The zoning administrator shall provide public notice of the proposed environmental determination in a
newspaper of general circulation, at city hall, and with the county clerk. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
611.03: MITIGATION MONITORING AND REPORTING PROGRAM:
A. Program Contents: The city shall approve a mitigation monitoring and reporting program (MMRP) for all projects that it approves with a mitigated
negative declaration or in conjunction with certification of a final EIR and compliance with CEQA.
B. Enforcement: Failure to comply with the conditions and requirements of an approved MMRP shall be considered a violation of the conditions of approval
of a project. Such violations shall be subject to enforcement in accordance with the provisions of article 613, "Enforcement", of this series.
C. Modification Of Mitigation Program Not Permitted Following Adoption: Unless specifically authorized or required by the conditions of project approval,
neither CEQA nor this article authorize the city to modify or add mitigation measures if the monitoring program shows that the mitigation measures
have not achieved the desired result. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
611.04: PREPARATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL DOCUMENTS BY CONSULTANTS:
If the city planning division is unable to prepare an environmental document or technical study for a public or private project, the city shall contract with a
qualified consultant for preparation of the appropriate environmental documents including technical studies. The city has undertaken the negotiation of and
maintains an on call environmental consultant for use on city projects with defined funding sources, and for use by private development proponents in the
event they desire to streamline the process. In such cases, the city and consultant shall prepare an agreement for preparation of and to specify the details
of the necessary environmental studies and documents.
The applicant is responsible for the full cost of the services. The full negotiated cost of service plus ten percent (10%) for contingencies shall be placed on
deposit with the city prior to authorizing work to begin on the environmental documents. The zoning administrator shall be the authority to require payment
to the city of a ten percent (10%) administrative fee in cases where the cost of administering the contract is likely to exceed the adopted fee for
environmental reviews. The zoning administrator shall have the authority to facilitate the consultant selection process, to select the consultant, and to
negotiate fees for services. The process for selecting an environmental consultant shall be as follows:
A. Staff will prepare a request for proposals (RFP) soliciting project specific proposals from qualified consultants as represented in a consultant services
file and as posted by the purchasing agent;
B. Staff will evaluate the proposals relative to responsiveness and pursuant to the consultant selection criteria currently used in the city;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 539/636
C. Staff may elect to interview the consultant to determine additional qualifications and ability to represent the city's interest in a public forum;
D. Staff will prepare a consultant services agreement and the zoning administrator will sign following submittal of the necessary funds and contingencies
by the project proponent; and
E. Staff will send the deposit to the finance department and request the establishment of a pass through account and will set up a purchase order for
monthly invoice payments. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 612. APPEALS
612.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes uniform procedures for appeals of final decisions by the zoning administrator, city engineer or parcel map committee. (Ord. 1801,
12-3-2013)
612.02: RIGHTS OF APPEAL:
Appeals may be filed by the applicant, by the owner of property, or by any other person aggrieved by a decision that is subject to appeal under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
612.03: TIME LIMITS:
Unless otherwise specified in state or federal law, all appeals shall be filed with the city clerk in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the
action. In the event an appeal period ends on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by the city, the appeal period shall end at the close of business on
the next consecutive business day. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
612.04: PROCEDURES:
A. Proceedings Stayed By Appeal: The timely filing of an appeal shall stay all proceedings in the matter appealed including, but not limited to, the issuance
of city building permits and business licenses.
B. Filing An Appeal: All final decisions of the zoning administrator, city engineer or parcel map committee may be appealed to the city council by filing a
written appeal with the city clerk accompanied by the required fee. The notice of appeal shall set forth, in concise language, the following:
1. Date of appeal;
2. Name of appellant and the individual representing appellant;
3. Address to which notices shall be sent;
4. Telephone number of representative;
5. Name of applicant, if different from appellant;
6. Action or decision being appealed and the date of such action or decision;
7. Address and description of real property involved; and
8. Grounds for appeal.
C. Transmission Of Record: The city clerk shall schedule the appeal for consideration by the city council within thirty (30) days of the date the appeal was
filed. The zoning administrator shall forward the appeal, the notice of action, and all other documents that constitute the record to the city council. The
zoning administrator shall also prepare a staff report that responds to the issues raised by the appeal and may include a recommendation for action.
D. Public Notice: In addition to providing notice in the same manner required for the action that was the subject of the appeal, the city clerk shall provide
notice to all persons who spoke on the matter at any prior hearings on the same matter. Notice to such persons shall be mailed only if they provided
their names and addresses at the time they spoke at the prior hearing.
E. City Council Action: The city council shall review the appeal, the record, and any written correspondence submitted after the appeal has been filed, and
may take one of the following actions:
1. Conduct a public hearing; or
2. Remand the matter to the zoning administrator to cure a deficiency in the record or proceedings.
F. City Council Decision: The city council shall render its decision within thirty (30) days of the date the hearing is closed unless state law requires a shorter
deadline.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 540/636
G. Council Action In Lieu Of Appeal: The city council may call up for review and a public hearing any action of the zoning administrator within ten (10) days
of the decision. Such action by the council shall stay all proceedings in the same manner as the filing of an appeal. Such action shall not require any
statement of reasons and shall not represent opposition to or support of an application or appeal. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
612.05: STANDARDS OF REVIEW:
When reviewing any decision on appeal, the city council shall use the same standards and criteria for decision making required for the original decision.
The city council may adopt the same decision and findings as were originally approved. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
ARTICLE 613. ENFORCEMENT
613.01: PURPOSE:
This article establishes the responsibilities of various departments, officials and public employees of the city to enforce the requirements of this chapter
and sets forth the procedures the city will use to identify, abate, remove, and enjoin those uses, structures, buildings, or properties that are deemed to be
in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
613.02: ENFORCEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES:
All departments, officials, and public employees of the city, vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter, and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this chapter; and any such permit or
license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. The following officials, departments, and employees have specific
responsibilities as follows:
A. Zoning Administrator:
1. Shall enforce all provisions of this chapter related to issuance of discretionary permits and shall have responsibility for ordering the correction of
violations and initiating the revocation of discretionary permits pursuant to section 601.10, "Revocation Or Modification Of Approvals", of this series,
and the abatement of nuisances as defined in this article.
2. Shall prior to issuance of building permits, ascertain that plans presented with the building permit application conform to those approved subject to
the requirements of this chapter.
3. Shall enforce all provisions of this chapter pertaining to the use, erection, construction, reconstruction, relocation, conversion, alteration, or addition
to any building or structure and condition of approval of use permits, variances, nuisance abatements, or other discretionary approvals. The zoning
administrator is hereby authorized to cause to be stopped any work or use undertaken without or contrary to approval granted pursuant to this
chapter or in violation of any of its other provisions.
B. City Attorney: The city attorney may, at his or her discretion or upon order of the council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the
abatement and removal and enjoinment of violations in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such courts as
may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such use, or building or structure, and may seek to restrain and enjoin any person,
firm or corporation from such use of any property, building or structure, or from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining or demolishing any such
building or structure contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
613.03: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
Any use, event, building or structure that violates any provision of this chapter or any other city, state, or federal regulation, ordinance, or statute shall be
deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
613.04: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
A. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is subject to any and all applicable provisions of the municipal code, including, but
not limited to, the general penalty provisions specified at section 1-9 of the municipal code.
B. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter may be subject to the administrative citation procedure pursuant to
chapter 2, article XIV of the municipal code. These procedures are in addition to other applicable remedies established in the municipal code.
C. Notwithstanding the applicable fines specified in chapter 2, article XIV of the municipal code, any nuisance associated with a use allowed by a
discretionary permit (i.e., conditional use permit, etc.) as set forth in this code, may be subject to an administrative fine as follows:
1. First offense: Not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
2. Second offense: Not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
3. Third offense: Not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 541/636
613.05: REMEDIES:
Upon a finding of nuisance pursuant to this article, and after giving the property owner an opportunity to cure the nuisance (i.e., courtesy notice or notice of
violation) and determining that the nuisance still exists, the zoning administrator shall submit the item to the code compliance officer for recourse outlined
in the municipal code who may impose any remedy available at law or in equity. (Ord. 1801, 12-3-2013)
Chapter Series 700
GENERAL TERMS
ARTICLE 700. DEFINITIONS
700.01: LIST OF TERMS:
ARC districts (agriculture/rural/conservation districts)
Abutting or adjoining
Accessory building
Accessory structure
Accessory use
Acre, gross
Acre, net
Adjacent
Affordable housing terms
Additional incentive
Affordable rent
Affordable sales price
Density bonus
Density bonus units
Economically feasible
Housing cost
Lower income household
Maximum residential density
Moderate income household
Regulatory agreement
Senior citizen
Senior citizen housing development
Target unit
Very low income household
Aggrieved person
Alley
Alteration
Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA)
Animal-related terms
Household pet
Livestock
Area, gross
Balcony
Base district
Bedroom
Bicycle parking, long-term
Bicycle parking, short-term
Block
Blockface
Building
Building, accessory
Building footprint
Building front
Building height
Building, main
C districts (commercial districts)
California Building Code (CBC)
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
Carport
City
City Council
City Engineer
Code Enforcement Officer
Commercial vehicle
Compatible
Condition of use
Conditionally permitted
Construction
Conversion
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 542/636
County
Crew quarters
D districts (downtown districts)
Deck
Demolition
Density
Development
Development agreement
Development ordinance
District
Double frontage lot
Drive-through facilities
Driveway
Dwelling unit
Easement
Effective date
Emergency
Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
Facade
Family
Feasible
Fence
Floor area
Floor area ratio
Foot-candle
Footprint
Freeway
Frontage, street (frontage, lot)
Garage
General Plan
Glare
Gross leasable area
Ground floor
Habitable area
Hazardous materials
Heat
Height
Home occupation
Household
Illegal use
In-lieu fees
Intensity of use
International Building Code
Intersection, street
Kitchen
Land division terms
Abut
Access, approved
Adjoin
Applicant
Arterial
Block
Centerline
Collector street
Community apartment project
Condominium
Condominium project
Conversion
Cul-de-sac
Design
Final Map
Flood or flooding
Frontage road
Improvements
Industrial street
Local street
Lot line adjustment
Map Act
Merger
Minor street
Parcel
Parcel Map
Preliminary Map
Private street
Public improvement
Remainder
Standard plans and specifications
Stock cooperative
Subdivider
Subdivision
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 543/636
Subdivision design
Tentative Map
Tentative Parcel Map
Vesting Tentative Map
Landscaping
Landscaping terms
Anti-drain or check valve
Automatic controller
Backflow prevention device
Controller
Emitter
Hydrozone
Irrigation efficiency
Operating pressure
Overspray
Runoff
Lighting terms
Foot-candle
Light fixture
Light fixture cutoff
Full cutoff
Cutoff
Semi-cutoff
Non-cutoff
Shielded fixture
Living room
Long-term parking
Lot
Lot area
Lot coverage
Lot depth
Lot frontage
Lot line
Lot line types
Front lot line
Interior lot line
Rear lot line
Side lot line
Street side lot line
Lot types
Lot, corner
Lot, flag
Lot, interior
Lot, key
Lot, reversed corner
Lot, through
Lot width
Maintenance and repair
Manufactured home
Mobile home
Noise terms
Ambient noise level
Decibel
Mobile noise source
Noise
Noise level reduction (NLR)
Nonconforming use and development terms
Abandoned
Illegal nonconforming building or use
Nonconforming building or structure
Nonconforming lot
Nonconforming sign
Nonconforming use
Nuisance
Occupancy, change in
On-site
On-site loading facilities
Open space types
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 544/636
Common open space
Private open space
Usable open space
Opposite
Outdoor storage
Owner
Parking area
Permit
Permitted use
Person
Persons with disabilities
Porch
Pre-existing
Project
Public Works Director
Qualified applicant
Queuing area
R district (residential district)
Recreational vehicle
Redevelopment Agency
Rescission
Right-of-way
Screening
Setback
Sexually oriented business terms (see section 301.17, "Sexually Oriented Businesses", of this chapter)
Sidewalk
Sign-related terms
Abandoned sign
Animated sign
Area of sign
Awning sign
Balloon
Banner
Building frontage
Building-mounted sign
Can sign (box sign)
Canopy
Center identification sign
Changeable copy sign
Channel letters
Construction sign
Directional sign
Electronic message center sign
Fence sign
Flag
Freestanding sign
Height
Identifiable area
Identification sign
Illegal sign
Illuminated sign
Inflatable sign
Logo
Mansard
Marquee sign
Master Sign Program
Monument sign
Neon sign
New subdivision
Off-site advertising sign
Off-site directional sign
Parapet
Pennant
Pole sign
Political sign
Portable sign
Projecting sign
Real estate sign
Roof sign
Sign
Sign area
Sign copy
Sign face
Temporary sign
Vehicle display sign
Vehicle for sale sign
Wall sign
Window sign
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 545/636
Site
Specific plan
State
Story
Street
Strip mall
Structural alteration
Structure
Accessory structure
Permanent structure
Primary structure (main structure)
Temporary structure
Swimming pool
Tandem parking
Telecommunication terms
Amateur radio antenna
Antenna
Camouflage
Co-location
Communication tower
Ground mounted
Monopole
Wireless telecommunications facility
Temporary uses
Garage sales
Model homes
Outdoor sales, temporary and seasonal
Unit
Use
Use, accessory
Use, primary
Use, sensitive
Variance
Vibration
Visible
Weekday
Yard
Front yard
Interior side yard
Rear yard
Street side yard
Zoning Administrator
Zoning district (Ord. 1843, 11-7-2017)
700.02: DEFINITIONS:
ARC DISTRICTS (AGRICULTURE/RURAL/CONSERVATION DISTRICTS): One or more of the following districts: AC Agriculture/Conservation or RR
Rural Residential.
ABUTTING OR ADJOINING: Having a common border, boundary, or lot line. Lots or parcels of land that touch at corners only shall not be deemed
adjoining.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See definition of building, accessory.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: See definition of structure: accessory structure.
ACCESSORY USE: See definition of use, accessory.
ACRE, GROSS: A measure of total land area of a lot or site, including areas to be dedicated for public rights-of-way, streets, schools, or other dedications.
ACRE, NET: A measure of land area of a lot or site remaining after dedication of all areas for public rights-of-way, streets, schools, or other dedications.
ADJACENT: Directly abutting, having a boundary or property line(s) in common or bordering directly, or contiguous to.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING TERMS: The following terms are related to article 302, "Affordable Housing Density Bonus And Other Incentives", of this
chapter.
Additional Incentive: A benefit offered by the City to facilitate construction of eligible projects as defined by the provisions of article 302 of this
chapter. Benefits may include, but are not limited to, priority processing, fee deferments and waivers, the modification of site development standards
or requirements of this chapter, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions that are offered in
addition to a density bonus.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 546/636
Affordable Rent: Monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental target units reserved for very low, lower or
moderate income households, not exceeding the following calculations:
A. Very Low Income: Fifty percent (50%) of the area median income for the County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent (30%)
and divided by twelve (12); and
B. Lower Income: Sixty percent (60%) of the area median income for the County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent (30%)
and divided by twelve (12).
Affordable Sales Price: A sales price at which lower or very low income households can qualify for the purchase of target units, calculated on the
basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for development.
Density Bonus: A minimum increase in the number of dwelling units authorized for a particular parcel of land of at least twenty five percent (25%)
over the otherwise maximum residential density.
Density Bonus Units: Residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of article 302, "Affordable Housing Density Bonus And Other Incentives", of
this chapter, which exceed the otherwise maximum residential density for the development site.
Economically Feasible: Economically feasible means when a housing project can be built with a reasonable rate of return. The housing developer's
financial ability to build the project shall not be a factor.
Household Type: Type of household classified according to whether the occupants of the housing units are very low income, lower income, or senior
citizens.
Housing Cost: The sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following associated with for-sale target units: principal and interest on
a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs,
homeowners' association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.
Lower Income Household: A household whose gross income is as established by Health and Safety Code section 50079.5.
Maximum Residential Density: The maximum number of residential units allowed by the General Plan range specified on the land use map of the
City's General Plan.
Moderate Income Household: A household whose gross income is as established by Health and Safety Code section 50093.
Regulatory Agreement: A legally binding agreement between a developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of article 302, "Affordable
Housing Density Bonus And Other Incentives", of this chapter are satisfied. The agreement, among other things, shall establish: the number of target
units, their size, location, terms, and conditions of affordability, and production schedule.
Senior Citizen: Persons who are:
A. At least sixty two (62) years of age; or
B. At least fifty five (55) years of age in a senior citizen housing development, as defined by State and Federal law.
Senior Citizen Housing Development: Residential development of one of the following types:
A. Assisted housing units for senior citizens; or
B. Housing intended for, and solely occupied by, persons at least sixty two (62) years of age; or
C. Housing consisting of at least one hundred fifty (150) units in which eighty percent (80%) of the units have at least one person aged fifty five
(55) or older and which provide special facilities and services designed for seniors. Eligibility for a density bonus or other incentive for senior citizen
units must be in conformity with State and Federal laws governing senior housing projects.
Target Unit: A dwelling unit within a housing development which will be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low, lower or moderate
income, or senior citizen households.
Very Low Income Household: A household whose gross income is as established by Health and Safety Code section 50105.
AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at a City public hearing in conjunction with a decision or action
appealed or who, by other appropriate means prior to a hearing, informed the local government of the nature of his or her concerns or who, for good
cause, was unable to do either.
ALLEY: A public way permanently reserved primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
ALTERATION: Any change, addition or modification that changes the exterior architectural appearance or materials of a structure or object. Alteration
includes changes in exterior surfaces, changes in materials, additions, remodels, demolitions, and relocation of buildings or structures, but excludes
ordinary maintenance and repairs. See also the definition of "structural alterations" for modifications to any of the supporting members of a structure.
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA): United States Public Law 101-336, 104 Stat. 327 (July 26, 1990), codified at 42 USC section 12101 et seq.
AREA, GROSS: The horizontal area within the boundaries of a lot or site including any area for future streets, parks, and other dedications.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 547/636
BALCONY: A platform that projects from the wall of a building thirty inches (30") or more above grade.
BASE DISTRICT: A zoning district that includes use, height, bulk, space, and development standards for the regulation of development in a particular area.
BEDROOM: Any room located within a dwelling unit that is used primarily for sleeping purposes by its residents and that contains at least seventy (70)
square feet of floor area. Rooms designated as a "den", "library", "study", "loft" or other extra room that satisfies this definition and is not a kitchen, living
room, or bath will be considered a bedroom.
BICYCLE PARKING, LONG-TERM: Bicycle parking that is designed to serve employees, students, residents, commuters, and others who generally stay
at a site for four (4) hours or longer.
BICYCLE PARKING, SHORT-TERM: Bicycle parking that is designed to serve shoppers, customers, messengers, guests, and other visitors to a site who
generally stay for a period of less than four (4) hours.
BLOCK: The frontage along one side of a street between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets.
BLOCKFACE: All property between two (2) intersections that fronts upon a street or abuts a public right-of-way.
BUILDING: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods, or materials.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building on the same lot.
BUILDING FOOTPRINT: See definition of footprint.
BUILDING FRONT: That portion of the main building which affords public entry. In the case of a building with more than one public entry, the entrance with
the assigned address shall be considered the main public entry.
BUILDING HEIGHT: See definition of height.
BUILDING, MAIN: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
C DISTRICTS (COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS): One or more of the following districts: CN Neighborhood Commercial, CR Retail Center, CG General and
Service Commercial or CMX Commercial Mixed-Use.
CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE: The latest edition of the California Building Code, as adopted by and in effect in the City.
CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA): State law, pursuant to California Public Resources Code section 21000 et seq., or any
successor statute, that requires public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action before a decision.
CARPORT: An accessory structure that is roofed but permanently open on at least two (2) sides and maintained for the storage of motor vehicles.
CITY: The City of Porterville.
CITY COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Porterville.
CITY ENGINEER: The City Engineer of the City of Porterville.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: A Code Enforcement Officer is defined under chapter 2, article IV of the Municipal Code.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle currently registered as such with the State Department of Motor Vehicles or equivalent out-of-State or Federal
agency and is used primarily in the conduct of a business as opposed to private family or individual use.
COMPATIBLE: That which is harmonious with and will not adversely affect surrounding buildings and/or uses.
CONDITION OF USE: A development standard determined to be necessary to permit the harmonious classification of a use as listed in a district and
therefore a prerequisite to place, or for application to place, such use as classified.
CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED: Permitted subject to approval of a conditional use permit or site plan review.
CONSTRUCTION: Construction, erection, enlargement, alteration, conversion or movement of any building, structures, or land together with any scientific
surveys associated therewith.
CONVERSION: A change of a residential dwelling, including a mobile home lot in a mobile home park, as defined in section 18214 of the Health and
Safety Code, or a residential hotel, as defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of section 50519 of the Health and Safety Code, to a condominium,
cooperative, or similar form of ownership; or a change of a residential dwelling, including a mobile home lot in a mobile home park, or a residential hotel to
a nonresidential use.
COUNTY: The County of Tulare.
CREW MEMBERS: People that make up the crew of an aircraft, including the pilot, co-pilots, flight engineers, observers, control officers, essential
maintenance personnel, and personnel that support the operation of the aircraft's activity such as paramedics, nurses, and incidental passengers that
travel to or from the site of the aircraft in the aircraft in flight.
CREW QUARTERS: Temporary or permanent facilities that house crew members of an aircraft on a temporary basis.
D DISTRICTS (DOWNTOWN DISTRICTS): One or more of the following districts: DR-N Downtown Retail - North of Olive Avenue, DR-S Downtown Retail
- South of Olive Avenue, DR-D Downtown Retail - D Street Corridor, D-MX Downtown Mixed-Use, D-PO Downtown Professional Office, D-GC Downtown
General Commercial, D-PS Downtown Public and Semipublic, DRM-2 Downtown Medium Density Residential, and DRM-3 Downtown High Density
Residential.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 548/636
DECK: A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is supported by pillars or posts. See also definition of "balcony".
DEMOLITION: The intentional destruction and removal of any structure or portion thereof, including a residential dwelling, including a mobile home, as
defined in section 18008 of the Health and Safety Code, or a mobile home lot in a mobile home park, as defined in section 18214 of the Health and Safety
Code, which has not been declared to be a public nuisance under division 13 (commencing with section 17000) of the Health and Safety Code or any local
ordinance enacted pursuant to those provisions.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per unit of land area.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to the division of a parcel of land into two (2) or
more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill
or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT: A contract duly executed and legally binding between the City of Porterville and a developer(s) that delineates the terms
and conditions agreed upon by two (2) or more parties.
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE: The development ordinance of the City of Porterville, as amended.
DISTRICT: See definition of zoning district.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: See definition of lot types: through lot.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES: Facilities designed to enable persons to receive a service or purchase or consume goods while remaining within a motor
vehicle, typically associated with banks, eating, and drinking establishments, pharmacies, and other commercial uses.
DRIVEWAY: An accessway composed of concrete or asphalt that provides vehicular access between a public street or legal right-of-way, controlled by the
City of Porterville, and the parking or loading facilities located on an adjacent property.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or suite of rooms including one and only one kitchen, and designed or occupied as separate living quarters for one family. See
also definition of family.
EASEMENT: A portion of land created by grant or agreement for specific purpose; an easement is the right, privilege or interest which one party has in the
land of another.
EFFECTIVE DATE: The date on which a permit or other approval becomes enforceable or otherwise takes effect, rather than the date it was signed or
circulated.
EMERGENCY: A sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential
public services.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT (EIR): An Environmental Impact Report as required under the California Environmental Quality Act, Public
Resources Code section 21000 et seq.
FACADE: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. The portion of any exterior elevation
of a building extending vertically from the grade to the top of a parapet wall or eave, and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation.
FAMILY: One or more persons living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit and sharing common living, sleeping, cooking and eating facilities.
Members of a "family" need not be related by blood but are distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house.
FEASIBLE: Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental,
social and technological factors.
FENCE: An artificially-constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen an area of land.
FLOOR AREA: The total floor area in a building (including basements, mezzanines, interior balconies, and upper stories or levels in a multistory building)
unless otherwise stipulated; e.g., "ground" floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR): The ratio of the total floor area of all buildings on a lot to the lot area.
FOOT-CANDLE: See definition of lighting terms.
FOOTPRINT: The horizontal area, as seen in plan view, of a building or structure, measured from the outside of exterior walls and supporting columns,
and excluding eaves.
FREEWAY: A divided arterial highway designated for through traffic having grade separate intersections and full control of access; State Routes 190 and
65.
FRONTAGE, STREET (FRONTAGE, LOT): That portion of a lot or parcel of land that borders a public street. "Street frontage" shall be measured along the
common lot line separating said lot or parcel of land from the public street, highway, or parkway.
GARAGE: A building or portion of a building that is enclosed and roofed and designed for the storage of motor vehicles.
GENERAL PLAN: The Porterville 2030 General Plan.
GLARE: The effect produced by a light source within the visual field that is sufficiently brighter than the level to which the eyes are adapted, such as to
cause annoyance, discomfort or loss of visual performance and ability.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA: The total floor area for which a tenant pays rent and that is designed for the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use, including
any basements and mezzanines.
GROUND FLOOR: The first floor of a building other than a cellar or basement.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 549/636
HABITABLE AREA (Also HABITABLE FLOOR AREA): As defined by the most current adopted Building Code. Generally, a space in a building for living,
sleeping, eating, or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed.
HEAT: Thermal energy of a radioactive, conductive, or convective nature.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance from the highest point of any structure to the ground level directly below. See also section 103.05, "Measuring Height", of
this chapter.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any occupation conducted by a resident, entirely within a dwelling, where the use is accessory to the residential use of the
structure, and does not change the residential character of the neighborhood. See article 301, "Standards For Specific Uses And Activities", of this
chapter.
HOUSEHOLD: A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living and eating areas and all areas and
facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the dwelling unit.
ILLEGAL USE: Any use of land or building that does not have the currently required permits and was originally constructed and/or established without
permits required for the use at the time it was brought into existence.
IN-LIEU FEES: A cash payment required as a substitute for a dedication and/or improvement of land by an owner or developer of property.
INTENSITY OF USE: The impacts a particular use or the use in combination with other uses has on its surroundings or on its demand for services and
natural resources. Measures of intensity include, but are not limited to, requirements for water, gas, electricity, or public services; number of automobile
trips generated by a use; parking demand; number of employees on a site; hours of operation; the amount of noise, light or glare generated; the number of
persons attracted to the site, or, in eating establishments, the number of seats.
INTERSECTION, STREET: The area common to two (2) or more intersecting streets.
KITCHEN: Any room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food.
LAND DIVISION TERMS: The following terms are related to series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter.
Abut: To physically touch, border upon, or share a common corner or property line. For the purposes of series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter,
abutting properties shall include those properties separated by any road, street, or highway except for a limited access major highway, canal, or
railroad.
Access, Approved: A means of vehicular access that conforms to all of the requirements of series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter, and has
been approved by the City Council or its designee.
Adjoin: To physically touch, be contiguous to, or be situated next to but not including properties separated by any road, street, or highway.
Applicant: The subdivider or agent thereof.
Arterial: A street designated by the circulation element of the General Plan to serve high-volume inter- and intra-City traffic, and to act as a distributor
between freeways, other arterials, and major traffic generators.
Block: An area of land within a subdivision entirely bounded by any streets (other than alleys), freeways, railroad rights-of-way, natural barriers, or
the exterior boundaries of the subdivision.
Centerline: A line designated by official survey to be the center of a future or existing fully developed easement, street, road, or highway, which may
or may not coincide with the construction centerline.
Collector Street: A street designated by the circulation element of the General Plan to collect and distribute traffic between local streets and arterials.
Community Apartment Project: A project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment
located thereon.
Condominium: A property conforming to the definition set forth in section 783 of the Civil Code of the State of California.
Condominium Project: A development consisting of condominiums.
Conversion: The creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of a building.
Cul-De-Sac: A local street open at only one end, which has a turnaround for vehicles at the closed end.
Design: Any of the following:
A. Street alignments, grades and widths, sidewalks, curbs and gutters;
B. Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof;
C. Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;
D. Fire roads and firebreaks;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 550/636
E. Lot size and configuration;
F. Traffic access;
G. Grading;
H. Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; and
I. Other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision that are necessary to ensure consistency with, or
implementation of, the General Plan or any applicable specific plan.
Final Map: A map showing a subdivision of five (5) or more lots, prepared for filing with the Tulare County Recorder in accordance with the provisions
of the Subdivision Map Act and series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter, if deemed in substantial compliance with a previously approved tentative
subdivision map and with any conditions to such approval.
Flood Or Flooding: Any general inundation of normally dry land from the overflow of tidal waters or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff
of surface waters from any source.
Frontage Road: A street adjacent and auxiliary to a freeway or arterial, and separated by a divider strip, which street provides access to abutting
property.
Improvements: Any street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private
streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and
drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. Improvements also refers to any other specific
improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity
approval by the local agency, or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of, the General Plan or any
applicable specific plan.
Industrial Street: A street that serves an industrial area and connects said area to the major street system.
Local Street: A street which provides direct access to abutting properties, primarily in residential districts with more than four hundred (400) average
daily vehicle trips pursuant to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers - Trip Generation Manual.
Lot Line Adjustment: A shift or rotation of an existing lot line or other adjustment where a greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed is
not created, as approved in accordance with section 406.03, "Lot Line Adjustments", of this chapter.
Map Act: The Subdivision Map Act of the State of California Government Code.
Merger: The joining of two (2) or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel.
Minor Street: A street that provides direct access to abutting properties, primarily in residential districts with four hundred (400) or fewer average daily
vehicle trips pursuant to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers - Trip Generation Manual.
Parcel: A legally subdivided plot of land shown on a map of record. Also referred to as "lot".
Parcel Map: A map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, designed to be placed on record in the Office of the Tulare County
Recorder, and providing for the division of land which meets the exceptions set forth in section 66426 of the Map Act.
Preliminary Map: A map to be submitted to the Zoning Administrator prior to the filing of a tentative map, to show the general characteristics of the
proposed subdivision and any other data necessary to enable the Project Review Committee to review the proposed subdivision design.
Private Street: Any street, roadway, accessway or similar, lying in whole or in part within a subdivision which is privately owned and maintained and
provides access to a development.
Public Improvement: A street work, utilities, and other facilities proposed or required to be installed within the subdivision for the general use of all the
subdivision lot owners and for local neighborhood or community needs.
Remainder: That portion of an existing parcel which is not designated on the required map as part of the subdivision. The remainder shall not be
considered as part of the subdivision but shall be shown on the required map as part of the area surrounding the subdivision.
Standard Plans And Specifications: All the standard plans and specifications prepared by the City Engineer and approved by resolution of the City
Council.
Stock Cooperative: A development in which a corporation is formed primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of
years, improved real property, and all or substantially all of the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of
the real property, title to which is held by the corporation. The owners' interest in the corporation, whether evidenced by a share of stock, a certificate
of membership, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an interest in a common interest development and a real estate development.
Subdivider: As defined in section 66423 of the Map Act.
Subdivision: The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest
equalized County assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property
shall be considered contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement, or railroad rights-of-way. This definition shall
specifically include condominiums, community apartment projects, or stock cooperative conversions.
Subdivision Design: The overall layout of the proposed subdivision including, but not limited to, the arrangement of streets and intersections, the
layout and size of lots, the widths and locations of easements and rights-of-way for utilities, drainage structures, sewers, the nature and location of
public or semi-public facilities, programs for the preservation of natural features, and the installation of public improvements.
Tentative Map: A map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 551/636
around it.
Tentative Parcel Map: A map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision creating four (4) or fewer
parcels or more than four (4) parcels as provided for in the State Subdivision Map Act and series 400, "Land Divisions", of this chapter, and the
existing conditions in and around it.
Vesting Tentative Map: A tentative map for a subdivision that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the
time it is filed in accordance with article 403, "Vesting Tentative Maps", of this chapter, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the provisions
hereof.
LANDSCAPING: The planting, configuration and maintenance of trees, ground cover, shrubbery and other plant material, decorative natural and structural
features (walls, fences, hedges, trellises, fountains, sculptures), earth patterning and bedding materials, and other similar site improvements that serve an
aesthetic or functional purpose.
LANDSCAPING TERMS:
Anti-Drain Or Check Valve: A valve located under a sprinkler head or other location in the irrigation system to hold water in the system to prevent or
minimize drainage from sprinkler heads when the system is off.
Automatic Controller: A mechanical or solid state timer, capable of operating valve stations to set the days and length of time of a water application.
Backflow Prevention Device: A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the
irrigation system.
Controller: An automatic timing device used to remotely control valves to set an irrigation schedule.
Emitter: A drip irrigation fitting emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.
Hydrozone: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs.
Irrigation Efficiency: The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived
from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices.
Operating Pressure: The pressure at which an irrigation system is designed by the manufacturer to operate.
Overspray: The water which is delivered beyond the landscaped area and causes overland flow during irrigation events onto non-targeted areas
such as, pavements, walks and structures.
Runoff: Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area.
LIGHTING TERMS:
Foot-Candle: A quantitative unit of measure for luminance. One foot-candle is equal to the amount of light generated by one candle shining on one
square foot surface located one foot (1') away. Equal to one lumen uniformly distributed over an area of one square foot.
Light Fixture: The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a
reflector or mirrors, and a refractor or lens.
Light Fixture Cutoff: Light fixtures are classified as full cutoff, cutoff, semi-cutoff, or non-cutoff according to the most recent adopted criteria of the
Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA). The IESNA classifications are defined as follows (IESNA 2000):
Full Cutoff: The luminous intensity (in candelas) at or above an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir is zero (0), and the luminous intensity (in
candelas) at or above a vertical angle of eighty degrees (80°) above nadir does not numerically exceed ten percent (10%) of the luminous flux (in
lumens) of the lamp or lamps in the luminaire.
Cutoff: The luminous intensity (in candelas) at or above an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir does not numerically exceed two and one-half
percent (2.5%) of the luminous flux (in lumens) of the lamp or lamps in the luminary, and the luminous intensity (in candelas) at or above a vertical
angle of eighty degrees (80°) above nadir does not numerically exceed ten percent (10%) of the luminous flux (in lumens) of the lamp or lamps in the
luminary.
Semi-Cutoff: The luminous intensity (in candelas) at or above an angle of ninety degrees (90°) above nadir does not numerically exceed five percent
(5%) of the luminous flux (in lumens) of the lamp or lamps in the luminary, and the luminous intensity (in candelas) at or above a vertical angle of
eighty degrees (80°) above nadir does not numerically exceed twenty percent (20%) of the luminous flux (in lumens) of the lamp or lamps in the
luminary.
Non-Cutoff: There is no candela limitation in the zone above maximum candela.
Shielded Fixture: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the lamp are projected below the horizontal plane
passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted.
LIVING ROOM: The principal room in a dwelling unit designed for general living purposes rather than for sleeping.
LONG-TERM PARKING: A situation in which a vehicle is not normally moved during the period of an employee's work shift, as opposed to customer or
visitor parking.
LOT: A parcel, tract, or area of land whose boundaries have been established by a legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map, and
which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title, except public easements or rights-of-way.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 552/636
LOT AREA: The total area circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE: The portion of a lot that is covered by structures, including principal and accessory buildings, garages, carports, and roofed porches,
but not including unenclosed and unroofed decks or landings. See also section 103.10, "Determining Lot Coverage", of this chapter.
LOT DEPTH: The distance from the midpoint of the front property line of a lot to the midpoint of the rear property line, or to the most distant point on any
other lot line where there is no rear lot line. See also section 103.06, "Measuring Lot Width And Depth", of this chapter.
LOT FRONTAGE: See definition of frontage, street.
LOT LINE: Any boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE TYPES:
Front Lot Line: The lot line that abuts a street or public right-of-way. For corner lots, the shortest side fronting a public street is considered the front lot
line regardless of which street is used for vehicle or pedestrian access, or street address.
Interior Lot Line: Any lot line that is not adjacent to a street.
Rear Lot Line: The lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. Where no lot line is within forty five degrees (45°) of being parallel
to the front lot line, a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line, will be deemed
the rear lot line for the purpose of establishing the minimum rear yard.
FIGURE 700.02(A): REAR LOT LINE FOR
PURPOSE OF DETERMINING SETBACK
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 553/636
Side Lot Line: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
Street Side Lot Line: A side lot line of a corner lot that is adjacent to a street.
LOT TYPES:
Lot, Corner: A lot or parcel situated at the intersection of two (2) or more streets that have an angle intersection measured within said lot or parcel of
not more than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
Lot, Flag: A lot with access to a street by means of a strip of land having less than the required site width but not less than twenty five feet (25') of
frontage. The length of a strip shall be measured from the frontage line to the nearest point of intersection with that lot line parallel or most nearly
parallel to the frontage line. The area of an access strip shall not be included in determining the site area of the developable lot.
Lot, Interior: A lot or parcel of land other than a corner or flag lot.
Lot, Key: An interior lot adjoining the rear lot line of a reversed corner lot.
Lot, Reversed Corner: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front line of a lot or parcel of land which
adjoins the rear lot line of said lot.
Lot, Through: A lot having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 554/636
FIGURE 700.02(B): LOT AND YARD TYPES
LOT WIDTH: The distance between the side lot lines, measured at a right angle to the lot depth at the midpoint of the lot depth line. See also section
103.06, "Measuring Lot Width And Depth", of this chapter.
MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR: The repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, roof or plumbing that restores the character, scope, size or
design of a structure to its previously existing, authorized, and undamaged condition.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976 in compliance with State standards in effect at the time of construction, is
transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation
system when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. "Manufactured home"
includes any structure that meets all the requirements of this definition and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification and
complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974.
MOBILE HOME: A structure constructed prior to June 15, 1976 in compliance with State standards in effect at the time of construction, is transportable in
one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems. "Mobile home" does not include a
commercial modular, as defined in section 18001.8, factory-built housing, as defined in section 19971, a manufactured home, as defined in section 18007,
a multifamily manufactured home, as defined in section 18008.7, or a recreational vehicle, as defined in section 18010 of the Health and Safety Code.
NOISE TERMS:
Ambient Noise Level: The composite of noise from all sources excluding an alleged offensive noise. In this context, the ambient noise level
represents the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location for a specified time of day or night.
Decibel: A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the
sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.
Mobile Noise Source: Any noise source other than a fixed noise source.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 555/636
Noise: Any sound that annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
Noise Level Reduction (NLR): The difference in decibels of noise level from the outside of a building to the interior of a building, generally resulting
from various construction methods and the materials used in walls, windows, ceilings, doors, and vents of a building.
NONCONFORMING USE AND DEVELOPMENT TERMS:
Abandoned: A use that has ceased or a structure that has been vacated for a time period as specified in this chapter. Abandonment does not include
temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or occupancy of a structure during periods of remodeling, maintaining, or otherwise improving or
rearranging a facility.
Illegal Nonconforming Building Or Use: A building or use that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this chapter and did not lawfully
exist on the effective date of applicable sections of this chapter.
Nonconforming Building Or Structure: Any building or structure that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and
laws at the time this chapter or any amendment thereto became effective, but which, due to the application of this chapter or any amendment
thereto, no longer complies with all the applicable regulation and standards of development in the zone in which it is located.
Nonconforming Lot: A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto,
but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that lawfully existed prior to but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to all of the standards
and regulation of this chapter.
Nonconforming Use: A use of a structure or land that was lawfully established and maintained, but which does not conform with currently applicable
use regulations for the district in which it is located by reason of adoption or amendment of this chapter or by reason of annexation of territory to the
City.
NUISANCE: Anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use and enjoyment of property, or
a violation of this chapter.
OCCUPANCY, CHANGE IN: A discontinuance of an existing use and the substitution therefor of a use of a different kind or class.
ON-SITE: Located on the lot that is the subject of discussion.
ON-SITE LOADING FACILITIES: A site or portion of a site devoted to the loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths, aisles,
access drives, and landscaped areas.
OPEN SPACE TYPES:
Common Open Space: Areas for outdoor living and recreation that are intended for the use of residents and guests of more than one dwelling unit.
Private Open Space: Open areas for outdoor living and recreation that are adjacent and directly accessible to a single dwelling unit, reserved for the
exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests.
Usable Open Space: Outdoor areas that provide for outdoor living and/or recreation for the use of residents.
OPPOSITE: Across from or across the street from.
OUTDOOR STORAGE: The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty
four (24) hours, except for the keeping of building materials reasonably required for construction work on the premises pursuant to a valid and current
building permit issued by the City.
OWNER: Any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for City taxes or the lessee, tenant or other person having control
or possession of the property.
PARKING AREA: A lot, structure, or any other area, including driveways, which is designed for and the primary purpose of which is to provide for the
temporary storage of vehicles.
PERMIT: Any zoning certificate, conditional use permit, temporary use permit, building permit, license, certificate, approval, or other entitlement for
development and/or use of property as required by any public agency.
PERMITTED USE: Any use allowed in a zoning district without a requirement for approval of a conditional use permit, but subject to any restrictions
applicable to that zoning district.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company, or corporation.
PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES: Persons who have a medical, physical, or mental condition, disorder or disability as defined in California Government
Code section 12926, that limits one or more major life activities.
PORCH: A roofed structure, usually open at the sides, projecting from the face of a building and used to protect the entrance.
PRE-EXISTING: In existence prior to the effective date of this chapter.
PROJECT: Any proposal for a new or changed use or for new construction, alteration, or enlargement of any structure, that is subject to the provisions of
this chapter. This term also refers to any action that qualifies as a "project" as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 556/636
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The Director of Porterville's Public Works Department.
QUALIFIED APPLICANT: The property owner, the owner's agent, or any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity that has a legal or equitable
title to land that is the subject of a development proposal or is the holder of an option or contract to purchase such land or otherwise has an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
QUEUING AREA: The distance from the point of sale to the public right-of-way, for vehicles or customers waiting in vehicles for service at drive-through
facilities, pump stations, auto service bays, or similar uses.
R DISTRICT (RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT): One or more of the following districts: RS-1 Very Low Density Residential, RS-2 Low Density Residential, RM-1
Low-Medium Density Residential, RM-2 Medium Density Residential, or RM-3 High Density Residential.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer with or without motor power designed for human habitation for
recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:
A. It contains less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including but not limited to
wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units, or fixtures, and a bath or toilet room;
B. It contains four hundred (400) square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;
C. It is built on a single chassis; and
D. It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a permit issued by the appropriate State agency.
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY/SUCCESSOR AGENCY: The Redevelopment Agency/successor agency of the City of Porterville.
RESCISSION: The City's unilateral unmaking of an approval for a legally sufficient reason, such as applicant's material breach of a condition.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be occupied or
occupied by a road, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer or other similar use.
SCREENING: Screening refers to a wall, fence, hedge, informal planting, or berm, provided for the purpose of buffering a building or activity from
neighboring areas or from the street.
SETBACK: The area between a property line and a building or structure which must be kept clear or open. See also sections 103.04, "Measuring
Distances", and 103.12, "Determining Setbacks (Yards)", of this chapter.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS TERMS: See section 301.17, "Sexually Oriented Businesses", of this chapter.
SIDEWALK: A paved, surfaced, or leveled area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
SIGN-RELATED TERMS: The following terms are related to article 305, "Signs", of this chapter:
Abandoned Sign: A sign remaining in place or not maintained for a period of ninety (90) days which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing
business, product, or service available on the business premises where the sign is located.
Animated Sign: A sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
Area Of Sign: The area included within the outer dimensions of a sign face display area including all portions not part of the necessary supporting
structure; a double-faced sign whose faces are parallel or no more than thirty degrees (30°) apart shall be deemed to be a single sign for the
purposes of determining sign area. In the case of a sign placed on a wall or other structure surface, the area shall be computed by enclosing the sign
within sets of parallel lines.
Awning Sign: A sign painted or otherwise affixed permanently to the exterior surface of an awning. For purposes of this chapter, awning means
shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and constructed of a rigid frame covered by a flexible skin (e.g., as fabric,
synthetic material, or thin sheet metal).
Balloon: An inflatable, airtight bag that can be strung together in multiple numbers to attract attention to a business location. A balloon shall not be
considered an inflatable sign.
Banner: A temporary sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.
Building Frontage: Building frontage shall be considered the wall of a building that faces and is roughly parallel with a public street, excluding an
alley.
Building-Mounted Sign: Any sign mounted or erected on or against any building or facade, including all wall signs, awning and canopy signs and
projecting signs.
Can Sign (Box Sign): A sign on the outside face of a metal box with or without internal illumination.
Canopy: A rigid multi-sided structure covered with fabric, metal, or other material and supported by columns or posts embedded in the ground, or
cantilevered out from the main structure.
Changeable Copy Sign: A sign whose informational content can be changed or altered manually.
Channel Letters: Three-dimensional individual letters or figures, with an open back or front, illuminated or nonilluminated, that are affixed to a
building or to a freestanding sign structure.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 557/636
Construction Sign: A temporary sign describing in words and/or drawings a planned future development project on a property.
Directional Sign: An on-site sign designed to direct or guide pedestrian or vehicular traffic and which is nonadvertising in nature, except for a logo
and directional information, (e.g., handicapped parking, one way, exit, and entrance).
Electronic Message Center Sign: A sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by electric, electro-mechanical, electronic, or any
other artificial energy means.
Fence Sign: A sign attached to or painted onto any freestanding wall or fence.
Flag: A loose fabric or membrane secured to a pole or rod, which flutters and moves with air or wind movement.
Freestanding Sign: A sign that is permanently supported upon the ground by poles or braces and is not attached to any building or other structure.
Height: The vertical distance measured from the lowest ground level directly beneath the sign to the highest point at the top of the sign. The ground
level shall be either the natural grade or finished grade, whichever is lowest.
Identifiable Area: Residential, commercial, or industrial site containing a minimum of two (2) acres with an integrated site and design plan creating a
single unified development with one or more uses.
Identification Sign: A permanent sign used to identify a residential area, shopping district, industrial district, or any area which fulfills the definition of
an identifiable area.
Illegal Sign: A sign that does not meet the requirements of this chapter or that does not have legal nonconforming status.
Illuminated Sign: A sign with an artificial source of light incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
Inflatable Sign: A form of inflatable device (e.g., shaped as an animal, blimp, or other object) that is displayed, printed, or painted on the surface of an
inflatable background, and is primarily installed outside a building to attract attention to or to advertise a business, a business location, a service, a
product, or an event. An inflatable sign shall not be considered a balloon.
Interior Illumination: Lighting whose source is contained within the sign.
Logo: A specially designed graphic symbol of a business establishment, a company, or any other legal private or public entity.
Mansard: A wall which has a slope equal to or greater than two (2) vertical feet for each horizontal foot and has been designed to look like a roof.
Marquee Sign: A sign advertising an event, performance, service, seminar, conference, or show, and displayed on a permanent roof-like structure or
canopy made of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
Master Sign Program: A coordinated program of signage designed to encourage consistency in signage for developments with multiple tenants or for
developments with a single tenant proposing multiple signs.
Monument Sign: A low-profile freestanding sign erected upon or supported solely by a planter, pedestal base, or similar ground structure
approximately the same dimension as the height of the sign and which is designed to incorporate the architectural theme and building material of the
building on the premises.
Neon Sign: A sign with tubing that is internally illuminated by neon or other electrically charged gas.
New Subdivision: An area of land that has a final subdivision map recorded on it, but that is not yet completely built out.
Off-Site Advertising Sign: A sign structure or billboard, whether freestanding or mounted on an existing building, built for the purpose of advertising
an establishment, product or service that is not available on the property upon which the sign is located at the time the sign structure was erected.
Off-Site Directional Sign: A sign offering directional information to a business, location or place located in an area different from where the sign is
located.
Parapet: That portion of the building wall that extends above the roof of the building.
Pennant: A device made of flexible materials, (e.g., cloth, paper, or plastic), that may or may not contain copy, and which is installed for the purpose
of attracting attention.
Political Sign: A temporary sign installed that advertises a political candidate, a political party, or a political issue.
Portable Sign: A sign not permanently attached to, mounted upon, or affixed to a building, structure, or the ground. Portable signs include A-frame
signs, sandwich board signs, and signs on wheels.
Projecting Sign: A sign, the sign surface of which is not parallel to the face of the supporting wall and which is supported wholly by the wall. This
definition shall include V- or wing-type signs.
Real Estate Sign: A temporary sign indicating that the premises on which the sign is located is for sale, lease, or rent. These signs typically include
rider signs that describe amenities such as swimming pools and spas, open house signs, subdivision signs, and off-site directional signs.
Roof Sign: A sign erected, constructed, and attached to and/or maintained upon or above any roof or portion of a roof of any building, including a
mansard roof. For the purposes of this chapter, a mansard roof is any roof or parapet wall with roofing material for siding that slopes from thirty
degrees (30°) to ninety degrees (90°) and does not have a ridgeline.
Sign: Any letters, figure, visual symbol, logo, object, or display, or any combination thereof, designed or used to identify, attract attention to,
advertise, or communicate information. Signs include display surfaces together with such facilities as are utilized in supporting, maintaining, and
illuminating the display surfaces.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 558/636
Sign Area: See definition of sign-related terms: area of sign.
Sign Copy: Any words, letters, logos, numbers, figures, design, or other symbolic representation incorporated into a sign.
Sign Face: The surface or surfaces used for the display of a sign message as seen from any one direction.
Temporary Sign: A sign that is designed or intended to be temporarily mounted or displayed and that is not intended for permanent or long-term use.
Vehicle Display Sign: A sign mounted, attached, affixed or painted upon any surface of a motor vehicle, trailer or similar conveyance parked on
public or private property for the purpose of advertising a business or a business location within the City or outside the City.
Vehicle For Sale Sign: A sign painted or affixed onto vehicles for sale that are kept in vehicle display areas of new and used motor vehicle dealership
lots.
Wall Sign: A sign painted or installed on or attached to a wall and which is parallel to the building facade. This definition includes painted, channel
letters, and can signs.
Window Sign: A sign painted or installed on a glass window or door or located within twelve inches (12") from inside the window in a manner that it
can be viewed from the exterior of a structure.
SITE: A lot, or group of contiguous lots, that is proposed for development in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and is in a single ownership or
under unified control.
SPECIFIC PLAN: A plan for a defined area that is consistent with the General Plan and with the provisions of the California Government Code, section
65450 et seq.
STATE: The State of California.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost
story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the roof above.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way whose function is to carry vehicular traffic or provide vehicular access to abutting property.
STRIP MALL: An attached row of stores or service outlets, configured in a straight line, with on-site parking usually located between the street and the
stores, typically with multiple driveways. Open canopies may connect the store fronts, but a strip mall does not have enclosed walkways linking the stores.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, floor joists, ceiling
joists, or roof rafters.
STRUCTURE:
Accessory Structure: A subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental to that of the main structure on the same lot.
Permanent Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to a building or other structure
having fixed location on the ground.
Primary Structure (Main Structure): A structure housing the principal use of a site or functioning as the principal use.
Temporary Structure: A structure without any foundation or footings and which is intended to be removed when the designated time period, activity,
or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.
SWIMMING POOL: A pool, pond, lake, or open tank capable of containing water to a depth greater than one and one-half feet (1.5') at any point.
TANDEM PARKING: An arrangement of parking spaces such that one or more spaces must be driven across in order to access another space or spaces.
TELECOMMUNICATION TERMS: The following terms are related to section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities", of this chapter:
Amateur Radio Antenna: Any antenna used to receive or transmit radio signals on the amateur radio bandwidth, as designated by Federal
regulations.
Antenna: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or receiving of electromagnetic radio
frequency waves.
Camouflage: To disguise a wireless facility by incorporating it into the architectural design of a building or structure or by utilizing design and siting
techniques that disguise the wireless facility as a structure or object other than a wireless facility, which is either already present in the area or blends
in with the existing environment. Examples of camouflage techniques include, but are not limited to, trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and
flag poles. The use of mono-pines shall not be considered appropriate camouflage unless integrated into the surrounding landscape with the use of
live trees, new or existing structures or other design features.
Co-Location: The location of two (2) or more wireless communication facilities on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location.
For the purposes of this chapter, co-location shall also include the location of wireless communication facilities with other facilities such as water
tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures.
Communication Tower: Any structure that is used to transmit or receive electromagnetic radio frequency waves or that supports such a device.
Ground-Mounted: A facility that is fully or partially supported by a platform, framework, pole, or other structural system that is affixed to or placed
directly on or in the ground.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 559/636
Monopole: A facility that consists of a single pole structure erected on the ground to support wireless communication antennas and connecting
appurtenances.
Wireless Telecommunication Facility: A facility containing communication towers and/or antennas and any related equipment for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio frequency waves.
TEMPORARY USES: The following terms are related to section 301.21, "Temporary Uses", of this chapter:
Garage Sales: The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five (5) items of personal property on a portion of a lot in a residentially
zoned district, whether inside or outside any building.
Model Homes: A dwelling built in a subdivision development to allow potential home buyers to view a sample finished product before other homes in
the development are completed.
Outdoor Sales, Temporary And Seasonal: The sale or offering for sale to the general public of merchandise outside of a permanent structure on
property owned or leased by the person, firm, or corporation. These sales are of a limited duration and conducted on an occasional basis, and are
secondary or incidental to the principal permitted use or structure existing on the property.
UNIT: See definition of dwelling unit.
USE: The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed, intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered, or enlarged for which either a site or
a structure is or may be occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A use that is customarily associated with, and is incidental and subordinate to, the principal use and located on the same lot as the
principal use.
USE, PRIMARY: A primary or dominant use established, or proposed to be established, on a lot.
USE, SENSITIVE: Any cemetery/religious institution; school; public building regularly frequented by children; public park; or boys' and girls' club, or similar
youth organizations.
VARIANCE: Permission to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter.
VIBRATION: A periodic motion of the particles of an elastic body or medium in alternately opposite directions from the position of equilibrium.
VISIBLE: Capable of being seen (whether or not legible) by a person of normal height and visual acuity walking or driving on a public road.
WEEKDAY: Any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a Federal, State, or local holiday.
YARD: In residential districts, including D-MX and CMX, an open space on a lot that is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as
otherwise permitted by this chapter.
Front Yard: A yard extending across the front of a lot for the full width of the lot between the side lot lines, measured inward from the front lot line.
The depth of a front yard shall be the minimum setback to the residence, excluding unenclosed porches; where the residence is not built to the
minimum setback, the standard shall be twenty feet (20') a distance specified by this chapter for the district in which it is located.
Interior Side Yard: A yard extending along an interior side of a lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and to a depth specified by this chapter for
the district in which it is located and measured inward from the interior side lot line.
Rear Yard: A yard extending across the rear of a lot for its full width between side lot lines, and to a depth specified by this chapter for the district in
which it is located. If a lot has no rear lot line, a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the
front lot line, will be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of establishing the minimum rear yard.
Street Side Yard: A yard extending along the street side of a corner lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and to a depth specified by this
chapter for the district in which it is located and measured inward from the street side lot line.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The Community Development Director of the City of Porterville, or designee.
ZONING DISTRICT: A specifically delineated area or district in the City within which regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement,
spacing, and size of land and buildings. (Ord. 1843, 11-7-2017)
ARTICLE 701. USE CLASSIFICATIONS
701.01: PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
Use classifications describe one or more uses of land having similar characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately be within the
classification. The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether a specific use shall be deemed to be within one or more use classifications or not within
any classification in this chapter. The Zoning Administrator may determine that a specific use shall not be deemed to be within a classification, whether or
not named within the classification, if its characteristics are substantially incompatible with those typical of uses named within the classification. (Ord. 1801,
12-3-2013)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1854 - CANNABIS LAND USES AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES. Go to new
ordinance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 560/636
701.02: LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS:
Aircraft Sales, Services, And Storage. Uses related to the rental, sales and leasing, storage, repair, and washing of aircraft.
Airports. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes, including runways, aircraft storage buildings, public terminal buildings and parking, and support
activities such as airport operations, crew quarters, and air traffic control.
Animal Care, Sales And Services.
Kennels. Facilities for keeping, boarding, training, breeding or maintaining for commercial purposes, four (4) or more dogs, cats, or other household
pets not owned by the kennel owner or operator. This classification excludes pet shops and animal hospitals that provide twenty four (24) hour
accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services.
Pet Stores. Retail sales of animals and/or services, including grooming, for animals on a commercial basis. This classification excludes dog walking
and similar pet care services not carried out at a fixed location, and excludes pet supply stores that do not sell animals or provide on-site animal
services.
Veterinary Services, Large. Medical care for large animals which generally includes agricultural animals, on a commercial basis. This classification
allows twenty four (24) hour accommodation of animals receiving medical or grooming services.
Veterinary Services, Small. Medical care for small animals on a commercial basis. This classification allows twenty four (24) hour accommodation of
animals receiving medical or grooming services but does not include kennels.
Animal Raising. The raising, grazing, or feeding of animals for animal products, animal increase, or value increase, and dairying as an accessory use on
farms with dairy cattle.
Artists' Studios. Work space for artists and artisans, including individuals practicing one of the fine arts or performing arts, or skilled in an applied art or
craft. Incidental retail sales of items produced on the premises is required.
Automobile/Vehicle Sales And Services.
Automobile/Vehicle Rentals. Rental of automobiles, including storage and incidental maintenance.
Automobile/Vehicle Sales And Leasing. Sales or leasing of automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trucks, and motor homes, including storage and
incidental maintenance.
Automobile/Vehicle Service And Repair, Major. Repair of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, boats and recreational vehicles, including
the sale, installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts, generally on an overnight basis. This classification includes auto repair shops,
body and fender shops, and transmission shops, but excludes vehicle dismantling or salvaging and tire retreading or recapping.
Automobile/Vehicle Service And Repair, Minor. The service and repair of automobiles, light-duty trucks, boats, and motorcycles, including the sale,
installation, and servicing of related equipment and parts. This classification includes quick-service oil, tune-up, wheel and brake shops, auto glass
services, tire sales and installation, muffler shops and upholstery shops where repairs are made or service provided in enclosed bays and no
vehicles are stored overnight. This classification excludes establishments providing engine repair, body and fender work, vehicle painting, or towing.
It also excludes repair of heavy trucks or construction vehicles.
Automobile/Vehicle Washing. Washing, waxing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities.
Emergency Ambulance Services. The location of emergency ambulance service vehicles.
Large Vehicle And Equipment Sales, Service And Rental. Sales, servicing, rental, fueling, and washing of large trucks, trailers, tractors, and other
equipment used for construction, agricultural, or landscape gardening activities. Includes large vehicle operation training facilities. Sales of new or
used automobiles or trucks are excluded from this classification.
Service Station. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing automotive fuels or retailing these fuels in combination with activities, such as
providing repair services; selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories; and/or providing food services.
Towing And Impound. Establishments primarily engaged in towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance. These establishments
may provide incidental services, such as vehicle storage and emergency road repair services. (For automobile/dismantling, see Salvage And
Wrecking.)
Banks And Financial Institutions.
Banks And Credit Unions. Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the
on-site circulation of money, including credit unions, but excluding check-cashing businesses.
Check Cashing Businesses. Establishments that, for compensation, engage in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or
other commercial paper serving the same purpose. This classification also includes the business of deferred deposits, whereby the check casher
refrains from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date pursuant to a written agreement as provided in Civil Code
1789.33. Check cashing businesses do not include State or Federally chartered banks, savings associations, credit unions, or industrial loan
companies. They also do not include retail sellers engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, such as consumables to retail
buyers, that cash checks or issue money orders incidental to their main purpose or business.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 561/636
Bed And Breakfast. A small lodging establishment that offers overnight accommodation and inclusive breakfast, where the host lives at the establishment.
Building Materials And Services. Retailing, wholesaling, or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and
equipment sales or rental establishments, and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their own use. This
definition does not include contractors' yards and hardware stores less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in floor area (see Retail Sales).
Business Services. Establishments that primarily provide goods and services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing and
copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, equipment rental and leasing, office security, custodial services, photo finishing, and model building,
but excluding vehicle rentals, bulk items, or print shops.
Cemetery. Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains, including
mausoleums, burial places, and memorial gardens.
Clubs And Lodges. Meeting, recreational, or social facilities of a private or nonprofit organization primarily for use by members or guests. This
classification includes union halls and social clubs.
Colleges And Trade Schools, Public Or Private. Institutions of higher education providing curricula of a general, religious or professional nature, typically
granting recognized degrees, including conference centers and academic retreats associated with such institutions. This classification includes business
and computer schools, management training, technical and trade schools, but excludes personal instructional services such as music lessons.
Commercial Entertainment And Recreation. Provision of participant or spectator entertainment to the general public.
Cinema/Theaters. Facilities for indoor display of films, motion pictures, or dramatic, musical, or live performances. This classification may include
incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Downtown Entertainment. This classification includes facilities such as amusement and theme parks, amphitheaters, facilities with more than ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in building area, including fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball, ice or roller skating rinks, swimming or
wave pools, miniature golf courses, bowling alleys, or archery or indoor shooting ranges. This classification may include restaurants, snack bars, and
other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Large-Scale. This classification includes large outdoor facilities such as amusement and theme parks, casinos, sports stadiums and arenas,
racetracks, amphitheaters, drive-in theaters, driving ranges, golf courses, and facilities with fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more in building
area, including fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball, or large tennis club facilities; ice or roller skating rinks; swimming or wave pools;
miniature golf courses; bowling alleys; archery or indoor shooting ranges; riding stables; campgrounds; stables, etc. This classification may include
restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Small-Scale. This classification includes indoor facilities that occupy less than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of building area, such as billiard
parlors, card rooms, health clubs, fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, racquetball; ice or roller skating rinks; swimming or wave pools; miniature
golf courses, bowling alleys, dance halls, small tennis club facilities, poolrooms, indoor shooting ranges, and amusement arcades. This classification
may include restaurants, snack bars, and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons.
Communication Facilities.
Antenna And Transmission Towers. Broadcasting and other communication services accomplished through electronic or telephonic mechanisms, as
well as structures designed to support one or more reception/transmission systems. Examples of transmission towers include, but shall not be limited
to, radio towers, television towers, telephone exchange/microwave relay towers, and cellular telephone transmission/personal communications
systems towers.
Broadcasting Facility. Includes radio or television stations. Transmission towers must comply with section 301.20, "Telecommunication Facilities", of
this chapter.
Call Centers. Includes customer support, direct sales, order processing, customer service, surveys, research, credit management, help desk,
reservations, billing and accounting, sales and telemarketing. These services are either provided internally by the company for its own use or
provided externally by an outsourcing agency which provide these services for several companies.
Recording Studio. Facility for sound recording which can consist of a studio or live room and control room, where sound is recorded and
manipulated.
Community Center. Any noncommercial facility established primarily for the benefit and service of the population of the community in which it is located.
Examples include youth centers and senior centers.
Construction And Material Yards. Storage of construction materials or equipment on a site other than a construction site.
Correctional Facility. A building such as a jail or prison used for the confinement of persons held while awaiting trial or for the confinement of persons
convicted of offenses.
Cottage Food Operations. A private home food operation where low-risk food products are prepared or packaged for sale to consumers which complies
with California Government Code section 51035.
Crop Cultivation. The cultivation of tree, vine, field, forage, and other plant crops intended to provide food or fibers. The classification excludes wholesale
or retail nurseries. (See Nurseries And Garden Centers.)
Crop Cultivation, Commercial. Results in quantities of crops greater than what could be reasonably consumed in personal use and/or crops that are
produced with the intent to sell commercially.
Crop Cultivation, Non-Commercial. Includes orchards and flower and vegetable gardens for personal use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 562/636
Cultural Institutions. Public or non-profit institutions engaged primarily in the display or preservation of objects of interest in the arts or sciences that are
open to the public on a regular basis. This classification includes performing arts centers for theater, dance, and events; buildings of an educational,
charitable or philanthropic nature; libraries; museums; historical sites; aquariums; art galleries; and zoos and botanical gardens.
Day Care Centers. Establishments providing non-medical care for persons on a less than 24-hour basis other than family day care home. This
classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care facilities for children or adults, and any other day care facility licensed by the State of
California.
Eating, Drinking, And Smoking Establishments. Businesses primarily engaged in serving prepared food, beverages, and/or tobacco for consumption on or
off the premises.
Bars/Night Clubs/Lounges. Businesses serving beverages for consumption on the premises as a primary use and including on-sale service of
alcohol including beer, wine, and mixed drinks. This classification includes establishments that provide dancing or entertainment.
Coffee Shops/Cafes. Establishments that serve nonalcoholic beverages, such as coffee, juices or sodas for consumption on or near the premises, or
a specialty snack, such as ice cream, frozen yogurt, cookies or popcorn.
Restaurants. Establishments where meals are served to customers. This classification includes full-service restaurants with table service as well as
establishments providing limited table service, such as fast-food restaurants, carryout sandwich shops, limited service pizza parlors and delivery
shops, and delicatessen restaurants. This classification excludes establishments that provide dancing or entertainment (see Eating, Drinking, And
Smoking Establishments: Bars/Night Clubs/Lounges).
Tobacco Bars. Any business establishment which in whole or in part is dedicated to or includes as part of the business, the smoking of tobacco or
other substances. This classification includes cigar lounges, hookah bars/cafes, tobacco cafes/bars, and smoking parlors.
Elderly And Long-Term Care. Establishments that provide twenty four (24) hour medical, convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of
advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves, and is licensed as a skilled nursing facility, including but not limited to, rest
homes and convalescent hospitals, but not residential care, hospitals, or clinics.
Family Day Care Home. A home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for fourteen (14) or fewer children, in the provider's own home,
for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care home or a small
family day care home as follows.
A. Large: A home that provides family day care for seven (7) to fourteen (14) children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside
at the home1. A large family day care home may provide care for more than twelve (12) children and up to and including fourteen (14) children, if all
of the following conditions are met2:
1. At least one child is enrolled in and attending kindergarten or elementary school and a second child is at least six (6) years of age.
2. No more than three (3) infants are cared for during any time when more than twelve (12) children are being cared for.
3. The licensee notifies a parent that the facility is caring for two (2) additional school-age children and that there may be up to thirteen (13) or
fourteen (14) children in the home at one time.
4. The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented.
B. Small: A home that provides family day care for eight (8) or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at the
home3. A small family day care home may provide care for more than six (6) and up to eight (8) children, without an additional adult attendant, if all
of the following conditions are met4:
1. At least one child is enrolled in and attending kindergarten or elementary school and a second child is at least six (6) years of age.
2. No more than two (2) infants are cared for during any time when more than six (6) children are cared for.
3. The licensee notifies each parent that the facility is caring for two (2) additional school-age children and that there may be up to seven (7) or
eight (8) children in the home at one time.
4. The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented.
Food And Beverage Retail Sales. Retail sales of food and beverages for off-site preparation and consumption. Typical uses include food markets,
convenient markets, groceries, liquor stores, and retail bakeries.
Freight/Truck Terminals And Warehouses. Facilities for local or worldwide freight, courier, local messenger, and postal services by truck or rail.
Funeral Parlors And Mortuaries. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of the
human dead and conducting memorial services. Typical uses include a crematory, columbarium, mausoleum, or mortuary.
Government Offices. Administrative, clerical, or public contact offices of a government agency, including postal facilities, together with incidental storage
and maintenance of vehicles. This classification excludes corporation yards, equipment service centers, and similar facilities that primarily provide
maintenance and repair services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment (see Utilities, Major).
Group Residential. Shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent for permanent or semitransient
residents on a weekly or longer basis. This classification includes rooming and boarding houses, dormitories, private residential clubs, and
residential hotels intended for long-term occupancy (30 days or more) but excludes hotels and motels, residential care, limited or general.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 563/636
Handicraft/Custom Manufacturing. Manufacture of crafts, art, sculpture, stained glass, jewelry, apparel, and similar items using hand tools and small
mechanical devices.
Heliports. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of helicopters, as a primary use. Heliports typically contain one or more helipads and may have limited
facilities such as fuel, lighting, a windsock, or even hangars.
Hotels And Motels. Establishments offering lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as conference and
meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or recreation facilities available to guests or to the general public. This classification includes motor lodges, motels,
hostels, extended-stay hotels, and tourist courts, but does not include rooming houses, boarding houses, or private residential clubs.
Industry, General. Manufacturing of products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such
products and materials. This classification includes operations such as biomass energy conversion; food and beverage processing; textile mills; production
apparel manufacturing; photographic processing plants; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood product manufacturing; paper manufacturing;
chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing; primary metal manufacturing; fabricated
metal product manufacturing; and automotive, ship, aircraft, and heavy equipment manufacturing.
Industry, Limited. Establishments engaged in light industrial activities taking place primarily within enclosed buildings and producing minimal impacts on
nearby properties. This classification includes operations such as manufacturing finished parts or products primarily from previously prepared materials;
commercial laundries and dry cleaning plants; mobile home manufacturing; monument works; printing, engraving and publishing; computer and electronic
product manufacturing; furniture and related product manufacturing; and industrial services.
Instructional Services. Establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development such as music, vocal, fitness and dancing
instruction.
Light Fleet-Based Services. Passenger transportation services, local delivery services, medical transport, and other businesses that rely on fleets of three
(3) or more vehicles with rated capacities less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds. This classification includes parking, dispatching, and offices for taxicab
and limousine operations, non-emergency medical transport, local messenger and document delivery services, home cleaning services, and similar
businesses. This classification does not include towing operations (see Automobile/Vehicle Sales And Services: Towing And Impound) or taxi or delivery
services with two (2) or fewer fleet vehicles on-site (see Business Services).
Maintenance And Repair Services. The on-site maintenance or repair of office machines, household appliances, furniture, and similar items. This
classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats (see Automobile/Vehicle Sales And Services) and personal apparel (see Personal
Services).
Massage Establishments. Healing arts.
Medical Facilities. These classifications exclude veterinary and animal hospitals (see Animal Care, Sales And Services).
Hospitals. State-licensed facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons.
Medical Clinic. This classification includes facilities for multiple physicians, medical groups, inpatient or outpatient treatment, including substanceabuse
programs as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees.
Professional/Medical. This classification is for the single practitioner; to include offices where medical and dental services are provided by physicians,
dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, and similar medical professionals, including, where affiliated with a medical practitioner, massage therapy.
Mining And Quarrying. The extraction of nonmetallic minerals, including dredging and sand and gravel pit operations. This classification includes surface
mining operations.
Mobile Home Parks. Mobile housing in a planned development with common area amenities. Spaces for mobile homes may be rented, leased or owned
through a subdivision, cooperative, condominium or other form of resident ownership.
Multi-Family Residential. Two (2) or more dwelling units on a lot. Types of multi-family dwellings include duplexes, garden apartments, senior housing
developments, and multi-story apartment buildings.
Nurseries And Garden Centers. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products - such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs,
and sod - that are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves. Fertilizer and soil
products are stored and sold in package form only. This classification includes wholesale and retail nurseries offering plants for sale.
Offices.
General Offices. Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, administrative or design services, such as
accounting, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design, investment, and legal offices, excluding banks, and
savings and loan associations (see Banks And Financial Institutions).
Walk-In Clientele. Offices of firms or organizations providing services to the public that rely on heavy pedestrian activity and constant visits by clients,
including real estate offices, landlord-tenant services, credit counseling, and financial tax services.
Park And Recreation Facilities, Public. Parks, playgrounds, fairgrounds, recreation facilities, trails, wildlife preserves, and related open spaces, all of which
are noncommercial. This classification also includes playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, swimming pools, picnic facilities, tennis courts, and golf courses,
botanical gardens, as well as related food concessions or community centers within the facilities.
Parking, Public Or Private. Surface lots and structures for use of occupants, employees, or patrons on the subject site or offering parking to the public for a
fee when such use is not incidental to another activity.
Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber and beauty shops, massage therapy,
tattoo parlors, seamstresses, tailors, dry cleaning agents (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service laundries,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 564/636
photocopying and photo finishing services, and travel agencies.
Public Safety Facilities. Facilities providing public-safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection and emergency medical services,
with incidental storage, and maintenance facilities.
Recycling Facility. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing, transferring and/or processing materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal. A certified
recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act. A
recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial or manufacturing use and
used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. This use type does not include waste transfer
facilities that operate as materials recovery, recycling, and solid waste transfer operations and are classified as utilities.
Recycling Collection Facility. A use that serves as a neighborhood drop off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but where the
processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on-site.
Recycling Processing Facility. Facilities that receive, sort, store and/or process recyclable materials.
Reverse Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a
redeemable credit slip.
Religious Facilities. A facility for religious worship and incidental religious education and offices, including churches, temples, and other facilities used
primarily for religious services or activities. This classification excludes private schools for primary or secondary education, as defined in this section, which
also may be available for temporary use by the general public or civic, cultural, or educational organizations.
Residential Care Facilities, General. Facilities that require a State license or are State licensed and provide twenty four (24) hour primarily non-medical
care and supervision, or skilled nursing services, for more than six (6) persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for
sustaining the activities of daily living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each
room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including
hospices, nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, and convalescent facilities. This category excludes transitional housing, foster family homes, community
service facilities, and any facilities supervised by or under contract with the State Department of Corrections.
Residential Care Facilities, Limited. Facilities that require a State license or are State licensed and provide twenty four (24) hour non-medical care and
supervision for six (6) or fewer persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living,
excluding the licensee or members of the licensee's family or persons employed as facility staff. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or
without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those
operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including hospices.
Retail Sales. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes department stores,
clothing stores, furniture stores, pet supply stores, small hardware stores (with 10,000 square feet or less of floor area), and businesses retailing the
following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services (including portraiture and retail photo
processing), medical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, electronic equipment, records, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances,
antiques, art galleries, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, video rental, and new
automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be combined with other services such as office machine,
computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs. This classification includes secondhand and wholesale stores.
Swap Meet. Any indoor or outdoor place, in an approved location, or for an approved activity where new or used goods or secondhand personal
property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces. The
term swap meet is interchangeable with and applicable to: flea markets, auctions, open air markets, farmers markets, or other similarly named or
labeled activities; but the term does not include the usual supermarket or department store retail operations.
Salvage And Wrecking. Storage and dismantling of vehicles and equipment for sale of parts, as well as their collection, storage, exchange or sale of goods
including, but not limited to, any used building materials, used containers or steel drums, used tires, and similar or related articles or property.
Schools, Public Or Private. Facilities for primary or secondary education, including public schools, charter schools, and private institutions having curricula
comparable to that required in the public schools of the State of California.
Sexually Oriented Business. An establishment or concern that, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers, sells or distributes adult-oriented
merchandise, or that offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services, entertainment or performances that have sexual arousal, sexual
gratification, and/or sexual stimulation as their dominant theme, or are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and are not customarily open to the general public because they exclude minors by virtue of their age. This classification does not include any
establishment offering professional services conducted, operated, or supervised by medical practitioners, physical therapists, nurses, chiropractors,
psychologist, social workers, marriage and family counselors, osteopaths, and persons holding licenses or certificates under applicable State law or
accreditation from recognized programs when performing functions pursuant to the respective license or certificate. Includes sexually oriented businesses
defined in subsection 301.17B, "Definitions", of this chapter.
Single Family Dwelling. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one household, and located on a separate lot from any other unit (except accessory
living quarters, where permitted). This classification includes individual manufactured housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to section
18551 of the California Health and Safety Code.
Attached. A single-family dwelling unit, located singly on a lot, but attached through common vertical walls to one or more dwellings on abutting lots.
An attached single-family dwelling unit is sometimes referred to as a "townhome".
Detached. A single-family dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling unit.
Single Room Occupancy. A residential facility where individual secure rooms, which may or may not include cooking facilities, are rented to one or two (2)
person households for a weekly or monthly period of time. This use type is distinct from a hotel or motel, which is a commercial use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 565/636
Social Service Facilities. Any noncommercial facility, such as homeless shelters, and emergency shelters, that may also provide meals, showers, and/or
laundry facilities. Specialized programs and services related to the needs of the residents may also be provided. This classification excludes transitional
housing facilities that provide living accommodations for a longer term.
Transitional And Supportive Housing. As defined in sections 50675.2 and 50675.14, respectively, of the Health and Safety Code.
Transportation Passenger Terminals. Facilities for passenger transportation operations. This classification includes rail stations, bus terminals, and scenic
and sightseeing facilities, but does not include airports or heliports.
Utilities, Major. Generating plants, electric substations, solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery (recycling processing)
facilities, solid waste treatment and disposal, water or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities.
Utilities, Minor. Facilities accessory to an established use involving only minor structures, such as electrical distribution lines, solar panels and
underground water and sewer lines.
Utilities, Renewable Energy Facility. Facilities including solar, wind or other facility utilizing renewable energy.
Warehousing And Storage. Storage and distribution facilities without sales to the public on-site or direct public access.
Chemical, Mineral, And Explosives Storage. Storage of hazardous materials including but not limited to: bottled gas, chemicals, minerals and ores,
petroleum or petroleum-based fuels, fireworks, and explosives.
Indoor Warehousing And Storage. The storage of general merchandise or refrigerated goods within enclosed buildings. Establishments in this
classification provide facilities to store commercial goods, but do not sell the goods they handle. They may provide a range of services related to the
distribution of goods, including labeling, breaking bulk, inventory control and management, order entry and fulfillment, price marking and ticketing,
and transportation arrangement. However, they always provide warehousing or storage in addition to any logistics services.
Personal Storage. Facilities offering storage for individual use, including mini-warehouses and mini-storage.
Wholesaling And Distribution. Indoor storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale; storage of goods for transfer to retail outlets of the same firm; or
storage and sale of materials and supplies used in production or operation, including janitorial and restaurant supplies. Wholesalers are primarily engaged
in business-to-business sales, but may sell to individual consumers through mail or internet orders. They normally operate from a warehouse or office
having little or no display of merchandise, and are not designed to solicit walk-in traffic. (Ord. 1843, 11-7-2017)
Chapter 22
TAXATION
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 1850 - USE TAX . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter Article I
PROPERTY TAXATION
22-1: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 920 § 1, 7-16-1968)
22-1.1: STATE REVENUE AND TAXATION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California, as now in effect and as may hereafter be amended, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 764
§ 1, 5-21-1963)
22-1.2: TRANSFER OF MUNICIPAL TAX ASSESSMENTS AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO TULARE COUNTY TAX ASSESSOR
AND TAX COLLECTOR:
A. Definitions: The following words and expressions when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them as follows:
CITY: The city of Porterville, a municipal corporation, situated in the county of Tulare, state of California.
COUNTY: The county of Tulare, a political subdivision of the state of California.
B. Transfer Of Duties: The assessment and tax collection of assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the assessor and tax
collector of the city, are hereby transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for ad
valorem property taxes that become a lien after the adoption of this section, and the collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming
due and payable on or after July 1, 1967, pursuant to the provisions of sections 51540 through 51562 and sections 51800 and 43072 of the
Government Code of the state of California.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 566/636
C. Filing Of Certified Copy: The city clerk shall cause a certified copy of this section to be filed with the auditor of the county on or before the first Monday
of February, 1967, and immediately thereafter shall notify the state board of equalization.
D. Repealing: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 872 §§ 1 _ 4, 1-17-1967)
Chapter Article II
SALES AND USE TAX
22-2: PURPOSE OF ARTICLE:
The city council hereby declares that this article is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
A. To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the state.
B. To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
C. To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which imposes a ninety five one-hundredths of one percent (0.95%) tax and provides a measure therefor that
can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least
possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting
the state sales and use taxes.
D. To adopt a sales and use tax regulation which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of
part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the
burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article. (Ord. 614 § 2; Ord. 638 § 1)
22-3: OPERATIVE DATE; CONTRACT WITH STATE:
This article shall become operative on April 1, 1956, and prior thereto, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions
incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax article; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the state board of
equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1956, this article shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar quarter following the
execution of such a contract by the city and by the state board of equalization; provided further, that this article shall not become operative prior to the
operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the county. (Ord. 614 § 3)
22-4: SALES TAX GENERALLY:
A. 1. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of ninety five onehundredths
of one percent (0.95%) of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and
after the operative date of this article.
2. For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier to an out of state destination. The gross receipts from such
sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the places at which the retail sales
are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization.
B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are
hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
2. Whenever, and to the extent that, in part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word "state"
when that word is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of equalization, or the
name of the state treasury, or of the constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the
result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state board of
equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to
have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state where the result
of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from
this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of such code; and, in
addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.
3. If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be
required by reason of this section.
4. There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 567/636
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
b. Receipts from sales to operators of common carrier and waterborne vessels of property to be used or consumed in the operation of such common
carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside of this city.
The following provisions shall be operative January 1, 1984:
4.5. There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.
b. The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which
the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws
of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 614 § 4; Ord. 638 § 2; Ord. 706 § 4; Ord. 1048 §§ A, B, 11-20-1973; Ord. 1292
§§ 1, 3, 12-20-1983; Ord. 1537 § B70, 8-6-1996)
22-5: USE TAX GENERALLY:
A. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or
after the operative date of this article, for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of ninety five one-hundredths of one percent (0.95%)
of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of
the place to which delivery is made.
B. 1. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are hereby
adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
2. Whenever, and to the extent that, in part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the
word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state board of control, the state board of
equalization, or the name of the state treasury, or of the constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in
any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this article; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections,
including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to
provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property that would not otherwise
be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of part 1 of division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property
which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of such code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that
of the state in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as
adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section
6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in section 6203.
3. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county
or city in this state.
c. The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation,
transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by
public utilities which are regulated by the public utilities commission of the state.
d. The use or consumption of property purchased by operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation
of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the city.
The following provisions shall be operative January 1, 1984:
3.5. There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:
a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.
b. The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county,
or city in this state.
c. In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. 614 § 5; Ord. 706 §§ 5, 6; Ord. 1048 § C, 11-20-1973; Ord.
1292 §§ 2, 4, 12-20-1983; Ord. 1537 § B71, 8-6-1996)
22-6: AMENDMENTS TO STATE LAW:
All amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of this article which relate to the sales and use tax and which
are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this article. (Ord. 614 § 6)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 568/636
22-6.1: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1537 § A, 8-6-1996)
22-7: SUITS TO ENJOIN COLLECTION:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or
against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,
of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 614 § 7)
Chapter Article IIA
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX FOR PUBLIC SAFETY, POLICE AND FIRE
PROTECTION
22-8.1: TITLE; PURPOSE:
This article shall be known as the TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX FOR PUBLIC SAFETY, POLICE AND FIRE PROTECTION. The city of Porterville
hereinafter shall be called "city". This article shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. This article of this code has been adopted for the
following (and other) purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
A. To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of part 1.6 (commencing with section 7251) of division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code and section 7285.91 of part 1.7 of division 2, which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if at least
two-thirds (2/3) of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
B. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California
insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code.
C. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the
state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory
and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California state transactions and use
taxes.
D. To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions
of parts 1.6 and 1.7 of division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city transactions and use taxes, and at the
same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions thereof.
E. To provide a source of revenue to be used to provide additional public safety, police, fire protection services and undertake necessary capital projects to
support those services, and to restore and maintain literacy programs and services. The revenue generated by the tax provided for herein shall be
restricted to those uses. The tax is, therefore, a special tax. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.2: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of this article, the
date of such adoption being set forth in the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.3: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation
hereof. If the city has not contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. The council may make any technical
amendments to this article required by the state board of equalization, except for any changes affecting the tax rate, its manner of collection, or the
purpose for which the revenue from the tax may be used. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.4: IMPOSITION OF TRANSACTIONS TAX:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of
one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city of Porterville on
and after the operative date of this article. The city council is authorized to establish a tax rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) by resolution. (Ord. 1684
§ 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.5: PRESUMPTION AS TO PLACE OF SALES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 569/636
For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer, unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts from
such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales
are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the board of equalization. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.6: IMPOSITION OF USE TAX:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the city of Porterville of tangible personal property purchased from any
retailer on or after the operative date of this article for storage, use or other consumption in said territory, at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of
the sales price of the property subject to the tax. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state transactions or use
tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. The city council is authorized to establish a tax rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) by resolution.
(Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.7: ADOPTION OF CERTAIN SECTIONS OF CALIFORNIA REVENUE AND TAXATION CODE BY REFERENCE:
Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of parts 1.6 and 1.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 (commencing with section 6001) of division 2 of said code, as amended and in force and effect on the
operative date of this article, applicable to use taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1684 § 1,
12-6-2005)
22-8.8: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:
A. Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
1. The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of control, state board of equalization, state treasury,
or the constitution of the state of California.
2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or
against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this article.
3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of
the substitution would be to:
a. Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not
otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
b. Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by
the state under the said provision of that code.
4. In sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
B. The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section 6203 and in the definition of
that phrase in section 6203. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.9: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this article. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.10: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
A. There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns uniform local sales and use tax law or the amount of any state
administered transactions or use tax.
B. There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:
1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the
county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by
the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection B2,
delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 570/636
a. With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of division
3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
chapters 1 and 2 of division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out of city address and by a declaration
under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
b. With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out of city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer,
that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the
operative date of this article.
4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the
property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this article.
5. For the purposes of subsections B3 and B4 of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract
or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
C. There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this article, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state administered transactions and use tax ordinance.
2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use
of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in sections
6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.
3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this article.
4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is continuing purchase of
such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date
of this article.
5. For the purposes of subsections C3 and C4 of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power
over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the
contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
6. Except as provided in subsection C7 of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city
or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
7. "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to chapter 1
(commencing with section 4000) of division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or
undocumented vessels registered under chapters 1 and 2 of division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be
required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.
D. Any person subject to use tax under this article may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district
imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the
person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.11: AMENDMENTS TO REVENUE AND TAXATION CODE:
All amendments subsequent to the effective date hereof to part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with part 1.6 and part 1.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to part 1.6 and part 1.7 of
division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this article; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate
so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this article. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
22-8.12: ENJOINING COLLECTION PROHIBITED:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or
against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection hereunder, or parts 1.6 and 1.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1684 § 1, 12-6-2005)
Chapter Article III
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
22-10: TITLE:
This article shall be known as the UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX LAW OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-11: DEFINITIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 571/636
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this article:
HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
"Hotel" does not include a hospital room, medical clinic, convalescent home or home for the aged. Also, "hotel" does not include a private home, vacation
cabin or similar facility which is rented by a person who is not regularly engaged in the business of renting such facilities and does so only occasionally
and incidentally to his own use thereof.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent
shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the
provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust,
business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money,
goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative services director or designee of the city of Porterville.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying
space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of this article may be considered. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965; Ord. 1614 § 1, 9-17-2002)
22-12: AMOUNT OF TAX; PAYMENT BY TRANSIENT:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel/motel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eight percent (8%) of the rent charged by
the operator. The tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which debt is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The
transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel/motel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax
shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel/motel. If for any reason the tax
due is not paid to the operator of the hotel/motel, such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965; Ord. 895 § A, 1-4-1968;
Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973; Ord. 1443 § A, 10-2-1990)
22-13: EXEMPTIONS:
No tax shall be imposed upon the following persons and occupancies:
A. Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the county to impose the tax herein provided.
B. Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
C. Any occupancy, by one or more occupants, for which the total rent paid by the occupants is less than two dollars ($2.00) a day.
No exemption shall be granted under subsection A or B of this section unless a claim of exemption in the form prescribed by the tax collector is executed
by the transient under penalty of perjury and filed with the operator at the time rent is collected. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965; Ord. 837 § A, 10-21-1967)
22-14: OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-
1965)
22-15: REGISTRATION:
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date hereof, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel
renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration certificate" to be
at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said registration shall be on a form provided by the tax administrator.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 572/636
The privilege of registration after the date of imposition of the tax provided in this article shall not relieve any person from the obligation of collection and
payment of the tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration.
Such registration form shall set forth the name under which such person transacts or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of
business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the tax administrator may require. The registration form shall be signed by the
owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of an association or partnership, and by an executive officer or some person specifically
authorized by the corporation to sign the registration form in the case of a corporation. The tax administrator shall, within ten (10) days after receiving such
registration form, issue without charge, the "transient occupancy registration certificate".
Said certificate shall certify as to the authority of registrant to collect tax from transients, and duplicates thereof for each additional place of business of
such registrants shall also be issued. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the tax
administrator upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon sale or transfer of the hotel. Said certificates shall contain the following
information:
A. The name of the operator.
B. The address of the hotel.
C. The date upon which the certificate was issued.
D. The following statement:
This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform
transient occupancy tax law by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and
remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those
requiring a permit from any board commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.
E. That said certificate is nonassignable and nontransferable.
F. Such additional information as may be required by the tax administrator. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-16: REPORTING AND REMITTING:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to
the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure
collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this article shall be held for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax
administrator. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-17: REMITTANCE BY MAIL:
If a remittance to cover a payment required by this article to be made to the tax administrator on or before a specified date is sent through the United
States mail, properly addressed with postage prepaid, it shall be deemed to have been received by the tax administrator on the date shown by the post
office cancellation mark stamped upon the envelope containing the remittance or on the date it was mailed if proof satisfactory to the tax administrator
establishes that the mailing occurred on an earlier date. Nothing in this section shall be construed as constituting payment of any remittance required,
unless such remittance is actually received by the tax administrator. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-18: PENALTIES AND INTEREST; ORIGINAL DELINQUENCY:
Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in
addition to the amount of the tax. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-19: PENALTIES AND INTEREST; CONTINUED DELINQUENCY:
Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent
(10%) penalty first imposed. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-20: PENALTIES AND INTEREST; FRAUD:
If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this article is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of
the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in sections 22-18 and 22-19 of this article. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 573/636
22-21: PENALTIES AND INTEREST; INTEREST:
In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent
(0.5%) per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until
paid. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-22: PENALTIES MERGED WITH TAX:
Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of sections 22-18 through 22-21 of this article shall become a part of the tax
herein required to be paid. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-23: FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX BY TAX ADMINISTRATOR:
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion
thereof required by this article, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base
his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the
assessment of any tax imposed by this article and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this article. In case such
determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving
or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a
hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and
conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the
manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for
such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be
so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the
manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable
after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section 22-25 of this article. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-24: DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
If the tax administrator is not satisfied with a return filed by an operator or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city pursuant to a return, he may
compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or upon the basis of any information within his
possession or that may come into his possession, one or more deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for any period. The tax
administrator shall give to the operator written notice of his determination in the same manner as provided in section 22-23 of this article. The operator
shall be entitled to apply for a hearing on the amount assessed to him pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 22-23 of this article and shall
thereafter be entitled to appeal to the city council in accordance with the provisions of section 22-25 of this article. The penalties and interest provided by
sections 22-18 through 22-22 of this article shall be applicable to the amount of deficiency established pursuant to this section. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-25: APPEAL:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall
fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings
of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any
amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-26: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of
three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the
city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-27: REFUNDS:
A. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this article it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a verified claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three (3) years of the date
of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.
B. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or
illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
C. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in
the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 574/636
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund
from the operator who collected the tax.
D. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
22-28: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owned by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owned by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city
under the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city of Porterville for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 807 § 1,
1-1-1965)
22-29: VIOLATIONS; MISDEMEANOR:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to
furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent
report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is
punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 807 § 1, 1-1-1965)
Chapter Article IV
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
22-31: TITLE; STATUTORY AUTHORITY FOR ADOPTION:
This article shall be known as the REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PORTERVILLE. It is adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 894 § 1,
12-5-1967)
22-32: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city of Porterville shall be
granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons by his or their direction,
a tax at a rate to be fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 894 § 2, 12-5-1967; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
22-33: PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT OF TAX:
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 22-32 of this article shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to
the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 894 § 3, 12-5-1967)
22-34: TAX NOT APPLICABLE TO INSTRUMENT SECURING DEBT:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 894 § 4, 12-5-1967)
22-35: EXEMPTIONS:
A. Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof,
is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this article when the exempt agency is acquiring title.
B. Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to any exemptions required by Revenue and Taxation Code sections 11926, 11927, 11928 and
11929. (Ord. 1537 § B72, 8-6-1996)
22-36: REORGANIZATION OR ADJUSTMENT PLANS; CONVEYANCE EXEMPTED:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or
adjustment:
A. Confirmed under the federal bankruptcy act, as amended;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 575/636
B. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended;
C. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the United
States Code, as amended; or
D. Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is affected.
Subsections A to D, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five (5)
years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 894 § 6, 12-5-1967)
22-37: SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION ORDERS; CONVEYANCE EXEMPTED:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the securities and
exchange commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of section 1083 of the internal revenue code of 1954; but only if:
A. The order of the securities and exchange commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of section 79K of title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the public utility holding company act of 1935;
B. Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
C. Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 894 § 7, 12-5-1967)
22-38: PARTNERSHIP REALTY:
A. In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership
or otherwise, if:
1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the internal revenue code of
1954; and
2. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
B. If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the internal revenue code of 1954, for purposes of this article, such
partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or
encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
C. Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer
pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 894 § 8, 12-5-1967)
22-39: ADMINISTRATION OF ARTICLE BY COUNTY RECORDER:
The county recorder shall administer this article in conformity with the provisions of part 6.7 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 894 § 9, 12-5-1967)
Chapter Article V
UTILITY USERS TAX
22-42: DEFINITIONS:
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this article.
CITY: The city of Porterville.
MONTH: A calendar month.
PERSON: Any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club
Massachusetts business or common law trust, society, individual, or municipal corporation.
SERVICE SUPPLIER: A person required to collect and remit a tax imposed by this article.
SERVICE USER: A person required to pay a tax imposed by this article.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 576/636
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The administrative services director or designee of the city of Porterville.
TELEPHONE CORPORATION, ELECTRICAL CORPORATION, GAS CORPORATION, WATER CORPORATION, AND CABLE TELEVISION
CORPORATION: Shall have the same meanings as defined in sections 234, 218, 222, 241, and 215.5, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the state
of California, as said sections existed on January 1, 1969. "Electrical corporation", and "water corporation", shall be construed to include any municipality
or franchised agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or water to a service user. (Ord. 980 § 1, 7-1-1970)
22-43: TELEPHONE USERS TAX:
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city, other than a telephone corporation, using intrastate telephone communication services in
the city. The tax imposed by this article shall be at the rate as fixed by resolution of the city council and shall be paid by the person paying for such
services.
B. As used in this section, the term "charges" shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin operated telephones except that
where such coin operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or
other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term "telephone communication services" include
land mobile services or maritime mobile services as defined in section 2.1 of title 47 of the code of federal regulations, as such section existed on
January 1, 1969.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, the tax imposed under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using
intrastate telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for such services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed by
section 4251 of title 26 of the United States Code, as such section existed on January 1, 1969, without regard to subsection B of this section.
D. The maximum annual telephone users tax for the twelve (12) month period beginning July 1, and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year for
manufacturers shall be as follows:
Number Of Employees Amount
0 to 600 employees $ 500.00
601 to 1,000 employees 1,000.00
Over 1,000 employees 1,500.00
(Ord. 980 § 2, 7-1-1970; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973; Ord. 1614 § 1, 9-17-2002)
22-44: ELECTRICITY USERS TAX:
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using electrical energy. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate as fixed by
resolution of the city council, and shall be paid by the person paying for such energy. "Charges", as used in this section, shall include charges made
for: 1) metered energy; and 2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges, and
annual and monthly charges.
B. As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or
possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided,
however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of batteries. The term shall not include
electricity used in water pumping by water corporations; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electrical corporation at a
point within the city for resale.
C. The maximum annual electricity users tax for the twelve (12) month period beginning July 1, and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year for
manufacturers shall be as follows:
Number Of Employees Amount
0 to 600 employees $ 500.00
601 to 1,000 employees 1,000.00
Over 1,000 employees 1,500.00
(Ord. 980 § 3, 7-1-1970; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
22-45: GAS USERS TAX:
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall
be at the rate as fixed by resolution of the city council and shall be paid by the person paying for such gas.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 577/636
B. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed: 1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and
delivered through mains or pipes; 2) charges made for gas to be used in the generation of electrical energy by an electrical corporation; 3) charges
made for gas used in water pumping by water corporations; and 4) charges made by a gas public utility for gas used and consumed in the conduct of
the business of gas public utilities.
C. The maximum annual gas users tax for the twelve (12) month period beginning July 1, and ending June 30 of the next succeeding year for
manufacturers shall be as follows:
Number Of Employees Amount
0 to 600 employees $ 500.00
601 to 1,000 employees 1,000.00
Over 1,000 employees 1,500.00
(Ord. 980 § 4, 7-1-1970; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
22-46: WATER USERS TAX:
A. There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section
shall be at the rate as fixed by resolution of the city council, and shall be paid by the person paying for such water.
B. There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered
through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a county or municipal water district for water used and
consumed by such department, utility or district in the conduct of the business of such department, utility or district.
C. The maximum annual water users tax for the twelve (12) month period beginning July 1, and ending June 30, of the next succeeding year for
manufacturers shall be as follows:
Number Of Employees Amount
0 to 600 employees $ 500.00
601 to 1,000 employees 1,000.00
Over 1,000 employees 1,500.00
(Ord. 980 § 5, 7-1-1970; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
22-47: CABLE TELEVISION TAX:
There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using cable television service. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate as fixed by
resolution of the city council and shall be paid by the person paying for such service. (Ord. 980 § 6, 7-1-1970; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
22-48: EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE:
Nothing in this article shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person if imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of the
constitution of the United States or the constitution of the state of California. (Ord. 980 § 7, 7-1-1970)
22-49: COLLECTION OF TAX:
A. Every person receiving payment of charges from a service user shall collect the amount of tax imposed by this article from the service user.
B. The tax shall be collected at the same time as and along with the collection of charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the
service supplier.
C. The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that person which starts on
or after the effective date hereof. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to
collect shall arise separately for each billing period. (Ord. 980 § 8, 7-1-1970)
22-50: REPORTING AND REMITTING:
Each service supplier shall, on or before the twentieth of each month, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, stating the amount
of taxes billed by the service supplier during the preceding month. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 578/636
tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such further information as he deems necessary to properly determine if the tax here
imposed is being levied and collected in accordance with this article. Returns and remittances are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. (Ord. 980 § 9, 7-1-1970)
22-51: PENALTY:
A. Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this article are delinquent.
B. Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any tax collected or any deficiency determination, shall attach and be paid by the person required to collect
and remit at the rate of ten percent (10%) of the total tax collected or imposed herein.
C. The tax administrator shall have power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions of this
article for fraud or negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax collected or as recomputed by the tax
administrator.
D. Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. (Ord. 980 § 10, 7-1-1970)
22-52: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax
collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect
and remit. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the
recovery of such amount. (Ord. 980 § 11, 7-1-1970)
22-53: FAILURE TO PAY TAX; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him from the amounts remitted to a
service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, or whenever the tax
administrator deems it is the obligation to collect taxes due under this article from certain named service users for specified billing periods, the tax
administrator shall notify the service user that he has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such
taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid
thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the service supplier; or should the service user have changed his
address, to his last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the
notice upon him, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax
set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five dollars ($5.00). The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 980
§ 12, 7-1-1970)
22-54: ASSESSMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDY:
A. The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not paid or remitted by a person required to pay or remit. A notice of the assessment which
shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes and penalties imposed and the time and place when such assessment shall be submitted to the city council
for confirmation or modification. The tax administrator shall mail a copy of such notice to the person selling the service and to the service user at least
ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing and shall post such notice for at least five (5) continuous days prior to the date of the hearing on the
chamber door of the city council. Any interested party having any objections may appear and be heard at the hearing, provided his objection is filed in
writing with the tax administrator prior to the time set for the hearing.
B. At the time fixed for considering said assessment, the city council shall hear the same together with any objection filed as aforesaid and thereupon may
confirm or modify said assessment by motion. (Ord. 980 § 13, 7-1-1970)
22-55: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the city any tax imposed by this article to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3)
years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax
administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at any reasonable time. (Ord. 980 § 14, 7-1-1970)
22-56: REFUNDS:
A. Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax
administrator under this article it may be refunded as provided in this section.
B. A person required to collect and remit taxes imposed under this article may claim a refund or take a credit against taxes collected and remitted the
amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax
administrator that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall
be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the
service user to the person required to collect and remit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 579/636
C. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement
thereto.
D. Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California public utilities commission or a court
of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this article on the amount of
such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes
against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this article is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be
borne by the city. (Ord. 980 § 15, 7-1-1970; Ord. 1343, 12-3-1985)
22-57: DATE TAXES IMPOSED:
The taxes imposed by this article shall become imposed as of July 1, 1970, or at the beginning of the first regular billing period thereafter which would not
include service prior to July 1, 1970. (Ord. 980 § 17, 7-1-1970)
Chapter 23
TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Chapter Article I
IN GENERAL
23-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively set forth in this section:
AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE: Shall include every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any
public street in the city and not over a regular or defined route and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundaries of the city or not,
excepting vehicle of highway contract carriers as defined in this section.
HIGHWAY CONTRACT CARRIER: Every highway common carrier subject to the regulations as such by the railroad commission under the public utilities
act of the state.
TAXICAB: Shall include every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the
city and not over a regular or defined route and irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city or not and where a
charge for such transportation is measured by the distance traveled or by the time required for such transportation, or both, or where any other goods are
received or charged for such transportation excepting vehicles of "highway contract carriers" as defined in this section. (Ord. Code § 7710)
23-2: COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER PROVISIONS:
The rules and regulations in this chapter shall be observed by all persons operating taxicabs or automobiles for hire, and it shall be unlawful to operate
such taxicab or automobile for hire in violation of any of the rules in this chapter. (Ord. Code § 7730)
23-3: IDENTIFICATION CARD:
Any person operating a vehicle for hire or a taxicab shall have the taxi driver identification card issued by the city and displayed in the cab while said
person is operating the cab. The identification card shall be affixed to the visor in the driver's area or, if no such visor exists, attached to the top of the cab
in that area. (Ord. Code § 7731.1; Ord. 973 § B, 6-5-1970; Ord. 1215 § B, 9-16-1980)
23-4: PERSONS NOT ELIGIBLE TO OPERATE/DRIVE VEHICLE:
No taxicab or automobile for hire shall be operated by any person under the age of eighteen (18) years; or by any person who does not possess a valid
California driver's license; or by any person who does not possess a valid taxicab driver permit; or by any person who is known to be habitually under the
influence of intoxicating drugs, liquors or combination of both. (Ord. Code § 7731.2; Ord. 1215 § B, 9-16-1980; Ord. 1666 § 1, 4-19-2005)
23-5: USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS OR MEDICATIONS PROHIBITED DURING HOURS OF DUTY:
The driver of any automobile for hire or taxicab in the city of Porterville shall refrain from drinking spirituous, malt, vinous or intoxicating liquors of any kind
or character, or the taking of any type of medication that manifests a narcotic tranquilizing effect, during the period of time that such person is on duty or
prior to going on duty when the effects of such liquor or medication would still be in effect on the driver, or when the subject driver is subject to call in the
operation of such automobile for hire or taxicab. (Ord. Code § 7731.3; Ord. 1215 § B, 9-16-1980)
23-6: PARKING:
No automobile for hire or taxicab shall remain standing upon any portion of any public street within the city, except for loading and unloading passengers
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 580/636
and then not for a period of more than five (5) minutes, excepting at such stand as may be designated and described in the permit. This section shall not
apply to any automobile for hire or taxicab while the same is engaged by or being paid for by a passenger. During operating hours, taxicabs shall not be
parked in residential areas unless during the course of business. During nonoperating hours the taxicabs shall be parked at the business location. Taxi
drivers who are "on call" may park the taxicab in front of their residence during the time during which they are on call, provided no more than one taxicab is
parked at that location. (Ord. Code § 7732.1; Ord. 1666 § 2, 4-19-2005)
23-7: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1215 § A, 9-16-1980)
23-8: OPERATOR TO TAKE MOST DIRECT ROUTE:
The operator of any taxicab shall carry any passenger engaging the same safely and expeditiously to his destination by the most direct and accessible
route. (Ord. Code § 7732.3)
23-9: MECHANICAL AND SANITARY CONDITION OF VEHICLE:
All automobiles for hire and taxicabs shall be kept in good mechanical condition.
No automobile for hire or taxicab shall be operated unless the passenger compartment be kept clean and in a sanitary condition. (Ord. Code § 7732.4)
23-9.1: MECHANICAL INSPECTION:
All vehicles permitted to be operated under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in safe operating condition and shall be inspected annually by
a qualified mechanic certified by the state of California department of consumer affairs. The police department shall provide inspection forms, which the
mechanic shall complete and certify. The permit holder shall submit the completed inspection form to the police department.
In the event said vehicle is found to be unsafe because of defective brakes, lights, or other operating defect, said vehicle shall not be used as a taxicab or
vehicle for hire until such defect has been corrected. The cost of said inspection shall be at the expense of the taxicab/automobile for hire company. (Ord.
946 § C, 8-5-1969; Ord. 1666 § 3, 4-19-2005)
23-9.2: TAXIMETERS; CONDITION, OPERATION:
Every taxicab shall be equipped with a single tariff taximeter or other measuring instrument. The use of any inaccurate taximeter or other measuring
instrument for the purpose of gauging or indicating distance traveled, or waiting time for the purpose of fixing rates to be collected from the public, is
hereby prohibited. It shall be the duty of the owner using any taximeter or other measuring instrument to keep said taximeter or other measuring
instrument in an accurate condition.
The permit holder shall provide proof that each vehicle's taximeter is inspected a minimum of once a year, and immediately upon a change effecting the
meter rate, by the Tulare County department of weights and measures. The taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Tulare County
department of weights and measures.
Every taximeter or other measuring instrument used for the purpose of gauging or indicating distance traveled, or waiting time, or for the purpose of
computing fares to be collected from the public, shall be of a type approved and subject to inspection at any time by the chief of police or his designee. A
police officer who receives a complaint from any person that the rate charged is more than the legal rate shall report such fact to the chief of police, who
shall cause such taximeter or other measuring instrument to be inspected at once.
The taximeter shall be so placed in a taxicab that the reading dial showing the amount to be charged shall be well lighted and readily discernible by the
passenger riding in such taxicab, unless such taxicab is equipped and operated with a receipt printing taximeter.
All drivers of taxicabs, upon payment of the fare, shall give a receipt when requested for the fare paid.
All taxicab drivers shall cause the taximeter to be in the nonrecording position at the termination of each service.
The taxicab driver, while carrying passengers or under employment, shall not cause the taximeter to be in such position as to denote that such taxicab is
not employed, or in such position as to denote that he is employed at a rate or fare different than that to which he is entitled. (Ord. 1032 § A, 2-20-1973;
Ord. 1666 § 4, 4-19-2005)
23-9.3: AUTHORITY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INSPECT TAXICABS:
The chief of police or his designee, under his/her direction, shall have the right at any time, when a taxicab or vehicle for hire is not transporting a customer
and after displaying proper identification, to enter into that vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions set forth in this
chapter are being violated.
Such inspection may occur when a customer is present and the chief of police or his/her designee has probable cause to believe a violation is present.
(Ord. 1666 § 5, 4-19-2005)
23-10: RATES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 581/636
The operator or owner of a taxicab shall post charges and rates in both the front and rear passenger sections of said vehicle and in a manner so that the
same shall be clearly visible to passengers.
The city council shall have the power and right at all times for the duration of the taxi license to regulate and establish reasonable rates and charges. The
taxi company licensee shall submit a list of all proposed rates increases to the city no less than thirty (30) days prior to the proposed increase taking effect.
If the licensee does not receive any notification from the city, such licensee may presume that there are no objections on the part of the city to the rate
increase. The establishment of rates and charges shall be discretionary with the city council. (Ord. Code § 7732.5; Ord. 973 § A, 6-5-1970; Ord. 1032 § B,
2-20-1973; Ord. 1215 § B, 9-16-1980; Ord. 1666 § 6, 4-19-2005)
23-11: SOLICITING PATRONAGE:
No owner or operator of any automobile for hire or taxicab shall solicit patronage for the same from the vehicle or within one hundred (100) yards
therefrom upon any public street, save and except at railroad and interurban depots and within the boundaries of the space to be designated by the chief
of police for such purposes. (Ord. Code § 7733.1)
23-12: EXCLUSIVE USE OF PERSONS ENGAGING VEHICLE:
No operator or owner of any automobile for hire or taxicab shall solicit or take on or carry any passenger after such automobile for hire or taxicab shall
have been engaged or while in use for another passenger, without the consent of the passenger first engaging the same, having been first obtained. A
passenger engaging such automobile shall have the exclusive right to full and free use of the passenger compartment and the whole thereof if he desires
the same. (Ord. Code § 7733.2)
23-13: AUTOMOBILE FOR HIRE NOT TO BE ADVERTISED AS TAXI OR TAXICAB:
No automobile for hire shall be designated as a "taxi" or "taxicab", or by word or phrase using the words "taxi" or "taxicab" in any sign or advertising matter.
(Ord. Code § 7734)
23-13.1: OUT OF SERVICE TAXICABS:
When a taxicab is not in service but is being operated on public streets, a sign shall be affixed on each side of the vehicle, clearly identifying the vehicle as
being "out of service". (Ord. 1666 § 7, 4-19-2005)
Chapter Article II
OPERATING/DRIVER PERMIT
23-14: REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to operate or cause to be operated, an automobile for hire, or a taxicab upon any public street within the city without first having
obtained a permit to do so in accordance with the provisions hereof, and without complying or having complied with all the provisions of this chapter as
well as those applicable sections of chapter 15 of this code.
No company shall operate a taxicab or vehicle for hire business within the city of Porterville without having first obtained a business license and an
operating permit from the city of Porterville. No person shall be allowed to drive a taxicab or vehicle for hire without having first obtained a driver's permit
from the city of Porterville. (Ord. Code § 7711; Ord. 1666 § 8, 4-19-2005)
23-15: LIMIT OF ONE PERMIT TO EACH PERSON:
No person shall be entitled to hold more than one permit at a time, either as individual, member of a copartnership, stockholder or officer of a corporation,
or under fictitious name, or otherwise. (Ord. Code § 7712)
23-16: APPLICATION; CONTENTS; FEE:
Any person desiring to obtain the permit required by section 23-14 of this article shall pay a fee, as fixed by resolution of the city council, and shall make
application for such permit to the chief of police.
A. An operator's permit application shall set forth:
1. The name and address of the applicant, and if the same be a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same be a partnership,
association or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company, with the address of each.
2. A statement as to whether the permit is desired for an automobile for hire, or a taxicab.
3. A description of every motor vehicle which the applicant proposes to use, giving:
a. Trade name;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 582/636
b. Motor and serial number;
c. State license number;
d. Seating capacity;
e. Body style.
4. The street number and exact location where the applicant proposes to stand each automobile.
5. Proposed schedule of rates or fares to be charged for carrying of passengers in such automobile.
6. The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia which shall be used on such automobile, along with an identifying vehicle number.
B. A driver's permit application shall set forth:
1. The name, date of birth, physical description, address, and phone number of the applicant.
2. The applicant's California driver's license number, status, and driving history.
3. Place of employment with contact address and phone number.
4. Listing of all previous arrests and convictions.
5. Other information as deemed pertinent by the chief of police. (Ord. Code § 7721; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973; Ord. 1666 § 9, 4-19-2005)
23-17: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1215 § A, 9-16-1980)
23-18: RESERVED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1215 § A, 9-16-1980)
23-19: GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The following reasons shall be sufficient denial of such permit as required in section 23-14 of this article:
A. The application is not in the form, and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this chapter.
B. The vehicle or vehicles described therein are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used.
C. The color scheme, name, monogram or insignia to be used upon such automobile, shall be in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, name,
monogram or insignia used by any person in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive, or defraud the public.
D. The applicant has, at some prior time, had a permit for the operation of automobile for hire, or taxicab revoked for reason. (Ord. Code § 7723; Ord. 946
§ A, 8-5-1969; Ord. 1215 § A, 9-16-1980)
23-19.1: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL REGARDING DENIAL OF PERMIT:
In the event the chief of police, for any reason, denies the application of any applicant or refuses to issue the applicant a permit for the operation of an
automobile for hire or taxicab, such applicant may, on or before the fifteenth day following said denial, file with the city clerk a written notice of protest of
the decision of the chief of police and a request that the city council issue the permit requested. Within thirty (30) days following the receipt of applicant's
written notice the same shall be considered by the city council at a regular or special meeting. The city council shall have full power and authority to grant
or deny the permit for the causes set forth in section 23-19 of this article. (Ord. 946 § C, 8-5-1969)
23-20: LICENSE FEE PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE:
Before any permit as required in section 23-14 of this article shall be issued, a license fee shall be paid to the city at a rate as fixed by the city council, and
failure to pay such license fee aforesaid shall automatically revoke any permit issued under this article. (Ord. Code § 7722; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
23-21: DEPOSIT OF INSURANCE POLICY PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF OPERATOR'S PERMIT:
Before an operator's permit required in section 23-14 of this article shall be issued by the chief of police, the applicant shall deliver to the city clerk a policy
of insurance, executed by a company duly authorized under the laws of the state to do an insurance business, by the provisions of which policy the
company promises and undertakes to pay in full all claims for damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the automobile referred to in
such application; provided, that the minimum amount for which liability shall be assumed for injury to or death of one person in any one accident shall be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 583/636
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to more than one person in any one accident, and the minimum amount
for which liability shall be assumed for destruction of property in any one accident shall be twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). (Ord. Code § 7724;
Ord. 946 § B, 8-5-1969; Ord. 1666 § 10, 4-19-2005)
23-22: PHOTOGRAPH; FINGERPRINTS:
Before any permit required in section 23-14 of this article shall be issued for the operation of an automobile for hire or taxicab, the operator thereof,
together with all chauffeur's licensed, shall file with the chief of police, a photograph, size two inches by two and three-fourths inches (2" x 23/4") and shall
have their fingerprints taken by the chief of police or any authorized deputy. (Ord. Code § 7725)
23-23: REVOCATION; HEARING; NOTICE:
Any permit granted under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city council either as a whole or as to any or all cars described therein, or as
to the right to use any distinctive color, monogram or insignia, after five (5) days' notice to the permit holder, requiring him to appear at a certain time and
place to show cause why such permit should not be revoked for any of the reasons enumerated in section 23-24 of this article. (Ord. Code § 7742)
23-24: GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION:
Grounds for revocation of a permit by the city council shall be for any of the following reasons:
A. For the nonpayment of any license fee.
B. For failure to observe any of the rules and regulations or provisions set out in this chapter.
C. For the violation of any of the laws of the state or ordinances of the city by any permit holder, operator or driver of an automobile for hire or taxicab.
D. For failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public by means of any vehicle described in the permit, or for failure to keep any car described in the
permit in use for any unreasonable length of time, or for failure to use the distinctive color, monogram or insignia described in the application.
E. For any cause which in the opinion of the city council makes it contrary to the public interest, convenience and necessity for the permit to be continued.
F. The undertaking provided for in section 23-21 of this article, has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for nonpayment of premium, or is not
in force for any reason. (Ord. Code § 7742; Ord. 946 § B, 8-5-1969)
23-25: TRANSFERABILITY:
No permit issued under the terms of this article shall be transferable either by contract or operation of law without the permission of the chief of police
having been first obtained, and any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause for revocation thereof. (Ord. Code § 7752)
23-26: APPLICATIONS FOR CHANGES OF NAME, SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLE, ETC.:
In the event that any permit holder desires to change his color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on such automobile for hire, or taxicab, or to
substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle described in the application for permit, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him
as automobiles for hire or taxicabs, he shall make application for permission to do so from the chief of police which permission shall be granted, if in the
discretion of the chief of police, he deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be served by such change, and if the permit holder has
complied with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. Code § 7751; Ord. 1032 § B, 2-20-1973)
23-27: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL REGARDING DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR CHANGES, ETC.:
In the event the chief of police shall refuse to permit any change specified in section 23-26 of this article, the permit holder may protest the decision of the
chief of police in the time and in the manner set forth in section 23-19.1 of this article, and the city council shall consider and act on said protest in the time
and in the manner set forth in section 23-19.1 of this article, and shall deny the change requested if the council fails to find that the public interest and
convenience will be served by such change, or if the permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 946 § C, 8-5-1969; Ord.
1032 § B, 2-20-1973)
23-28: PERMIT VALIDITY PERIOD:
A permit required by this article shall be valid for no longer than a period of one year. Renewal permits must be completed during the month of January
each year. (Ord. 1166 § B, 2-20-1979; Ord. 1666 § 11, 4-19-2005)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 584/636
Chapter 24
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
Chapter
TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
24-1: STATE LAW ADOPTED:
There is hereby adopted by reference division 13, part 2, mobilehome-manufactured housing, and division 13, part 2.1, the mobilehomes park act of the
California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 1537 § B73, 8-6-1996)
Chapter 24A
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES
Chapter
UNDERGROUND FACILITIES
24A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter, the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions:
COMMISSION: The public utilities commission of the state of California.
PERSON: Shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.
POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms,
crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground
within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS OR DISTRICT: That area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are
prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of section 24A-4 of this chapter.
UTILITY: Shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-2: PUBLIC HEARING BY COUNCIL:
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles,
overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying
electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof. Each such
hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1537 § B74, 8-6-1996)
24A-3: REPORT ON UNDERGROUND FACILITIES:
Prior to holding such public hearing, the public works director or designee, shall consult with all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for such hearing
by the city council containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities' participation and estimates of the total costs to the city and affected
property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead
facilities. (Ord. 1537 § B75, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
24A-4: COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS BY RESOLUTION:
If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal
and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such
removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A
reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment
necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-5: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 585/636
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein
as provided in section 24A-4 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or
operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by
such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service, as provided in section 24A-10 of
this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-6: EXCEPTION, EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES:
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days without
authority of the public works director or designee in order to provide emergency service. The public works director or designee may grant special
permission, on such terms as the public works director or designee may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to
any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-
1968; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
24A-7: OTHER EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to section 24A-4 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the
following types of facilities:
A. Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.
B. Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
C. Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting
to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
are not prohibited.
D. Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty four
thousand five hundred (34,500) volts.
E. Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to
another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street.
F. Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services.
G. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and
concealed ducts.
H. Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used in providing power or communications to construction projects. (Ord. 922
§ A, 10-3-1968; Ord. 993 § A, 2-2-1971)
24A-8: NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES:
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to section 24A-4 of this chapter, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities
and all persons owning real property within the district created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. Said city clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
commission.
Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to section 24A-4 of this chapter, together with a copy of
this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-9: RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to section 24A-4 of this
chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-10: RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 586/636
A. Every person owning, operating, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service
connection on his property between the facilities referred to in section 24A-9 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within said building or
structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.
If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 24A-4 of this chapter, the
public works director or designee shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof
as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after the receipt of such notice.
B. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such
persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of
such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears and must be addressed to
such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to general delivery, city of
Porterville. If the notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty eight
(48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the public works director or designee
shall, within forty eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in
size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on said premises.
C. The notice given by the public works director or designee to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to
be done, and shall state that if said work is not completed within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such notice, the public works director or designee
will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and
become a lien upon such property.
D. If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period the said required underground facilities have not been provided, the public works director or designee
shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric communications services are being
furnished thereto, the public works director or designee shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property. Upon completion of
the work by the public works director or designee, he shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground
facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The
council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time
shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.
E. The public works director or designee shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in
possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to
provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such
assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.
F. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed
to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.
G. If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the
property against which the assessment is made by the public works director or designee, and the public works director or designee is directed to turn
over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of said properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and said assessor and
tax collector shall add the amount of said assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which said assessment was not
paid.
Said assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as said property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall
bear interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
24A-11: RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY:
City shall remove at its own expense all city owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user
of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to section 24A-4 hereof. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-12: EXTENSION OF TIME:
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to section 24A-4 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time
provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
24A-13: PENALTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter; or failing to comply with any of its
requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars
($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 922 § A, 10-3-1968)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 587/636
Chapter 24B
VIDEO SERVICE/UTILITIES
Chapter Article I
REGULATION OF STATE VIDEO FRANCHISE HOLDERS
24B-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
This article is designed to regulate video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the city. As of January 1, 2007, the state of
California will have the sole authority to grant state video franchises pursuant to the digital infrastructure and video competition act of 2006. Pursuant to the
act the city of Porterville shall receive a franchise fee and shall receive a fee for public educational and government PEG purposes from all state video
franchise holders operating within the city. Additionally the city will acquire the responsibility to establish and enforce penalties consistent with state law
against all state video franchise holders operating within the city for violations of customer service standards; however, the act grants all authority to adopt
customer service standards to the state. The act leaves unchanged the city's authority to regulate the city's current cable franchise and the cable franchise
currently in effect until such time as the cable franchisee no longer holds a city franchise or is no longer operating under a current or expired city franchise.
(Ord. 1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless otherwise expressly set forth in this section or elsewhere in this article, the definitions of the terms herein shall have the same meaning as defined
in the California Public Utilities Code section 5830, and as otherwise defined in the digital infrastructure and video competition act of 2006, as amended.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms, phrases, and abbreviations have the meanings set forth below. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular include the plural number. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words,
terms, phrases, and abbreviations not defined in this section either directly or by reference to state law will be given their meaning as used in title 47 of the
United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that code, their meaning as used in title 47 of the code of federal regulations.
AFFILIATE: When used in relation to any person, another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with, such person.
CFR: The code of federal regulations. Thus, the citation of "47 CFR 80.1" refers to title 47, part 80, section 1, of the code of federal regulations.
CABLE SYSTEM OPERATOR OR CABLE OPERATOR: Any person or group of persons:
A. Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system; or
B. Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of Porterville, or the city manager's designee.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT: The communications act of 1934 (47 USC section 153 et seq.), as amended by the cable communications policy act of 1984,
the cable television consumer protection and competition act of 1992, and the telecommunications act of 1996.
FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION: The federal administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate cable
and telecommunications services and cable and telecommunications service providers on a national level.
FRANCHISE FEE: Any fee or assessment of any kind that is authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation in
the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the public rights of way. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
A. Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their
services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
B. Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
C. Requirements or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
D. Any fee imposed under title 17, United States Code.
FRANCHISE SERVICE AREA OR SERVICE AREA: The entire geographical area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be constituted,
unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.
GROSS REVENUE: Shall be defined in accordance to California Public Utilities Code section 5860 subdivision (d).
PERSON: An individual, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES, PEG ACCESS FACILITIES, OR PEG ACCESS: The total of the following:
A. Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
STREET OR PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Each of the following that has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and
is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights of way and similar public property that
the city from time to time authorizes within the definition of a street.
SUBSCRIBER OR CUSTOMER OR CONSUMER: Any person who pays for or lawfully receives cable or video services provided by a cable operator or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 588/636
video services provider by means of the cable system or video system.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: The transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information of the user's choosing, without change in the
form or content of the information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT: Equipment, other than customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to provide
telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that equipment.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The offering of telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the equipment or facilities that are used.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: Any provider of telecommunications service.
USC: The United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47 USC section 153" refers to title 47, section 153, of the United States Code.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING PROVIDER: Any person or group of persons who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract for the
carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open video system.
VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER: Any person, company, or service that provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a
home, multi-family dwelling complex, congregate living complex, condominium, apartment or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service,
whether directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public rights of way are used in the delivery of that video programming. A
"video provider" includes, without limitation, providers of cable television service, open video system service, master antenna television, satellite master
antenna providers, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services and other providers of video programming, whatever their technology. (Ord.
1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-3: REQUIREMENTS:
A. State Video Franchise Holder Fee To The City: For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Porterville there shall
be a fee paid to the city equal to five percent (5%) of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.
B. PEG Fee: A separate fee of one percent (1%) of gross revenues shall be assessed on all state franchise holders that use the public rights of way,
including all local franchisees and all holders of state franchises as consistent with state or federal law. The PEG fee shall be paid quarterly, to be
received by the city not later than forty five (45) days after the close of each quarter of holder's fiscal year.
1. On a quarterly basis, holder shall provide the city a complete and accurate statement verified by a financial officer of holder indicating gross
revenues for the past quarter, listing every revenue source, and depicting gross revenue computations.
2. A video service provider subject to this section may recover the amount of any fee by billing a recovery fee as a separate line item on the regular bill
of each subscriber.
C. Channel Designation: All video service providers that use the public rights of way shall designate sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow
the carriage of at least three (3) public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access channels. For the purposes of this section, a PEG access channel
is deemed activated if it is being utilized for PEG access programming within the city for at least eight (8) hours per day. PEG access channels shall be
for the exclusive use of the city or its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental channels.
1. Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG related activities.
2. The PEG access channels shall all be carried on the basic service tier of holder.
3. To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier and the
channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by
federal law.
4. After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the city
unless the change is required by federal law.
5. Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a national television system committee (NTSC) television signal.
6. Requests by the city for additional channel capacity will be made in accordance to PUC section 5870.
D. Interconnection: Where technically feasible, a state video franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect
their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave link,
satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection of the
PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an
incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow
the state video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent's network at a technically feasible point on the holder's network as
identified by the holder. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection
available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by
the state video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the parties.
E. Emergency Alert System And Emergency Overrides: A state video franchise holder must comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the
federal communications commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the holder's network. Provisions in city issued
franchises authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the
city for the duration of the city issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to subdivision
(m) of section 5840 of the California Public Utilities Code, or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 589/636
F. Gross Revenue: Gross revenue, for the purpose of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code section 5860. (Ord.
1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-4: AUTHORITY TO EXAMINE BUSINESS RECORDS:
Not more than once annually, the city manager or his or her designee may examine the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure
compliance with section 24B-3 of this article, under the terms and conditions set forth in the act. (Ord. 1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-5: CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS AND PENALTIES:
The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the
provision of video service.
A. Compliance: Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a video provider are specified in a franchise with the city, a video
provider must comply with all applicable provisions of the cable television and video customer service and information act1 and the video customer
service act2.
B. Registration: All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter, or that intend to operate in the city after the effective
date of this chapter, and are not required under applicable law to operate under a franchise, license, lease, or similar written agreement with the city,
must register with the city. The registration form must include or be accompanied by the following:
1. The video provider's name, address, and local telephone numbers.
2. The names of the officers of the video provider.
3. A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints, as
required by California Government Code section 53054 et seq. These customer service standards must include, without limitation, standards
regarding the following:
a. Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations, employee identification, and service call response time and scheduling.
b. Customer telephone and office hours.
c. Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits.
d. Procedures for termination of service.
e. Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of channel assignments, or an increase in rates.
f. Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution.
g. The video provider's written acknowledgment of its obligation under California Government Code section 53055.1 to provide to new customers a
notice describing the customer service standards specified in subsections B3a through B3f of this section at the time of installation or when service
is initiated. The notice must also include, in addition to all of the information described in subsections B3a through B3f of this section, all of the
following:
(1) A listing of the services offered by the video provider that clearly describes all levels of service and the rates for each level of service.
(2) The telephone number or numbers through which customers may subscribe to, change, or terminate service, request customer service, or seek
general or billing information.
(3) A description of the rights and remedies that the video provider may make available to its customers if the video provider does not materially
meet its customer service standards.
h. The video provider's written commitment to distribute annually to its employees and customers, and to the city, a notice describing the customer
service standards specified in subsections B3a through B3f of this section. This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its
performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by California Government Code section 53055.2.
4. Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to
cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and processing the registration form.
5. In addition to the registration fee specified in subsection B4 of this section, the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the city, when due,
all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in resolving any disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute
resolution is mandated by California Government Code section 53088.2(o).
C. Customer Service Obligations: The customer service obligations imposed upon video providers by the video customer service act3 consist of the
following:
1. Every video provider must render reasonably efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only as necessary.
2. All video provider personnel contacting subscribers or potential subscribers outside the office of the provider must be clearly identified as associated
with the video provider.
3. At the time of installation, and annually thereafter, all video providers must provide to all customers a written notice of the programming offered, the
prices for that programming, the provider's installation and customer service policies, and the name, address, and telephone number of the city's
office that is designated for receiving complaints.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 590/636
4. All video providers must have knowledgeable, qualified company representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries Monday
through Friday, excluding holidays, during normal business hours.
5. All video providers must provide to customers a toll free or local telephone number for installation, service, and complaint calls. These calls must be
answered promptly by the video providers.
6. All video providers must render bills that are accurate and understandable.
7. All video providers must respond promptly to a complete outage in a customer's service. The response must occur within twenty four (24) hours of
the reporting of such outage to the provider, except in those situations beyond the reasonable control of the video provider. A video provider will be
deemed to respond to a complete outage when a company representative arrives at the outage location within twenty four (24) hours and begins to
resolve the problem.
8. All video providers must provide a minimum of thirty (30) days' written notice before increasing rates or deleting channels. All video providers must
make every reasonable effort to submit the notice to the city in advance of the distribution to customers. The thirty (30) day notice is waived if the
increases in rates or deletion of channels are outside the control of the video provider. In those cases, the video provider must make reasonable
efforts to provide customers with as much notice as possible.
9. Every video provider must allow every residential customer who pays his or her bill directly to the video provider at least fifteen (15) days from the
date the bill for services is mailed to the customer, to pay the listed charges unless otherwise agreed to pursuant to a residential rental agreement
establishing tenancy. Customer payments must be posted promptly. No video provider may terminate residential service for nonpayment of a
delinquent account unless the video provider furnishes notice of the delinquency and impending termination at least fifteen (15) days prior to the
proposed termination. The notice must be mailed, postage prepaid, to the customer to whom the service is billed. Notice must not be mailed until the
sixteenth day after the date the bill for services was mailed to the customer. The notice of delinquency and impending termination may be part of a
billing statement. No video provider may assess a late fee any earlier than the twenty second day after the bill for service has been mailed.
10. Every notice of termination of service pursuant to subsection C9 of this section must include all of the following information:
a. The name and address of the customer whose account is delinquent.
b. The amount of the delinquency.
c. The date by which payment is required in order to avoid termination of service.
d. The telephone number of a representative of the video provider who can provide additional information and handle complaints or initiate an
investigation concerning the service and charges in question.
11. Service may only be terminated on days in which the customer can reach a representative of the video provider either in person or by telephone.
12. Any service terminated without good cause must be restored without charge for the service restoration. Good cause includes, but is not limited to,
failure to pay, payment by check for which there are insufficient funds, theft of service, abuse of equipment or system personnel, or other similar
subscriber actions.
13. All video providers must issue requested refund checks promptly, but no later than forty five (45) days following the resolution of any dispute, and
following the return of the equipment supplied by the video provider, if service is terminated.
14. All video providers must issue security or customer deposit refund checks promptly, but no later than forty five (45) days following the termination of
service, less any deductions permitted by law.
15. Video providers must not disclose the name and address of a subscriber for commercial gain to be used in mailing lists or for other commercial
purposes not reasonably related to the conduct of the businesses of the video providers or their affiliates, unless the video providers have provided
to the subscriber a notice, separate or included in any other customer notice, that clearly and conspicuously describes the subscriber's ability to
prohibit the disclosure. Video providers must provide an address and telephone number for a local subscriber to use without toll charge to prevent
disclosure of the subscriber's name and address.
D. Penalties For Noncompliance:
1. Purpose: The purpose of this subsection D is to authorize the imposition of monetary penalties for the violation of the customer service standards
established by this section. The imposition of penalties authorized by this subsection D will not prevent the city or any other affected party from
exercising any other remedy to the extent permitted by law, including, but not limited to, any judicial remedy as provided in subsection D2d of this
section.
2. Administration And Appeals:
a. Authority: The city manager or the city manager's designee is authorized to administer this subsection D. Decisions by the city manager to assess
monetary penalties against the holder must be in writing and must contain findings supporting the decisions. Decisions by the city manager are
final, unless appealed by the holder or aggrieved party.
b. Appeal: A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager to the city council within thirty (30) days of the initial
assessment. The city council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council's
decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final.
c. Schedule Of Penalties: The following schedule of penalties shall apply to state franchise holders, in the event of a violation of any requirement or
obligation established by applicable law:
(1) For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains
in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.
(2) For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be imposed
for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.
(3) For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) for
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 591/636
each violation.
(4) The maximum penalties referenced above may be increased by any additional amount authorized by state law.
d. Judicial Remedy: This subsection does not preclude any affected party from pursuing any judicial remedy available to that party without regard to
this subsection.
e. Notice Of Violation: The city must give the holder written notice of any alleged violation of the consumer service standards and allow the holder at
least thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice to remedy the specified violation.
f. Assessment Of Monetary Penalties:
(1) If a violation has not been corrected or cured by holder within the time specified by the city, the monetary penalties specified in subsection D2c
of this section may be assessed from the date of delivery to holder of the city's written notice of violation.
(2) In assessing monetary penalties under this subsection, the city manager or the city council, as applicable, may take into account the nature,
circumstances, extent and gravity of the violation and, with respect to the holder, the degree of culpability, any history of prior violations, and
such other matters as may be relevant. If warranted under the circumstances, the monetary penalty to be assessed may be less than the
maximum penalty amount specified in subsection D2c of this section.
E. Additional Consumer Protection And Service Standards:
1. In addition to the consumer protection and service standards that are specified in subsections B3a through B3h of this section, the franchise
agreement with a holder may require compliance with the following:
a. Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the federal communications commission, including the following:
(1) The provisions of section 76.309(c) of chapter 47 of the code of federal regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended.
(2) The provisions of section 76.630 of chapter 47 of the code of federal regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended.
(3) The provisions of section 551 of chapter 47, United States Code, as it now exists or may later be amended.
(4) The provisions of California Government Code section 53054 et seq., entitled the "cable television and video provider customer service and
information act".
(5) The provisions of California Government Code section 53088 et seq., entitled the "video customer service act".
(6) The provisions of California Civil Code section 1722(b)(1)_(6) relating to service or repair transactions between cable television companies and
their subscribers.
(7) The provisions of California Penal Code section 637.5 relating to subscribers' rights to privacy protection.
2. The city may, in its discretion, incorporate in a franchise agreement those customer service and protection standards referenced in subsection E1 of
this section that are the most stringent, and that afford the greatest protection to consumers. These standards will apply, to the extent authorized by
law, to all video, voice, and data services that are provided by the holder to its subscribers within the franchise service area.
F. Quarterly Reports: A state franchise holder and any franchisee, upon request by the city, shall prepare quarterly reports showing compliance customer
service standards for telephone response performance. Such reports will be due to the city within forty five (45) days from the end of each calendar
quarter. The report should detail customer call center performance within all call centers serving the city showing data tracked and aggregated for the
entire market area served by the call centers. The report shall include:
1. Calls offered to interactive voice router (IVR);
2. Calls handled within IVR;
3. Percentage of calls handled within IVR;
4. Calls offered to agents;
5. Calls handled within thirty (30) seconds;
6. Service level or percentage of calls answered within thirty (30) seconds;
7. Number of abandoned calls;
8. Percentage of calls abandoned;
9. Average speed to answer a call;
10. Number of calls reaching a busy signal;
11. Percentage of busy calls as a function of total calls. (Ord. 1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-6: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city of Porterville must concurrently provide complete copies to the city of any application
or amendments to applications filed with the public utilities commission. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager. Within thirty (30) days
of receipt the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video
franchise. (Ord. 1735, 11-20-2007)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 592/636
24B-7: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW FOR FACILITIES IN STREETS AND PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
Prior to construction or alteration of any facilities in, on, over, under, upon, across, and along the public streets and rights of way within the city of
Porterville, a state video franchise holder shall for each facility submit plans and drawings to the community development and/or public works directors for
review pursuant to the city's applicable regulations. For purposes of this section facilities includes wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments, and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant to the operation of the
video service system. (Ord. 1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-8: CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
All applicable construction standards as set forth in the city regulations shall apply to state video service franchise holders constructing or altering any
facilities within the city. (Ord. 1735, 11-20-2007)
24B-9: ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW:
The city of Porterville shall serve as the lead agency for any environmental review that is required for construction or alteration of facilities by a state video
service franchise holder within the city of Porterville and may impose conditions to mitigate environmental impacts of the applicant's use of the public rights
of way that may be required by the California environmental quality act, division 13 commencing with section 21000 of the Public Resources Code. (Ord.
1735, 11-20-2007)
Chapter 25
WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Chapter Article I
WATER
Division 1. Generally
25-1: ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE:
It shall be unlawful for officials of the city or of the water department to disregard or fail to enforce the provisions of this article in their administration of the
same. (Ord. Code § 3534)
25-2: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION; AUTHORITY TO ORDER REPAIR OF DEFECTS:
The city or its authorized representative shall have authority to enter any premises at any reasonable hour for the purpose of inspecting any equipment
that may be installed on such premises, when there is reason to believe such installation of equipment is such as to be a hazard to the water system or
any portion thereof. The city shall have the authority to order the correction of any faulty installation, or to order the owner or consumer to install at his own
expense, any fixture or apparatus that may be necessary to protect the water system from damage, and if necessary, may shut off the water from that
connection until the service shall be made safe. (Ord. 1537 § B76, 8-6-1996)
25-3: UNAUTHORIZED INTERFERENCE WITH WATER SYSTEM GENERALLY:
No person, except the public works director or designee, or someone authorized by him, shall tap the mains or pipes of the city water system, or in any
way interfere with the works or service of such system, nor shall anyone without authority from the public works director, or designee, turn on or shut off
water to or from any building or premises connected with such system, except by the use of a stop valve located on their own premises. No person shall
without the permission of the public works director or designee enter into any building or enclosure, climb up any ladder or onto any tower or reservoir, or
touch any machinery, materials, or tools, change any meter gauge or register, or molest in any way any of the property of the city water system. (Ord. 1537
§ B77, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-4: RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE FOR REPAIRS:
The city reserves the right to shut off the water at any time for the purpose of making repairs or making extensions to the system or for any other purpose
and will not be responsible for any damage resulting from the same. (Ord. Code § 3554)
Division 2. Installation Of Service
25-6: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE GENERALLY; CONNECTION CHARGES:
Before water shall be supplied to any premises, the consumer or owner shall file a written application with the department of community development and
services. The public works director or designee, as a condition precedent to the granting of such application and furnishing any water to such owner or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 593/636
consumer, is authorized to and shall require payment in advance therefor at rates as fixed by resolution of the city council.
On payment of the proper service charge, as above specified, the public works director, or designee, shall make connection by installing a water meter of
the designated size, and the consumer, at his own cost, shall extend the pipe therefrom to his property. The city shall be required to make service
connections only where there is a water main passing along the street or alley adjoining the applicant's property.
Nothing in this section shall obligate the city to install a meter of larger size than two inches (2"); but a meter of larger size with service enlargement may
be installed by special agreement at actual cost to the consumer, including cost of meter. (Ord. 1537 § B79, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-7: APPLICATION FOR SERVICE FOR FIRE PROTECTION:
Whenever water service, exclusively for fire protection, is requested by a consumer or owner and the service pipe is in excess of two and one-half inches
(21/2") in diameter, the city shall install such service to the property line on payment by the applicant of the cost thereof, and no water meter shall be
installed unless the service line shall contain a suitable valve for controlling the water supply to the premises. No charge is to be made for water consumed
in the event of fire or water used for testing fire equipment. Periodically the fire department shall inspect the service and satisfy themselves that no water is
being used through such service except for fire purposes or in testing fire equipment on the premises. (Ord. 1537 § B80, 8-6-1996)
25-8: GUARANTEE OF PAYMENT OF WATER BILLS BY PROPERTY OWNERS; AUTHORIZED GENERALLY; LIEN:
The owners of any property where water is furnished by the city may assume responsibility for the payment of such water by filing with the water
department a written acceptance of such responsibility in a form approved by the city attorney, guaranteeing payment of all water bills accruing against
such property or utilized by consumers on such property. The writing shall provide that unpaid water bills may be a lien on said property and the amount of
said unpaid water bill may be added to the tax statement for said real property and collected in the same manner as real property taxes. (Ord. Code
§ 3543; Ord. 845 § A, 11-16-1965)
25-9: GUARANTEE OF PAYMENT OF WATER BILLS BY PROPERTY OWNERS; REQUIRED WHEN MULTIPLE USERS
OCCUPY PREMISES UNDER SINGLE OWNERSHIP:
Where there is more than one consumer occupying premises held under the same ownership, each owner shall file with the finance department a written
acceptance of responsibility in the same form as provided for in section 25-8 of this article for payment of all water bills accruing against such property or
utilized by consumers on such property and guaranteeing payment of said water bills.
In the event of a refusal by an owner to do so, the city shall after thirty (30) days' notice to the consumer so served, and to the owner of such premises, or
the person in charge thereof, cut off the water from such premises until an independent service is provided from the curb line to each independent
consumer for which the owner has not assumed such responsibility. (Ord. 1537 § B81, 8-6-1996)
25-10: DEPOSIT; REQUIRED WHEN PROPERTY OWNER DOES NOT GUARANTEE PAYMENT OF BILL:
In the event of the refusal of the property owner to become responsible for utility bills as set forth in section 25-8 of this article, the city shall require a cash
deposit to be made with the department of finance by the consumer or the owner as follows:
A. In the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) before beginning water service.
B. In the amount of five dollars ($5.00) before beginning refuse removal service only.
C. In the amount of five dollars ($5.00) before beginning sewer rental service only.
D. In the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) before beginning refuse removal service and sewer rental service only.
E. In the amount of twenty dollars ($20.00) before beginning water service, refuse removal service, and sewer rental service.
F. In no case shall the combined deposits exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. Code § 3545; Ord. 704 § 2; Ord. 845 § C, 11-16-1965; Ord. 925 § A, 10-1-
1968)
25-11: DEPOSIT; REFUND:
Deposits made to secure payment of utility bills shall be returned to the person making the deposit under the following conditions:
A. When change of ownership or occupancy shall relieve such person from liability for the utility services, provided that all charges against such services
shall have been paid.
B. When, in the opinion of the administrative services director or designee, the person has established a good payment record by paying all utility bills
without tardiness or penalty for a minimum of one year.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 594/636
No charge shall be made for beginning or terminating a utility service when same is made at the request of the owner or consumer, after all charges due
against that service are paid. (Ord. Code § 3546; Ord. 925 § B, 10-1-1968; Ord. 1614 § 1, 9-17-2002)
25-12: LIMITS OF COMMON SERVICE GENERALLY:
No service connection shall be hereafter made for the purpose of supplying through a common service, two (2) or more independent consumers occupying
premises held under the same ownership, unless such houses are on the same lot, or the property is what is known as a court, campground, apartment
house, or building covering more than one lot, and then only provided the owner of such premises shall agree in writing to pay all charges for water service
thereto. (Ord. Code § 3547.1)
25-13: COMMON SERVICE UNAUTHORIZED FOR PREMISES SEPARATELY OWNED:
No water shall be served to two (2) or more parcels of separately owned property through a common service pipe. (Ord. Code § 3547)
25-13.1: CITY NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR WATER DAMAGE:
The city shall not maintain or repair any water pipe from the meter or the premises served, and the city shall in no case be liable for damages occasioned
by water running free from open or faulty fixtures or from broken or damaged pipes. When city personnel are called by the consumer for turnon and/or
turnoff service, the consumer shall pay the city the actual cost of time spent for such service performed as adopted by resolution of the council. (Ord. 1228
§ A, 2-17-1981)
25-13.2: CONSUMER RESPONSIBLE FOR EQUIPMENT RECEIVING WATER:
The consumer, at his own expense, shall furnish, install, and keep in repair, free from leakage and in safe condition, all service pipes, fixtures, stopcocks,
and other apparatus and appliances, which may be required for receiving and controlling water. The city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage
caused by the improper installation of such apparatus and appliances, negligence, want of proper care, or wrongful act of the consumer, or any member of
his family, or any person in his employ. (Ord. 1228 § B, 2-17-1981)
Division 3. Water Service Rates
25-14: USE OF METER REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
The service of all water to consumers shall be by measurement through a meter and at rates prescribed in this article; provided, however, that for service
during construction or other temporary purposes, or where meter service may for any reason be impracticable, a flat rate price to be agreed upon between
the public works director or designee and purchaser may be used instead of the meter service. (Ord. 1537 § B82, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-15: RATES GENERALLY:
The regular water rates to be charged by the city for its water and to be collected monthly by the finance department for the use and benefit of the city shall
be fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1537 § B83, 8-6-1996)
25-16: WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY; RATE:
Except as provided by section 25-16.2 of this article pertaining to water connections outside city limits, the city council may, at its option and sole
discretion, elect to make available water services to inhabitants outside the boundaries of the city and under such rules and regulations as the city council
may, at its discretion, determine, and discontinue such service at its option and election; and at such rates and under such conditions as the city council
may elect; provided, however, that water consumers receiving such service outside of the city shall be required to pay for such service at a service rate
fixed and established for such consumers. (Ord. 1537 § B84, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1564 § 1, 12-1-1998)
25-16.1: RATES FOR INDEPENDENT WATER COMPANIES:
The city council may, by resolution, establish rates of independent water companies owned by the city of Porterville. For the purpose of this section, an
"independent water company" is one that is not connected to the water distribution operated by said city within its city limits. (Ord. 963 § A, 12-4-1969)
25-16.2: APPROVAL FOR WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The city council shall have authority for approval of requests for water service outside city limits, if applicant meets all other conditions as required by this
code and the annexation and municipal services policy, and all other pertinent regulations. Consideration of said request shall be in conjunction with
approval of required city permits, Tulare LAFCo extraterritorial service agreement, and payment of applicable fees. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-17: RESALE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 595/636
It is hereby made unlawful for any consumer or purchaser of city water to furnish or resell water from his service to any other person or to any premises
not his own for remuneration without the approval of the city. (Ord. 1537 § B85, 8-6-1996)
25-18: CITY COLLECTOR TO COLLECT WATER RATES; RECORDS; DISPOSITION OF REVENUES:
It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to collect all water rates and receipts therefor, keeping an accurate record of such collections, and depositing such
collections daily for the benefit of the city. (Ord. 1537 § B86, 8-6-1996)
25-19: DUE DATE OF PAYMENTS; PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT PAYMENT:
All utility bills shall be delinquent if they remain unpaid at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the thirtieth day after their billing date and a charge of ten percent
(10%) as a penalty for said delinquency shall be made and added to the amount of and become a part of said delinquent utility bill, and the service for all
utility bills which shall remain unpaid at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the forty fifth day after their billing date shall be subject to discontinuance. (Ord. Code
§ 3526; Ord. 846 § A, 11-16-1965; Ord. 964 § A, 1-1-1970; Ord. 1537 § B87, 8-6-1996)
25-20: METHOD OF DELIVERY OF BILLS:
Rendering bills for water service, or the service, or the service of notice of delinquency, or any other notice or communication regarding such service under
the provisions of this chapter may be made by personal delivery to the party to be served, or by mail deposited to the party to be served, or by mail
deposited in the United States post office at Porterville, postage prepaid, addressed to such party at his last known address.
Service by mail shall be complete upon the expiration of two (2) days after the deposit of such mail in the post office as aforesaid. Failure of the addressee
to receive such bills or notices shall not excuse him from his obligation as set forth by this chapter. (Ord. Code § 3527)
25-21: SHUTOFF FOR NONPAYMENT; ADDITIONAL PAYMENT TO RECONNECT; DEPOSIT REQUIRED FOR CONSUMERS:
Any delinquent water rate bills which remain unpaid at five o'clock (5:00) P.M. on the forty fifth day after the billing date, shall be listed by the finance
department for shutoff and this shutoff list shall be executed the following working day. The administrative services director, or designee, may proceed to
make a personal demand for payment on the delinquent consumer or person responsible for the payment of the bill if he can be conveniently located;
provided, that the failure to make this personal demand shall in no case invalidate the provisions of this article. If the consumer or responsible person does
not, at this time, make immediate payment, the administrative services director, or his designee, shall shut off the water, and the water so shut off shall not
be turned on until the amount of the delinquent bill, with the accrued penalties and with an additional sum as fixed by resolution of the city council for
turning on and off the service, shall be paid to the finance department.
A consumer's water service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of a bill for water service rendered, provided, that the bill has not been paid by the
forty fifth day after the billing date. Such bill shall be deemed presented to the consumer when delivered to him personally, when left at the property
served, or at his place of business, or when deposited in the United States post office at Porterville, postage prepaid, addressed to the consumer's last
known address.
A consumer who has failed to pay his water bills in accordance with the provisions of this article and whose service has been discontinued therefor, shall
be required to pay all accrued bills and penalties and may be required to reestablish his credit by making a cash deposit with the city finance department
not to exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). (Ord. 1537 § B88, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 1, 9-17-2002)
25-22: DISCONNECTION AT NEW LOCATION FOR NONPAYMENT AT OLD LOCATION:
A consumer's water service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of a bill for water service of the same class rendered to him at a previous location by
the city; provided, that such bill is not paid within thirty (30) days after presentation at the new location. (Ord. Code § 3528.1)
25-23: WRITTEN DEMAND FOR CHANGE IN SERVICE REQUIRED:
The consumer or owner shall notify the city finance department in writing of any changes in the service desired, or if they want the water turned off or on.
In cases of the failure of the owner or consumer to give such notice in writing, the full amount of water consumed, as shown by the meter shall be charged,
or in case no consumption is shown by the meter or the consumption shall be less than one thousand (1,000) cubic feet, the monthly minimum water rate
as specified in this division shall be charged and collected monthly. (Ord. 1537 § B89, 8-6-1996)
25-24: COLLECTION OF UNPAID WATER BILL BY SUIT:
The city may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction, any person from whom any unpaid bill for water service is delinquent, for the amount of such
delinquent bill for water service together with all penalties and reasonable costs of collection. (Ord. Code § 3530)
Division 4. Meters, Stopcocks And Hydrants
25-25: TWO STOPCOCKS TO BE PLACED IN EACH CONNECTION:
There shall be a stopcock in every connection at a point designated by the city engineer. Such stopcock and the box containing the same shall be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 596/636
furnished by the city and shall be for its exclusive use and under its exclusive control. The city shall not be responsible for damage to any building or its
contents from any break beyond the service box and the water consumers are hereby required for their own protection, to provide, at their own expense,
another stopcock or valve to be placed at the first suitable joint outside the meter box beyond the stop or service of the city. (Ord. 1537 § B90, 8-6-1996)
25-26: TESTING AND ADJUSTMENTS TO METERS:
Any consumer may demand that the meter through which water is being furnished, be examined and tested by the water division for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not it is correctly registering the amount of water which is delivered through it. Such demand shall be in writing, filed with the water
division and shall be accompanied by a fee which shall be fixed by a resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of such written demand and the fee, it shall
be the duty of the water division to cause the meter to be examined and tested, and for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not it is correctly registering
the water being delivered through it. If on such examination and test, the meter shall be found to register over three percent (3%) more water than actually
passes through it, another meter shall be substituted therefor, at no cost to the consumer, and the water bill for the current period adjusted in such manner
as the administrative services director, or designee, may deem fair and just. If the meter be found on test to register not over three percent (3%) of the
actual water passing therethrough, the water bills shall be paid as rendered. (Ord. 1537 § B91, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 1, 9-17-2002)
25-27: OBSTRUCTION OF STOPCOCKS AND HYDRANTS GENERALLY:
No person shall place on or about any hydrant or stopcock connecting with the pipes of the waterworks of the city any building material or other obstruction
as to prevent the free access to the same. (Ord. Code § 3553)
Division 5. Extension Of Water Mains Generally
25-28: SIZE AND SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY:
A. Water Mains: All city water mains hereafter installed shall have a minimum inside diameter of six inches (6") and shall be of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) or
ductile iron, American Water Works Association, classifications or specifications, class 150 or equal. Effective July 1, 1986, asbestos cement pipe will
no longer be considered acceptable.
B. Fittings And Valves: All fittings and valves shall be American Water Works Association specifications, class 150 ductile iron or equal. All fire hydrants
shall be American Water Works Association specifications and type to be installed shall be approved by the city engineer and the chief of the fire
department. (Ord. 623 § 1; Ord. 1352 § A, 6-3-1986)
25-29: ESTIMATE OF COST; APPLICATION ACCOMPANIED BY DEPOSIT OF AMOUNT OF ESTIMATE:
Any application for the extension or installation of water mains shall be accompanied by a deposit of money equal to the estimate of the public works
director or designee for the cost of actual demand size, plus fittings, valves and fire hydrants. Should the actual cost for the installation of the water line be
less than the estimate, the applicant will be refunded the difference between the actual cost and the estimated cost. Should the actual cost be greater than
the estimate, the applicant must deposit the additional money between the actual cost and the estimated cost and no water service shall be furnished
through or by means of the installed line until the additional money has been deposited.
The city council hereby declares it to be its intention that the full cost and expense of actual demand size together with all fittings, valves and fire hydrants
be paid by and borne by the applicant. (Ord. 623 § 2; Ord. 1438, 8-21-1990; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-30: DEVELOPER CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES:
Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility described in a resolution adopted
pursuant to this section, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the facilities network, a reimbursement
agreement with the developer shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not exceed the actual cost of the construction of the facility by the
developer. In the event the actual construction cost of the facility exceeds the fee required of the development project, the city shall enter into a
reimbursement agreement for the cost in excess of the fee required for the project, to be paid from the special account established pursuant to this
section. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
25-31: COST TO INCLUDE COST OF EXCAVATION, BACKFILL, FITTINGS, ETC.:
The cost of water mains shall include the cost of all pipes, excavations, backfill, replacement of pavement, block work, safety precautions, valve
connections, fittings and fire hydrants cost together with all pipe valve fittings in connection therewith. (Ord. 623 § 4)
25-32: MAINS, FITTINGS, ETC., TO REMAIN PROPERTY OF CITY:
All city mains, valves, fittings and fire hydrants constructed or installed in connection with the aforesaid plan shall be and remain the exclusive property of
the city. (Ord. 623 § 5)
25-32.1: CONNECTION NOT MADE UNTIL PRORATED CHARGE PAID:
In no event shall any owner of property benefited by the water line constructed pursuant to this division, or other person in possession or control of such
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 597/636
real property, be permitted to connect thereto without first paying, or by written agreement arranging to pay, the prorated charges placed against the
property by the city manager. The council may, by resolution, establish provisions whereby property owners may pay water connection fees in installments
over a period of time not to exceed three (3) years. (Ord. 901 § B, 4-16-1968)
25-32.2: CONSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS AND FINANCING THEREOF:
A. The city may install fire hydrants into all areas within the city and areas subsequently annexed into the city which are not yet served by same as rapidly
as funds are available and budgeted therefor by the city council.
B. In the event that a private individual installs fire hydrants in advance of the time the city is able to do so, the city may enter into an agreement with such
individual under the terms of which the city will reimburse him for that portion of the total cost of the fire hydrant installation over and above the cost
applicable to his premises; provided, however, that the source of funds for such reimbursement shall be the fire hydrant installation charges collected
from other users of the hydrant and provided that such an agreement shall terminate within ten (10) years from the date thereof; and, provided further,
that the cost returned shall not exceed the actual cost to the individual nor the then current costs for similar quantities of work performed by the city,
whichever is smaller. (Ord. 1135 § C, 3-21-1978)
25-32.3: ACREAGE FEE:
A. Purpose: In order to implement the goals and objectives of the water system master plan of the city, and to provide needed water facilities for new
development in the planning area, certain public water facilities must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development impact fee is
needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development's fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In
establishing the fee described in the following subsections, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to
Government Code section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element
of the general plan.
B. Established: An acreage fee is hereby established upon issuance of certificate of occupancy for development in the city, or upon connection to the city
water system to pay for water system improvements. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fee, describe the
benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed, describe the estimated cost of
these facilities, describe the reasonable relationships between this fee and the various types of new development and set forth time for payment. As
described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer upon issuance of certificate of occupancy or connection to the
water system. On an annual basis, this fee shall be adjusted by the public works director department in accordance with the "Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index" publication.
C. Limited Use Of Fees: The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account and such revenues, along with any
interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:
1. Pay for the city's future construction of water facilities described in the resolution enacted with this section, or to reimburse the city for those
described or listed facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or
2. Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted as set forth below, to install such listed facilities which are oversized with supplemental
size, length, or capacity. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
25-32.4: CROSS CONNECTIONS:
No water service connection shall be installed or maintained on the premises of any consumer unless the city water supply is protected from contamination
in accordance with the city council resolution on standards for backflow prevention. (Ord. 1237 § A, 5-19-1981)
Division 6. Water Conservation And Efficiency
25-32A.1: PURPOSE:
A. The city of Porterville has found:
1. That the waters of the Tule Subbasin are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;
2. That the continuation of Porterville's economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;
3. That it is the policy of the city of Porterville to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;
4. That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in Porterville by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the
environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;
5. That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can, and should be, water efficient; and
6. That section 2 of article X of the California constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the
beneficial use to be served and the right does not, and shall not, extend to waste or unreasonable method of use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 598/636
B. Consistent with these legislative findings, the purpose of this division is to:
1. Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;
2. Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated
projects through a watershed approach that requires cross sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many
benefits possible;
3. Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;
4. Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest
practical amount; and
5. Establish economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a tiered rate structure.
C. Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained with the watershed based approach can improve California's and
Porterville's environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals. Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient
in the face of climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of this division, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by:
1. Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting
productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade, habitat and aesthetic benefits;
2. Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting
climate appropriate shade trees in urban areas;
3. Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and gray water wherever possible and selecting climate appropriate plants that need minimal
supplemental water after establishment;
4. Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and
using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion;
5. Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants, climate adapted nonnatives and avoiding invasive plants; and
6. Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.2: APPLICABILITY:
A. This division shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:
1. New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or
landscape permit, plan check or design review;
2. Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring
a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;
3. Existing landscapes limited to sections 25-32A.20 and 25-32A.21 of this article; and
4. Cemeteries; recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to sections 25-
32A.6, 25-32A.13 and 25-32A.14 of this article; and existing cemeteries are limited to sections 25-32A.20 and 25-32A.21 of this article; and
5. All new commercial and/or industrial developments requiring building permits where the landscape area will be modified or rehabilitated.
B. Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements
of this division or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in section 25-32A.23 of this article.
C. For projects using treated or untreated gray water or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet of landscape and meets the lot's or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated
or untreated gray water or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to subsection 25-32A.23B5 of this article.
D. This division does not apply to:
1. Registered local, state or federal historical sites;
2. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;
3. Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or
4. Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.
E. This division further applies to all properties within the city limits of the city of Porterville, as well as any property beyond the limits of the city of
Porterville but that receives municipal water service from the city. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.3: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in this division have the meaning set forth below:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 599/636
APPLIED WATER: The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.
AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: An automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic
irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather based) or soil moisture data.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from
the irrigation system.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: The document required under section 25-32A.11 of this article.
CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade
organization or other program such as the U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation
Association's certified irrigation designer program.
CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR: A person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a
professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program
and Irrigation Association's certified landscape irrigation auditor program.
CHECK VALVE OR ANTIDRAIN VALVE: A valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to
prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS: Community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil
Code section 1351.
COMPOST: The safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.
CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62): The number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.
DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY: The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.
DRIP IRRIGATION: Any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume
irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF): A factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas that, when applied to reference
evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two (2) major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the
landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated
landscapes is 0.8.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT: A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION OR USABLE RAINFALL (Eppt): The portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.
EMITTER: A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.
ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE: The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are
established after one or two (2) years of growth.
ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS: The first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two (2) years if irrigation will be
terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may
need three (3) to five (5) years for establishment.
ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU): The total water used for the landscape as described in section 25-32A.6 of this article.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE: The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.
FLOW RATE: The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet
per second.
FLOW SENSOR: An in-line device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow
sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This
combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.
FRIABLE: A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root
structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.
FUEL MODIFICATION PLAN GUIDELINE: Guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building
structures in a fire hazard severity zone.
GRAY WATER: Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or
unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Gray water"
includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not
include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health And Safety Code section 17922.12.
HARDSCAPES: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious).
HYDROZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES: Species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 600/636
economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the
California invasive plant inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.
IRRIGATION AUDIT: An in depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation
audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff
that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's
landscape irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S. environmental protection agency "WaterSense" labeled auditing program.
IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (IE): The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is
derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this
division are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.
IRRIGATION SURVEY: An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to:
inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.
IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS: A review of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business And Professions Code,
section 5615.
LANDSCAPE AREA: All the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance
calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone
walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native
vegetation).
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of
landscape systems.
LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The documents required under section 25-32A.5 of this article.
LANDSCAPE PROJECT: Total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of this division, meeting requirements under
section 25-32A.2 of this article.
LANDSCAPE WATER METER: An in-line device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is
connected to a totalizer to record water use.
LATERAL LINE: The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.
LOCAL AGENCY: The city of Porterville. The city of Porterville is responsible for the enforcement of this division including, but not limited to, approval of a
permit and plan check or design review of a project.
LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR: Any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.
LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION: The application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such
as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of
plants.
MAIN LINE: The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.
MASTER SHUTOFF VALVE: An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve
is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.
MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA): The upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in section
25-32A.6 of this article. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The
estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently
and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an
ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo)(0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].
MEDIAN: An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.
MICROCLIMATE: The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun
exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.
MINED LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS: Any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the surface mining and
reclamation act of 1975.
MULCH: Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and/or decomposed granite left
loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
soil erosion.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of this division, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or
greenbelt without an associated building.
NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or
public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.
OPERATING PRESSURE: The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.
OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS: Systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).
OVERSPRAY: The irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 601/636
PERMIT: An authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.
PERVIOUS: Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.
PLANT FACTOR OR PLANT WATER USE FACTOR: A factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of
this division, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor
range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this division are
derived from the publication "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from
academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California department of water resources (DWR).
PROJECT APPLICANT: The individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under section 25-32A.5 of this article to request a
permit, plan check, or design review from the local agency. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.
RAIN SENSOR OR RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE: A component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.
RECORD DRAWING OR AS BUILTS: A set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are
usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.
RECREATIONAL AREA: Areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports
fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.
RECYCLED WATER, RECLAIMED WATER, OR TREATED SEWAGE EFFLUENT WATER: Treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for
nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION OR ETo: A standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is
expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in section 25-32A.6 of this article, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field
of four (4) to seven inch (7") tall, cool season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum
applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.
REGIONAL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE: A local ordinance adopted by two (2) or more local agencies, water suppliers and other
stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to
provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to.
REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE: Any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of section 25-
32A.2 of this article, and the modified landscape area is equal to, or greater than, two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes surrounding single- or multi-family homes.
RUNOFF: Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result
from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE OR SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR: A device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also
suspend or initiate an irrigation event.
SOIL TEXTURE: The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.
SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA): An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or
water features using recycled water.
SPRINKLER HEAD: A device which delivers water through a nozzle.
STATIC WATER PRESSURE: The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.
STATION: An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.
SUBMETER: A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.
SWING JOINT: An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement
in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.
TURF: A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool season
grasses. Bermuda grass, kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine grass, zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm season grasses.
VALVE: A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
WUCOLS: The "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species" published by the University Of California cooperative extension, and the department of
water resources, 2014.
WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES: A plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.
WATER FEATURE: A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls,
fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water
use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not
irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.
WATERING WINDOW: The time of day irrigation is allowed. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.4: COMPLIANCE WITH LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 602/636
A. Prior to construction, the zoning administrator or his designee shall:
1. Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks, or design reviews;
2. Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant;
3. Approve or deny the landscape documentation package;
4. Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and
5. Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, retain a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet for use in reporting as may be
required.
B. Prior to construction, the project applicant shall:
1. Submit a landscape documentation package to the city prior to, or as a part of, the building permit submittal package.
C. Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the zoning administrator, the project applicant shall:
1. Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; and
2. Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner
or his/her designee. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.5: ELEMENTS OF THE LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE:
A. The landscape documentation package shall include the following six (6) elements:
1. Project information:
a. Date;
b. Project applicant;
c. Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
d. Total landscape area (square feet);
e. Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner installed);
f. Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the service is other than city of Porterville;
g. Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;
h. Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner;
i. Applicant signature and date with statement,
I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package.
2. Water efficient landscape worksheet:
a. Water budget calculations:
(1) Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA);
(2) Estimated total water use (ETWU).
3. Soil management report;
4. Landscape design plan;
5. Irrigation design plan; and
6. Grading design plan. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.6: WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE WORKSHEET:
A. A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation
efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the
landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The
ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based
on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated
total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the
MAWA.
1. In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values listed below, as
excerpted from the reference evapotranspiration table in appendix A of the state model water efficiency landscape ordinance, 2015.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 603/636
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Annual ETo
Porterville 1.2 1.8 3.4 4.7 6.6 7.7 8.5 7.3 5.3 3.4 1.4 0.7 52.0
B. Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:
1. The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved
by the California department of water resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water
use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.
2. All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use
hydrozone.
3. All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in the water efficient landscape worksheet.
4. ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.7: SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT:
A. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her
designee, as follows:
1. Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.
a. Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended
plants.
b. The soil analysis shall include:
(1) Soil texture;
(2) Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;
(3) pH;
(4) Total soluble salts;
(5) Sodium;
(6) Percent organic matter; and
(7) Recommendations.
c. In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately
fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven (7) lots.
2. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following:
a. If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the zoning administrator as part of the landscape
documentation package; or
b. If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the zoning administrator as part of the certificate of completion.
3. The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design
plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.
4. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the
zoning administrator with certificate of completion. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.8: LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN:
A. For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan
meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package:
1. Plant Material:
a. Any plant may be selected for the landscape providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied
water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:
(1) Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;
(2) Selection of water conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;
(3) Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;
(4) Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting
area; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 604/636
(5) Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists.
b. Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in
subsection 25-32A.9A2d of this article.
c. Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the
project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:
(1) Use the sunset western climate zone system which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of
continental and marine influence on local climate;
(2) Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure
(e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and
(3) Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.
d. Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and
where twenty five percent (25%) means one foot (1') of vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length (rise divided by run x
100 = slope percent).
e. High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.
f. The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California invasive plant council, is strongly discouraged.
g. The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which includes community apartment projects, condominiums, planned
developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants as
a group.
h. Natural turf is prohibited in commercial and industrial zone districts. However, when the city council finds that a logical and substantiated need
exists for natural turf, e.g., for uses such as daycare centers or commercial recreation facilities, a conditional use permit may be approved with
conditions specifying the reason natural grass is deemed necessary by the applicant, the allowed area of turf, and that all other water conservation
requirements of this code are applied, regardless of the total landscape area.
i. Warm season grasses are the only approved natural turf for new installations.
2. Water Features:
a. Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.
b. Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.
c. Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.
d. Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
3. Soil Preparation, Mulch And Amendments:
a. Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting
holes need meet this requirement.
b. Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see
section 25-32A.7 of this article).
c. For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall
be incorporated to a depth of six inches (6") into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six inches (6") of soil are
exempt from adding compost and tilling.
d. A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five
percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.
e. Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.
f. The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.
g. Organic mulch materials made from recycled or postconsumer products shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products
unless the recycled postconsumer organic products are not locally available.
B. The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:
1. Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;
2. Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low
water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;
3. Identify recreational areas;
4. Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;
5. Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;
6. Identify type of mulch and application depth;
7. Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 605/636
8. Identify type and surface area of water features;
9. Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);
10. Identify location, installation details, and twenty four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management
practices that encourage on site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the city of Porterville or regional water quality
control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the
landscape design plan and examples are provided in section 25-32A.18 of this article.
11. Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in section 25-32A.18 of this article and their twenty four (24) hour
retention or infiltration capacity;
12. Identify any applicable gray water discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;
13. Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape
design plan"; and
14. Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See
sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business And Professions Code, section 832.27
of title 16 of the California code of regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.9: IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN:
A. This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment
period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers'
recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and
maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.
1. System:
a. Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated
landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies)
and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:
(1) A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the city of Porterville; or
(2) A privately owned meter or submeter.
b. Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing nonvolatile memory shall be required for
irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
c. If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating
device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for
optimal performance.
(1) If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure regulating devices such as in-line
pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.
(2) Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These
pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the
measurements shall be conducted at installation.
d. Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall
be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or
during rain.
e. Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the
water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.
f. Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall
refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.
g. Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all nonresidential landscapes and
residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.
h. Master shutoff valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers
that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shutdown features.
i. The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto
nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
j. Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.
k. The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.
l. The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in section 25-32A.6 of this
article regarding the maximum applied water allowance.
m. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society Of
Agricultural And Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "landscape irrigation sprinkler and emitter standard".
All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in
ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 606/636
n. Through the project review process, or, if an applicable project is not subject to project review, during the building permit review process, the public
works director will provide information regarding peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact
the effectiveness of the irrigation system.
o. In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.
p. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's
recommendations.
q. Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity
using the manufacturer's recommendations.
r. Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic
areas of turf grass.
s. Check valves or antidrain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.
t. Areas less than ten feet (10') in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or
overspray.
u. Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty four inches (24") of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from
nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The
surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:
(1) The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or
(2) The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or
(3) The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates
strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection A1i of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed
during the irrigation audit.
v. Slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per
hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape
documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the
irrigation audit.
2. Hydrozone:
a. Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.
b. Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.
c. Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, ground covers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The
mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.
d. Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:
(1) The plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or
(2) The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.
e. Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.
f. On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the
irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the water efficient
landscape worksheet. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.
B. The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:
1. Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
2. Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture
sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;
3. Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;
4. Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;
5. Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in section 25-32A.16 of this article;
6. The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation
design plan"; and
7. The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design
an irrigation system. (See sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business And
Professions Code, section 832.27 of title 16 of the California code of regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 1830,
11-17-2015)
25-32A.10: GRADING DESIGN PLAN:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 607/636
A. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be
submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other building permits
satisfies this requirement.
1. The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:
a. Height of graded slopes;
b. Drainage patterns;
c. Pad elevations;
d. Finish grade; and
e. Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
2. To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:
a. Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain onto nonpermeable hardscapes;
b. Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and
c. Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
3. The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for
the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-
2015)
25-32A.11: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
A. The certificate of completion shall include the following six (6) elements:
1. Project information sheet that contains:
a. Date;
b. Project name;
c. Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;
d. Project address and location;
e. Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;
2. Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the
landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package;
a. Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as built" or record drawings shall be included with the
certification;
b. A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes;
3. Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see section 25-32A.12 of this article);
4. Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see section 25-32A.13 of this article);
5. Irrigation audit report (see section 25-32A.14 of this article); and
6. Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report
recommendations (see section 25-32A.7 of this article).
B. The project applicant shall:
1. Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city of Porterville for review; and
2. Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the property owner or his or her designee.
C. The city of Porterville shall:
1. Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant; and
2. Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city of Porterville shall provide information to the project
applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.12: IRRIGATION SCHEDULING:
A. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to
maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 608/636
1. Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.
2. Irrigation shall be scheduled in a manner consistent with the current phase of the city's water conservation plan.
3. For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current
reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to
maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference
evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.
4. Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:
a. The plant establishment period;
b. The established landscape; and
c. Temporarily irrigated areas.
5. Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:
a. Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);
b. Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);
c. Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;
d. Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;
e. Application rate setting;
f. Root depth setting;
g. Plant type setting;
h. Soil type;
i. Slope factor setting;
j. Shade factor setting; and
k. Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.13: LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE SCHEDULE:
A. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.
B. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its
components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; top dressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas,
and removing obstructions to emission devices.
C. Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.
D. A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities. (Ord.
1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.14: IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY, AND IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS:
A. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the
person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.
B. In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven (7) lots or
approximately fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this requirement.
C. For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 3, 2015, as described in section 25-32A.2 of this article:
1. The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city of Porterville that may include, but is not
limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and
preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and
any other factors necessary for accurate programming; and
2. The city of Porterville shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation
surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.15: IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 609/636
A. For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for
drip system devices. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.16: RECYCLED WATER:
A. The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water.
B. All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.
C. Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special
landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.17: GRAY WATER SYSTEMS:
A. Gray water systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on site landscape irrigation. All gray water systems shall conform
to the California plumbing code (title 24, part 5, chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to subsection 25-32A.2C of this article
for the applicability of this division to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with the estimated total water use met
entirely by gray water. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.18: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND RAINWATER RETENTION:
A. Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing
stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on site rainwater retention and
infiltration are encouraged.
B. Project applicants shall refer to the city of Porterville and regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical
requirements.
C. All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to subsection 25-32A.8A3 of this article.
D. It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious
surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either:
1. The 1-inch, 24-hour rain event, or
2. The eighty fifth percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or
3. Additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation.
E. It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and
use:
1. Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.
2. Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.
3. Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
4. Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.
5. Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.
6. Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.
7. Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.19: PUBLIC EDUCATION:
A. Publications: Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design,
installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.
1. The city of Porterville shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new single-family residential homes regarding the design,
installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget.
B. Model Homes: All model homes shall be landscaped and use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes
described in this division.
1. Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment,
and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per this
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 610/636
division; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using
native plants, gray water systems, and rainwater catchment systems.
2. Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.20: IRRIGATION AUDIT, IRRIGATION SURVEY, AND IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS, EXISTING:
A. This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 3, 2015, and are over one acre in size.
1. For all landscapes in this subsection A that have a water meter, the city of Porterville shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited
to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce
landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water
allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8)(ETo)(LA)(0.62).
2. For all landscapes in this subsection A that do not have a meter, the city of Porterville shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited
to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.
B. All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.21: WATER WASTE PREVENTION:
A. The city of Porterville shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due
to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking
lots, or structures.
B. Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:
1. The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or
2. The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.22: EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION:
A. The city of Porterville will consider effective precipitation (25 percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and will use the following equation to
calculate maximum applied water allowance:
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt)(0.62)[(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas.
MAWA = (ETo - Eppt)(0.62)[(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for nonresidential areas.
(Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.23: PRESCRIPTIVE COMPLIANCE OPTION:
A. Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the prescriptive compliance
option as an alternative to the other performance requirements of this division.
B. Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:
1. Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements:
a. Date;
b. Project applicant;
c. Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));
d. Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material;
e. Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner installed);
f. Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;
g. Contact information for the project applicant and property owner;
h. Applicant signature and date with statement,
I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the MWELO.
2. Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet to a depth of six inches (6") into landscape area
(unless contraindicated by a soil test).
3. Plant material shall comply with all of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 611/636
a. For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for
seventy five percent (75%) of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water. For nonresidential areas, install climate adapted
plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for one hundred percent (100%) of the plant area
excluding edibles and areas using recycled water;
b. A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting
ground covers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.
4. Turf shall comply with all of the following:
a. Turf shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall be no turf in nonresidential areas;
b. Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot (1') vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length;
c. Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten feet (10') wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles.
Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by subsurface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.
5. Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:
a. Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data.
b. Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.
c. Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturer's
recommended pressure range.
d. Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the
water supply.
e. All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, "landscape irrigation sprinkler and
emitter standard". All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the
protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
C. At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation,
irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.24: PENALTIES:
A. Penalties for violation of this division will be imposed as prescribed in chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.25: REPORTING:
A. The city of Porterville will report on implementation and enforcement of this division to the department of water resources on an annual basis, not later
than January 31 of each year.
B. The report shall include the following information:
1. The number and types of projects subject to the ordinance during the specified reporting period.
2. The total area (in square feet or acres) subject to the ordinance over the reporting period, if available.
3. The number of new housing starts, new commercial projects, and landscape retrofits during the reporting period.
4. The procedure for review of projects subject to the ordinance.
5. Actions taken to verify compliance. If a plan check was performed, note by which entity. If a site inspection was performed, note by which entity. If a
postinstallation audit was required, note by whom.
6. Describe enforcement measures.
7. Explain challenges to implementing and enforcing the ordinance.
8. Describe educational and other needs to properly apply the ordinance. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.26: WASTEFUL USE OF WATER PROHIBITED:
In addition to all protocols within this division adopted with the intent to increase efficient outdoor water use, property owners and residents shall use
reasonable care to prevent the waste of water. Water shall not be allowed to run or waste from a property onto streets or highways, and shall not be used
to wash sidewalks, building entrances or lobbies or other properties to such excess that water shall flow in street gutters beyond the frontage of the
properties occupied by them. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
25-32A.27: CITY WATER CONSERVATION PLAN:
The city council has adopted by resolution its water conservation plan which sets forth water conservation phases and conservation measures including
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 612/636
mandatory restrictions on water usage by property owners and water consumers. Violation of the measures in effect, currently and as may be amended by
resolution from time to time, pursuant to the applicable phase of the water conservation plan, shall be enforceable as set forth per any applicable remedy
provisions in this code, including, but not limited to, sections 1-9 and 1-10 of this code, and chapter 2, article XIV of this code, and/or this division. The
city's water conservation plan is deemed to be the city's "water shortage contingency plan" as per applicable state law. (Ord. 1830, 11-17-2015)
Chapter Article II
SEWER SYSTEM GENERALLY
Division 1. Generally
25-33: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CONNECTION CHARGE: A general term referring to one or more of the charges hereinafter established and defined, made at the time of connecting onto
the city sewer system.
CONNECTIONS: A privately owned and maintained pipe conveying sewage from a single building or premises into a lateral or other common sewer; and
shall also mean the act of installing and connecting the privately owned pipe onto such sewer.
LATERAL: A common sewer into which two (2) or more connections are made and shall normally, but not exclusively, be considered to be any sewer six
(6) or eight inches (8") in diameter.
SEWAGE: Sanitary wastewater carrying human excrement and like material derived principally from dwelling, business buildings, institutions and welfare
rooms of industrial buildings.
SEWERS: Only those pipes carrying sewage, and shall not include those primarily carrying storm drainage and industrial wastes.
TRUNK: A common sewer larger than a lateral and receiving sewage from several laterals and house connections. (Ord. 680 § 2)
25-34: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION OF SEWER OR CONNECTION TO SEWER SYSTEM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a sewer in a city street, alley or easement, or connect onto the sewer system of the city without first
receiving a permit to do so and complying with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 680 § 1)
25-34.1: CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED:
All new construction, including residential, commercial, and all other development within the city of Porterville shall be connected to a public sanitary
sewer, unless the city council shall determine by resolution that a different method of sewage disposal shall be utilized. (Ord. 1039 § A, 6-5-1973)
25-35: HOUSE CONNECTION INSTALLED AT OWNER'S EXPENSE; TAPPING LINE:
Each parcel of land under separate ownership shall be served through at least one house connection. The owner shall install, or cause to be installed, the
house connection at his own expense and under the supervision and inspection of the city. (Ord. 680 § 3; Ord. 1214 § 1, 9-16-1980)
25-36: SEWER RENTAL CHARGES:
Sewer rental charges for domestic, commercial and industrial use outside of the city are hereby established and at rates fixed by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. Code § 3635; Ord. 919 § A, 7-19-1968; Ord. 929 § A, 11-12-1968; Ord. 954 § A, 9-19-1969; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973)
25-36.1: SERVICE TO INHABITANTS OUTSIDE CITY BOUNDARIES; CHARGES:
Except as provided by section 25-36.2 of this article pertaining to sewer connections outside city limits, the city council may, at its option and sole
discretion, elect to make available sewer services to inhabitants outside the boundaries of the city and under such rules and regulations as the city council
may, at its discretion, determine, and discontinue such service at its option and election. Said service shall be made available only to the owners of the
property to be served. (Ord. 1564 § 2, 12-1-1998)
25-36.2: APPROVAL FOR SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have authority for the administrative approval of requests for sewer service outside city limits, if applicant
meets all other conditions as required by this code and the annexation policy manual and all other pertinent regulations.
Consideration of said request shall be in conjunction with approval of required city permits and payment of applicable fees. (Ord. 1564 § 2, 12-1-1998)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 613/636
25-37: COLLECTION OF SEWER RENTALS; PENALTIES; DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT;
CHARGES TO BE LIEN:
Charges for sewer rentals shall be included with the water bill and if the charge for sewer rental shall remain unpaid at the due date for the payment of
water bills, there shall be added to the sewer rental charge the same penalties and interest as are required for delinquencies or nonpayment of water bills.
Water services may be discontinued for nonpayment of the charge for sewer rental or sewer rental penalties and interest, and any unpaid charge for sewer
rental or sewer rental penalties or interest may be placed as a lien on the real property involved. (Ord. Code § 3635.1)
25-38: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
All money received from the collection of sewer rental charges together with penalties and interest shall be deposited by the city treasurer who shall
establish and maintain a "sewer rental fund". This fund shall be used for the payment of bond redemption and interest charges for sanitary sewer and
wastewater treatment facilities and for the payment of the cost of land acquisitioned, rights of way, easements, construction, reconstruction, maintenance,
management, operations and repair of the sewerage system, sewage treatment works, sewage disposal system of sewage pumping, treatment and
disposal works; provided, however, that such fund shall not be used for the acquisition or construction of new location sewers or laterals as designated
from interceptor and outfall sewers. (Ord. 1537 § B93, 8-6-1996)
Division 2. Laterals And Trunks
25-39: CONSTRUCTION OF LATERALS GENERALLY AND FINANCING THEREOF:
The city will assist in the design and supervision of lateral construction. The city may construct laterals, and the cost of such construction shall be
recovered from an assessment district formed to purchase such laterals or from the minimum lateral connection charge as provided in section 25-41 of this
article.
In the event that a private individual constructs laterals, and such laterals are later included within the boundaries of an assessment district formed to
finance a sewer collector system, the cost of such lateral construction will be returned to such individual by the district; provided, that the costs returned
shall not exceed the actual costs to the individual nor the district costs for a similar quantity of work, whichever is smaller. In the absence of such district
financing, the city may enter into an agreement with such individual under the terms of which the city will reimburse him for that portion of the cost of the
lines over and above the cost applicable to his premises; provided, that the source of funds for such reimbursement shall be the lateral connection charges
collected from other users of the lines; and provided further, that such agreements shall terminate within ten (10) years from date thereof. (Ord. 680 § 3)
25-40: CONSTRUCTION OF TRUNK LINES AND FINANCING THEREOF:
The city may construct trunk sewers into all areas within the city and areas subsequently annexed into the city which are not yet served by sewers as
rapidly as funds are available and budgeted therefor by the city council.
In the event that a private individual constructs trunk lines in advance of the time the city is able to do so, the city may enter into an agreement with such
individual under the terms of which the city will reimburse him for that portion of the cost of the lines over and above the cost applicable to his premises;
provided, however, that the source of funds for such reimbursement shall be the trunk sewer connection charges collected from other users of the lines
and provided that such an agreement shall terminate within ten (10) years from the date thereof, and; provided further, that the cost returned shall not
exceed the actual cost to the individual nor the then current costs for similar quantities of work performed by the city, whichever is smaller. (Ord. 680 § 3)
25-41: CONNECTION CHARGES:
The charges enumerated in this section shall be paid to the city prior to the issuance of the sewer connection permit and connection to the line.
A. Line Taps: When a wye branch is not available to connect into, the person requesting connection shall pay a fee as fixed by resolution of the city
council.
B. Laterals: If a house connection is made directly into a main or into a lateral which has not been constructed or financed through an assessment district,
or by the party desiring to make the connection, there shall be paid a connection charge as fixed by resolution of the city council. Such lateral
construction charges shall be in addition to any other charge enumerated in this article.
C. Reserved.
D. Wastewater Treatment Plant Fees: Before any connection can be made into any sewer, there shall be paid a wastewater treatment plan construction
charge as fixed by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for construction of expansion of wastewater treatment plant facilities.
E. Additional Requirements: The city council may add, by resolution, rules and requirements implementing the resolutions adopting fees referred to in this
section. (Ord. 680 § 4; Ord. 1046 § A, 9-18-1973; Ord. 1206 § 1, 7-1-1980; Ord. 1439, 8-21-1990)
25-42: SEWER EXTENSION REVOLVING FUND:
There is hereby established and set up a sewer extension revolving fund, and all money collected from main line connection charges and lateral
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 614/636
connection charges shall be placed in such sewer extension revolving fund and disbursed therefrom to reimburse the city for construction and replacement
of trunk sewers, lateral sewers and to reimburse others who have advanced the cost of constructing lines as provided in this article. (Ord. 680 § 5)
25-43: OWNERSHIP AND MAINTENANCE OF LINES:
Lines on private property belong to the property owner, unless a line is or becomes a part of a community system serving more than one piece of property;
however, before such a multiple use may be permitted, the lines and an acceptable utility easement along such lines must be approved by and granted to
the city.
All lines on public streets, alleys, roads and easements, shall be the property of the city when connected to the city lines and when the job is completed
and approved by the city engineer and accepted by the city council.
The city will maintain all lines belonging to the city, but the property owners shall maintain all others including the house connection for its full distance from
the main or lateral to the house or premises. (Ord. 680 § 6)
Division 3. Extension Of Sewer Mains
25-44: APPLICATION FOR EXTENSION OF SEWER MAINS NOT UNDER ASSESSMENT DISTRICT OR BOND ISSUE;
DEPOSIT OF ESTIMATED COST REQUIRED:
One or more property owners desiring to have public sewer facilities constructed to serve their property and not wishing to have such sewer facilities or
water facilities constructed under an assessment district and bond issue may deposit with the city manager an amount which in the estimation of the city
manager will be sufficient to cover the entire cost of such construction, including preparation and specifications. Such monies so deposited shall not draw
interest. (Ord. Code § 3612.1)
25-45: PREPARATION OF PLANS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION BY CITY WHEN EXTENSION REQUESTED:
When requests for the extension of sewer mains are received as provided in section 25-44 of this article and when the deposit required by section 25-44 of
this article has been made, then, if, in the opinion of the city manager, sewer facilities are necessary and the construction thereof feasible, he shall cause
plans and specifications for the construction thereof to be prepared. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
25-45.1: ACREAGE FEE:
A. Purpose: In order to implement the goals and objectives of the wastewater facilities master plan of the city, and to provide needed wastewater facilities
for new development in the planning area, certain public wastewater facilities must be constructed. The city council has determined that a development
impact fee is needed in order to finance these public improvements and to pay for the development's fair share of the construction costs of these
improvements. In establishing the fee described below, the city council has found the fee to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to
Government Code section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fee with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element
of the general plan.
B. Established: An acreage fee is hereby established upon issuance of certificate of occupancy for development in the city, or upon connection to the city
sewer system for development in the city, or upon connection to wastewater facilities. The city council shall, in a council resolution, set forth the specific
amount of the fee, describe the benefit and impact area on which the development fee is imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed,
describe the estimated cost of these facilities, describe the reasonable relationships between this fee and the various types of new development and
set forth time for payment. As described in the fee resolution, this development fee shall be paid by each developer prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy or connection to the sewer system.
On an annual basis, this fee shall be adjusted by the public works director or designee in accordance with the "Engineering News Record Construction
Cost Index" publication.
C. Limited Use Of Fees: The revenues raised by payment of this fee shall be placed in a separate and special account, and such revenues, along with any
interest earnings on that account, shall be used solely to:
1. Pay for the city's future construction of wastewater facilities described in the resolution enacted with this section, or to reimburse the city for those
described or listed wastewater facilities constructed by the city with funds advanced by the city from other sources; or
2. Reimburse developers who have been required or permitted as set forth below, to install such listed wastewater facilities which are oversized with
supplemental size, length, or capacity.
D. Developer Construction Of Facilities: Whenever a developer is required, as a condition of approval of a development permit, to construct a public facility
described in a resolution adopted pursuant to this section, and when such construction is necessary to ensure efficient and timely construction of the
facilities network, a reimbursement agreement with the developer shall be offered. The reimbursement amount shall not exceed the actual cost of the
construction of the facility by the developer. In the event the actual construction cost of the facility exceeds the fee required of the development project,
the city shall enter into a reimbursement agreement for the cost in excess of the fee required for the project, to be paid from the special account
established pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
25-46: PLANS FOR NEW CONSTRUCTION BY CITY PUT OUT FOR BID; SUBMISSION OF BIDS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 615/636
Immediately after the plans and specifications provided for in section 25-45 of this article are prepared, the city manager shall call for bids and submit the
same to the city council for acceptance or rejection. (Ord. Code § 3622)
25-47: ESTATES BENEFITED TO DEPOSIT ADDITIONAL AMOUNT IF BIDS IN EXCESS OF DEPOSIT:
If the amount estimated by the city manager, as set forth in section 25-44 of this article, is not sufficient to cover the entire cost of such sewer construction,
including the preparation of plans and specifications, either at a bid price or by force account, the city manager shall notify the property owner, or owners,
involved of the additional amount necessary to do such work, and within ten (10) days thereafter such property owner, or owners, shall deposit such
additional amount with the city manager. Should the property owner, or owners, fail to deposit such additional amount, the city manager shall prepare a
statement showing all expenditures on behalf of the proposed sewer construction and after deducting the same from the deposit made by the property
owner, or owners, the city manager shall thereafter refund to the property owner, or owners, all the money deposited by them, except that amount shown
by the city manager's statement to have been expended on behalf of the proposed construction. (Ord. Code § 3623)
25-48: WHERE FUNDS DEPOSITED; DISPERSAL:
When the full amount necessary to cover the entire cost of the construction pursuant to this article, has been so deposited with the city treasurer, it shall be
placed in a guaranteed deposit account against which only charges for such sewer construction shall be drawn. (Ord. 1537 § B94, 8-6-1996)
25-49: COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION PRORATED AMONG ESTATES BENEFITED:
Immediately after the completion of the sewer construction pursuant to this article, the city treasurer shall prorate or cause to be prorated, the entire cost
thereof against all lots, tracts of land or property that may be ultimately benefited by direct connection to such sewer, in proportion to the frontage thereof,
or if the lot, lots, tract of land or property be irregular in shape, then in such manner as may, in the opinion of the public works director or designee, provide
an equitable distribution of cost. (Ord. 1537 § B95, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-50: REFUNDS WHEN CONSTRUCTION COST LESS THAN DEPOSIT:
After proper charges for the entire cost of the sewer construction pursuant to this article has been paid, the excess, if any, remaining on deposit with the
city, shall be refunded to the property owner, or owners, in proportion to the amount contributed by him or them. (Ord. Code § 3626)
25-51: UNCLAIMED REFUNDS TO ESCHEAT TO CITY:
Any person entitled to any refund under the provisions of this article shall keep on file with the city his correct mailing address. In the event the city is
unable to locate any person entitled to receive a refund hereunder, it shall send a written notice to such person by registered mail to the last address filed
by such person with the city. Such written notice shall contain a statement of the amount of such refund and shall also advise such person that if the refund
is not called for within one year from the date of such notice, all rights of such person to that particular refund will be forfeited. After the period of one year,
the refund or refunds shall be paid or deposited into the general fund of the city. (Ord. Code § 3626.1)
25-52: CONTRACT BETWEEN CITY AND PROPERTY OWNERS; REQUIRED UPON COMPLETION:
Immediately upon the completion of the sewer construction pursuant to this article, the property owner, or owners, who have contributed thereto shall enter
into a contract with the city. (Ord. Code § 3627.1)
25-53: CONTRACT BETWEEN CITY AND PROPERTY OWNERS; TERMS:
The city manager is hereby authorized on behalf of the city to enter into a written contract with the property owner, or owners, depositing funds as provided
in this article, which contract shall contain among other things, the following conditions:
A. No property owner or person in possession or control of such property shall be permitted to connect to such sewer unless he has first paid the charge
placed against such property as provided in subsection B of this section.
B. That the city shall endeavor to collect such charges and cause the same so collected to be refunded, as provided in subsection C of this section, but
shall not be liable for any failure to make such collection or refund.
C. That all sums so paid by any property owner or person in possession of such property shall be refunded to the property owner, or owners, or person in
possession, who deposited the amount necessary to complete such sewer in the proportion that the amount contributed bears to the entire cost, until
such property owner, or owners, or person making such deposit, have received the entire amount deposited by them, less that proportion prorated
against their own property.
D. If the entire amount has not been refunded, as provided in subsection C of this section, within a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of such
contract, the same shall terminate and be of no further force and effect.
E. No charge made or payment collected shall bear interest. (Ord. Code § 3627.2)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 616/636
25-54: CONNECTION NOT MADE UNTIL PRORATED CHARGE PAID OR PAYMENT ARRANGED:
In no event shall any owner of property benefited by the sewer constructed pursuant to this article or other person in possession or control of such real
property be permitted to connect thereto without first paying, or by written agreement arranging to pay, the prorated charges placed against the property by
the public works director or designee. The council may, by resolution, establish provisions whereby property owners may pay sewer connection fees in
installments over a period of time not to exceed three (3) years. (Ord. 1537 § B96, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-55: PERMIT AND FEE REQUIRED TO CONNECT:
No person shall connect any property with the public sewer without first obtaining the permit and paying the fee provided by the provisions of this code and
other ordinances of the city. (Ord. Code § 3632)
Chapter Article III
USE OF WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY
25-56: PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump, place, unload or dispose sewage material, offal, cleanings from septic tanks, cesspools,
sewage seepage pits, or privies at the Porterville wastewater treatment facility without first obtaining from the public works director or designee of the city
of Porterville a permit so to do. Every person, firm or corporation using or employing the Porterville wastewater treatment facility in any form or manner in
the disposal of sewage material, offal, cleanings from septic tanks, cesspools, sewage seepage pits, or privies shall first obtain from the public works
director or designee a permit and pay therefor to the city of Porterville a fee as fixed by resolution of the city council for any material dumped.
No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 1537 § B97, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-57: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
Every person, firm or corporation holding a permit from the public works director or designee shall comply with all ordinances of the county of Tulare,
ordinances of the city of Porterville and the city of Porterville uniform plumbing code and shall not suffer, allow or permit any strong acids, alkalis,
petroleum oils or greases, chrome solutions or other deleterious material to be disposed of at the Porterville wastewater treatment facility under said permit
and all disposal and all dumping under permits so issued shall be accomplished in a clean and orderly manner and at the times and places designated by
the public works director or designee. (Ord. 1537 § B97, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
25-58: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the public works director or designee for cause or for violation of any of the terms
and provisions of this article on five (5) days' notice to the permittee. An appeal may be taken from the decision of the public works director or designee
revoking any permit, within ten (10) days after the issuance of the revocation, such appeal to be directed to the council of the city of Porterville by written
notice of such appeal and the council shall set the matter for hearing, after five (5) days' notice to the permittee of the time and place of said hearing, and
the decision of the council shall be final in the matter.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for the appellant or any permittee to operate under any revoked permit pending the decision of the council upon
appeal. (Ord. 1537 § B97, 8-6-1996; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
Chapter Article IV
REQUIREMENTS AND SURCHARGES FOR SEWAGE DISCHARGES INTO CITY
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM
25-59: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5): The quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty degrees Celsius (20°C).
CITY: The city of Porterville.
MANHOLE: A hole through which a person may go to gain access to an underground or enclosed structure.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 617/636
STANDARD METHODS: The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Environment
Federation.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration device and
retained on a glass fiber filter with a nominal pore size of 1.5 µm and dried at one hundred three (103) to one hundred five degrees Celsius (105°C) to a
constant weight in accordance with the procedure set forth in standard methods. (Ord. 1047 § 1, 11-6-1973; Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-60: PERMISSIBLE SEWAGE DISCHARGES AND REQUIREMENTS:
A. Normal sewage discharges shall consist of waters or wastes having the following:
1. Suspended solids content not in excess of one hundred seventy five milligrams per liter (175 mg/l); and
2. BOD5 not in excess of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
Sewage discharges exceeding any of the limits as set forth herein for normal sewage discharges shall be classified as industrial wastes, and may be
subject to article V of this chapter.
B. Water which has been used as a cooling medium in any cooler, appliance, device or other apparatus, may be discharged directly or indirectly into the
city sanitary sewer system, provided, however, that such discharge is not in excess of fifteen percent (15%) of intake water.
C. Swimming pools may discharge into the city sanitary sewer system.
D. Any person proposing to discharge industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system shall first obtain a permit for nonresidential wastewater
discharge from the city. Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the city and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
1. Name and address of applicant.
2. Location of connection or proposed connection with the city sanitary sewer system.
3. Estimated gallons of wastes proposed to be discharged and a statement as to approximate time of discharging same, together with information as to
peak loads, and such other similar data as the city may require.
4. Statement of the character of the waste proposed to be discharged, including such detail in connection therewith as the city engineer may require.
The city engineer may, at his discretion, require that an applicant for an industrial waste permit file a bond in an amount deemed adequate by the city
engineer to indemnify the city and any other person against all loss, expense, or damage which may result from or arise out of the granting of the
permit and the discharge of industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system. The city engineer may require the bond as a condition precedent to
the issuance of an industrial waste permit or at any time after a permit is granted.
E. No person shall be permitted to maintain or use any facility or connection to the city sanitary sewer system which is in violation of this article, and any
such facility or connection in existence at the time of the effective date hereof shall be immediately corrected or disconnected from the city sanitary
sewer system. (Ord. 1047 § 1, 11-6-1973; Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-61: PROHIBITED SEWAGE DISCHARGE:
No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the city sanitary sewer system any of the following:
A - D. Reserved.
E. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) or sixty five degrees Celsius (65°C).
F. Any waters or wastes containing emulsified oil and grease exceeding fifty milligrams per liter (50 mg/l). In addition, disposal of petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin which may cause interference or pass through is prohibited.
G. Any waters or wastes which contain grease or oil or other substance which will become discernibly viscous at temperatures between thirty two degrees
(32°) and one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F).
H. Any radioactive isotopes having a half life of more than one hundred (100) days.
I. Any noxious or malodorous gas such as hydrogen sulfide, sulphur dioxide or nitrous oxide or other substance which either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, is capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or of preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
J. Any household garbage that has not been properly comminuted or triturated. All ground garbage shall be capable of passing through a one-half inch
(1/2") mesh screen before being introduced into the city sanitary sewer system.
K. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry,
lime residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint residues, unscreened cannery waste, bulk solids, or any other solid or viscous
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 618/636
substance capable of causing an obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the city sanitary sewer system.
L. Any waters of nonsewage or nonindustrial waste origin, such as waters from water well developments, storm water, etc., except by special permission of
the city.
All waters or wastes not meeting the applicable requirements of this section shall be pretreated to meet such requirements before such waters or wastes
enter the city sanitary sewer system. Pretreatment shall be approved by the city. (Ord. 1047 § 1, 11-6-1973; Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-62: INDUSTRIAL WASTES DISCHARGES:
A. All persons or corporations discharging industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system shall be subject to a surcharge, in addition to any other
sewer service charges. The amount of surcharge shall reflect the cost incurred by the city in removing the excess BOD5 and suspended solids in the
waste load. This surcharge will be determined as follows:
The excess pounds of BOD5 and suspended solids will be computed by multiplying the industrial wastes flow volume in million gallons per day by the
constant 8.345, and then multiplying this product by the difference between the industrial wastes concentration of BOD5, and suspended solids and the
aforementioned "normal" concentration in milligrams per liter. The surcharge for each constituent will then be determined by multiplying the excess
pounds of each constituent by the rate of surcharge and by the number of days in the billing period.
The city may charge a surcharge fee for excess BOD and/or TSS at five (5) times the established rate to encourage pretreatment of waste discharges.
The rates of surcharge for BOD5 per pound and suspended solids per pound shall be established by resolution of the city council.
The rates of surcharge are to be reviewed periodically by the city in order to determine whether or not they are sufficient to defray the fixed charges,
amortization costs, and annual cost of operation as determined from city records. However, failure of the city to so review, shall not invalidate any
provision of this article and the fee established shall remain in effect until changed by resolution of the city council.
B. The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste surcharges shall be the metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the city. If the person or corporation discharging industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system procures any part, or all, of his
water from sources other than the city, the person or corporation shall install and maintain a water meter of a type approved by the city, for the purpose
of determining the volume of water obtained from these other sources. Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required by the
city if these volumes cannot be otherwise determined from the metered water consumption records. Metering devices for determining the volume of
waste shall be installed, owned, and maintained by said person or corporation. Following approval and installation, such meters shall not be removed
without the consent of the city.
C. Each person or corporation discharging industrial wastes into the city sanitary sewer system shall, when required by the city, construct and maintain
one or more industrial waste monitoring manholes or access points to facilitate observation, measurement and sampling of wastes, including domestic
sewage. Industrial waste monitoring manholes or access facilities shall be located and built in a manner acceptable to the city.
D. Industrial wastes discharged to the city shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of character and concentration of said wastes. Said
inspections and determination shall be made as often as may be determined necessary by the city.
E. Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this article shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for sewer charges or sent as a separate
bill.
For sewer surcharge bills that remain unpaid at the due date for the payment of said bills, there shall be added to the sewer surcharge the same
penalties and interest as are required for delinquencies or nonpayment of water bills. Water services may be discontinued for nonpayment of the
charge for sewer surcharge or sewer surcharge penalties and interest, and any unpaid charge for sewer surcharge or sewer surcharge penalties or
interest may be placed as a lien on the real property involved.
F. Significant industrial users as defined by section 25-75 of this chapter shall be subject to the provisions in article V of this chapter. (Ord. 1047 § 1, 11-6-
1973; Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-63: VIOLATION OF ARTICLE:
A. Cost Of Repair, Cleaning: In the event that any person or corporation discharges any substance into the city sanitary sewer system in violation of the
provisions of this article, in addition to any other penalties provided by this article, such person or corporation shall pay the city for the damage caused
thereby and for the cost of any repair or cleaning of any portion of said sanitary sewer system made necessary by reason thereof. The city shall
determine the amount of such damage and costs.
B. Shutoff Of Premises: The city shall have the authority to shut off any premises from the use of the city sanitary sewer system where the occupant or
user of such premises is placing, discharging or conducting any water or wastes into the city sanitary sewer system in violation of this article.
C. Penalty For Violation: Any person or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be deemed
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of said provisions is committed, continued or permitted,
and upon conviction of any such violation such person or corporation shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with minimum federal penalty
guidelines for each offense.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 619/636
D. Additional Penalties, Enforcement: Additional penalties and enforcement action will apply if a violation involves a "significant industrial user" as defined
by section 25-75 of this chapter. (Ord. 1047 § 1, 11-6-1973; Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
Chapter Article V
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS
Division 1. Generally
25-74: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributions into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the city and enables
the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the clean water act of 1972 and amendments thereto, and the general pretreatment
regulations (40 CFR, part 403), as amended from time to time.
The objectives of this article are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate
the resulting sludge;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
C. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system; and
D. To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system.
This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain
nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user
reporting, assumes that existing customers' capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-75: DEFINITIONS:
The definitions given in this section shall be used in the interpretations of this article, the issuance of permits, the establishment of charges for service and
all other operations of this article unless the context specifically indicates otherwise.
ACT OR THE ACT: The federal water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person or group of persons, who applies for sewer service or a wastewater discharge permit.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY: California regional water quality control board, Central Valley region.
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW: The total quantity of liquid tributary to a point divided by the number of days of flow measurement.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5): Shall mean the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty degrees Celsius (20°C).
BUILDING SEWER: A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the publicly operated treatment works (POTW).
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS: National pretreatment standards specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be
discharged to a POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories.
CITY: The city of Porterville.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager of the city of Porterville or his or her designee.
CODE: Porterville municipal code.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS: Pollutants that are capable of being processed a) under normal loading conditions by a biological wastewater treatment
plant, and b) in concentrations that are normally present in wastewater without any detrimental effect on the city's POTW.
COMPLIANCE DETERMINATION: The sampling and analysis conducted on specific industrial wastes to ascertain compliance with applicable federal or
state pretreatment standards, whichever is more stringent.
COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE: The time period allowed by the city in which an industry shall comply with permit conditions or discharge requirements.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 620/636
COMPOSITE SAMPLES: A combination of individual samples of sewage taken at hourly or selected intervals to minimize the variability of the individual
sample. Individual samples may be combined in quantities that are proportional to the flow at the time of sampling.
CONTROL AUTHORITY: The city manager or his or her designee.
COOLING WATER: The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER: The liquid and waterborne wastes derived from, or equivalent to that of, ordinary residential living processes and which are
of such a character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the service lateral.
EPA: Environmental protection agency.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without
consideration of time.
GREASE, OIL, FATS: Any material, or like material, that is extractable.
HOLDING TANK OR POND WASTE: Any wastewater or processed wastewater received from holding tanks or ponds such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum tank trucks, and industrial or agricultural process or wastewater holding tanks or ponds.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The discharge or the introduction of pollutants, including holding tank discharge, from any nondomestic source regulated under
section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the act into the city's POTW.
INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER: A source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: All wastewater of a community, excluding domestic and pollutant free wastewater, and shall include all such wastewater from any
producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or other operation which contains characteristics unlike that of domestic
wastewater.
INTERFERENCE: A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from another source, contribute to an inhibition or disruption of
the city's POTW treatment process or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore is a cause of violation of any requirement of the
city's waste discharge requirements. Interference includes any discharge that causes the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
section 405 of the clean water act, the solid waste disposal act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the resource conservation and
recovery act (RCRA), and including any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA),
the clean air act, the toxic substances control act, and the marine protection, research and sanctuaries act, as amended from time to time.
MAY: "May" is permissive. "Shall" is mandatory.
MONITORING: The practice of investigating, surveying and sampling wastewater sources in an effort to obtain information on the quality and quantity of
the wastewater flow.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): A permit issued to a POTW pursuant to section 402 of the act.
NEW SOURCE: A. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
1. The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an
existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source,
should be considered.
B. Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a
new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection A2 or A3 of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
C. Construction of a "new source" as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has:
1. Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on site construction program:
a. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
b. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for
the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
2. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge which exits the city's POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's waste discharge requirements.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or
any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine. The singular shall include the
plural where indicated by the context.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 621/636
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock,
sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into the city's POTW.
POLLUTION: The manmade or man induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT OR TREATMENT: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; process changes; or by other means, except dilution is not an acceptable means to reduce the
amounts of pollutants in a waste stream.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS: Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard,
imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with the act which applies to
any user of the city's POTW.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by the act, including sewer lines, lift stations that convey wastewater to
the POTW plant and shall include any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by agreement with the city,
users of the city's POTW.
RCRA: Resource conservation and recovery act.
SAMPLING WELL: An approved opening to a building sewer for the purpose of sampling and flow measurement.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system that:
A. Is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, as amended from time to time;
or
B. Has an average discharge flow of twenty five thousand (25,000) gallons or more per day; or
C. Contributes a process waste stream that makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity in the city's
waste treatment system; or
D. Has in its waste discharge, any toxic pollutants defined in the act; or
E. Is found by the city, state agency or U.S. environmental protection agency to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the
system.
SLUG DISCHARGE: Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC): A classification pursuant to the "Standard Industrial Classification Manual" and as amended.
STATE: The state of California.
STORM WATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT: The person designated by the city manager to supervise the operation of the publicly owned treatment works, and who is charged
with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or his duly authorized representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Shall mean solids that are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a laboratory filtration
device and retained on a glass fiber filter with a nominal pore size of 1.5 µm and dried at one hundred three (103) to one hundred five degrees Celsius
(105°C) to a constant weight in accordance with the procedure set forth in standard methods.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under provision
of the act.
USER OR INDUSTRIAL USER: A source of indirect discharge.
WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to
enter the POTW.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: As set forth in section 25-103 of this article. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-76: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
BOD5 Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of federal regulations
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 622/636
EC Electrical conductance
EPA Environmental protection agency
l Liter
mg Milligram
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National pollutant discharge elimination system
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource conservation and recovery act
SIC Standard industrial classification
SWDA Solid waste disposal act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
USC United States Code
(Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
Division 2. Regulations
25-82: GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause pass-through or interference with the
operation or performance of the city's POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of the city's POTW whether or not the user is subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user shall have an affirmative
defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of general or specific prohibitions where the user can demonstrate that it did not know or have
reason to know that its waste discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass-through or
interference and that the ongoing compliance of their waste discharge met all federal, state and local limits or that their waste discharge experienced only
minimal deviation from their norm prior to or during the pass-through or interference.
A user shall not contribute the following substances to the city's POTW:
A. Fire/Explosion Hazard: Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction
with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time, shall two (2)
successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent
(5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the lower explosion limit (LEL) of the meter. These hazards include, but are not limited to, waste
streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees Celsius (60°C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21, as amended from time to time. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to: gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides and any other
substances which the city, the state, or the EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system.
B. pH: Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 and higher than 9.0, or wastewater having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW.
C. Solid Or Viscous Substances: Which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities, such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch
manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grindings or polishing wastes.
D. Toxic Pollutants: Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW. A toxic
pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the act, as amended from time to time.
E. Noxious Or Malodorous Liquids: Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient
to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
F. Substance Affecting Effluent, Residues: Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues,
sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged to
the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the
act, as amended from time to time; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the solid waste
disposal act, the clean air act, the toxic substance control act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
G. Causing Pass-Through: Any substance which causes pass-through or interference and, therefore, causes the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state
waste discharge requirement permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 623/636
H. Objectionable Color: Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye waste and
vegetable tanning solutions.
I. Reserved.
J. Flow Rate/Concentration: Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD5, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration
which will cause interference or pass-through at the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentration or qualities of
pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24) hour concentration,
quantities or flow during normal operation.
K. Radioactive Wastes: Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established
by the city.
L. Hazard; Nuisance: Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
M. Sulfide: Any sulfide forming pollutants or wastes which, when discharged to the sewer, generate sulfide concentrations in excess of one milligram per
liter (1 mg/l).
N. Reserved.
O. Reserved.
P. Hauled Pollutants: Any trucked or hauled pollutants are prohibited from disposal except at those discharge points so designated by the POTW.
Q. Heat: Heat in any amount which will inhibit biological growth activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case, heat in such quantities that
the temperature at the POTW exceeds forty degrees Celsius (40°C) (104°F) unless the approval authority approves alternate temperature limits.
R. Oils: Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through. (Ord. 1636
§ A, 7-1-2003)
25-83: NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS; CATEGORICAL STANDARDS:
The city, as legal control authority, will require compliance by all industrial users of all applicable categorical standards and requirements. The reporting
requirements for industrial users subject to categorical standards are covered in section 25-104 of this article. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-84: MODIFICATIONS OF CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of a pollutant or pollutants limited by categorical pretreatment standards, the
city may apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the categorical pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean the
average of the lowest fifty percent (50%) of the removal measured by approved methods. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-85: SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS:
The specific pollutant limitations will be set by resolution of the city. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-85.1: GREASE, OIL AND SAND TRAPS:
A. Generally: Grease, oil and sand traps shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city, they are necessary for the protection of the sewage system from
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such traps shall not
be required for buildings used solely for residential purposes. Such traps shall be required, for example, on discharges from all service stations, dry
cleaning establishments, eating establishments and food preparation establishments.
B. Construction: All traps shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Restaurant traps shall be gastight, of a type approved for restaurant use by the state and/or county health departments. Traps for all other
facilities, including service stations and garages, shall be in accordance with the adopted plan of the city for such traps or shall be approved equal
thereof, as determined by the city.
C. Maintenance: When installed, all grease, oil and sand traps shall be inspected and maintained by the owner at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-86: STATE REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 624/636
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they apply to charter cities and are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-87: CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
A. The city reserves the right to establish by resolution more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in section 25-74 of this article.
B. In addition to the limitations upon the characteristics or quantity of wastewater discharged, caused to be discharged or permitted to be discharged into
any public sewer pursuant to this article, the city may, in connection with the issuance of permits pursuant to the provisions of this section, establish
additional specific limitations on wastewater strengths upon a finding by the city that:
1. The limitations set forth in this article may not be sufficient to protect the operation of the city's sewer system, treatment facilities or any portion
thereof, or the waste or wastewater proposed to be discharged otherwise constitutes a hazard to, or unreasonable burden upon, such operation;
2. The limitation expressly set forth in this article may not be sufficient to enable the operation of the city's sewage system of treatment facilities to
comply with water quality standards of effluent limitations specified in the city's national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit
and/or state waste discharge requirement permit; or
3. The permit for which application is made will cover new sources in which case the permit shall require compliance with the best available technology.
(Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-88: EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE:
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant specific limitations
developed by the city or state. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-89: ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES:
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost and expense. Detail plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be approved by the city before construction
of the facility. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date hereof shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system
until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the
industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective actions.
A. Written Notice: All significant industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges (accidental or nonaccidental) that exceed their permit
limitations, including any slug loadings by the user. Within five (5) days following an accidental or nonaccidental discharge, the user shall submit to the
city a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences.
Such modification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the damage to the
POTW or any other damage to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability which may be
imposed by this article or other applicable laws.
B. Notice To Employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-90: HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE:
Any industrial user, permitted or nonpermitted, shall notify the POTW in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under federal regulations 40 CFR 261, as amended from time to time. Notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste set forth in 40 CFR 261, as amended from time to time, the EPA hazardous waste number, and type of discharge (continuous, batch,
other). If the industrial user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such wastes per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also
contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve months. All
notifications must take place within one hundred eighty (180) days after discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under
this section need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, all industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of
any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the
industrial user has submitted initial notification. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the selfmonitoring
requirements of section 25-104 of this article.
Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of the above paragraph during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15)
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), as amended from time to
time, discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one time notification.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 625/636
Subsequent months during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous wastes do not require additional notification.
In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management waste division director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
In the case of any notification made under the preceding paragraphs, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has been determined to be economically practical. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
Division 3. Fees
25-95: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this division to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater disposal system and for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in the city's schedule of fees and charges. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-96: FEES AND CHARGES:
The city may adopt fees and charges which may include:
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program;
B. Fees for monitoring inspection and surveillance procedures;
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
D. Fees for permit applications;
E. Fees for filing appeals;
F. Fees for consistent removal by the city of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and
G. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city and when new development
occurs, collectable upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy. (Ord. 1754, 6-2-2009)
Division 4. Administration
25-102: WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS:
It shall be unlawful to discharge without city approval to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the POTW
any wastewater except as authorized by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-103: INDUSTRIAL USER WASTEWATER PERMIT APPLICATION:
A. General Permits: All significant industrial users connected to or proposing to connect to the POTW shall obtain an industrial user wastewater discharge
permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain an
industrial user wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date hereof.
B. Industrial User Wastewater Discharge Permit Application: Users required to obtain an industrial user wastewater discharge permit shall complete and
submit the nonresidential wastewater discharge permit application form, accompanied by the required fee.
The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the
city may issue an industrial user wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
C. Permit Modifications: The city may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
1. To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements;
2. To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater
discharge permit issuance;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 626/636
3. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
4. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters;
5. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit;
6. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
7. Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
8. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit;
9. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator.
D. Permit Conditions: Industrial user wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits shall contain the following:
1. A statement of duration (in no case more than 5 years);
2. A statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to
the new owner or operator;
3. Effluent limits based on general pretreatment standards in section 25-82 of this article, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and
local law;
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on applicable pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local
limits, and state and local law;
5. A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines.
E. Permit Duration: Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period of less than one year or may be
stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing
permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modifications by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements,
as identified in division 2 of this article, sections 25-82 through 25-90, are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his permit at least sixty (60) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
F. Permit Transfer: Industrial user wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An industrial user wastewater
discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the
approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
G. Permit Revisions: If an industrial user increases the concentration or type of pollutants in their discharge over their permitted levels, they must reapply
for a permit to cover the increased discharge.
Discharge from a new source shall require a revision of the user's industrial user wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-104: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE:
Significant industrial users and categorical users shall submit monitoring reports and compliance schedule reports as described below:
A. Baseline Monitoring Report: Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a baseline report within one hundred eighty
(180) days after the effective date of the standard or one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision made upon an industrial user
that the industrial user must comply with the categorical standards, which ever is later. The report shall contain the following information: applicable
environmental permits, description of operations, flow measurements, measurements of pollutants, certification by an authorized representative of the
industrial user of whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, a compliance schedule of additional operation and
maintenance and/or additional pretreatment required to be in compliance.
1. Name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners;
2. A list of any environmental permits held;
3. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by the industrial
user. This description should include a schematic diagram which indicates points of discharge from the regulated process to the POTW;
4. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
a. Regulated process streams; and
b. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula if so used;
5. a. The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process.
b. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of
daily operations.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 627/636
c. A minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, twenty four (24) hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible.
The control authority may waive flow proportional sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In
such cases, samples may be obtained through time proportional sampling techniques or through a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the
industrial user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged.
d. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
e. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from the pretreatment facilities, if such exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated
process, if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure
the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment
standards.
f. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40
CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or the approval authority determines that part 136
sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties,
approved by the approval authority.
g. The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information
sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures.
h. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis
is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
6. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
7. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later
than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
B. Compliance Schedule Progress Report: The report required by subsection A7 of this section shall contain increments of progress (dates) for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to
meet pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing
and completion of construction, etc.). No increment shall exceed nine (9) months. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule
and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the city indicating the status of compliance.
C. Contents Of Report: The report on compliance with categorical deadline shall contain the information listed in subsections A4 to A6 of this section. The
reporting requirement may include the actual production during an appropriate sampling period for those users subject to allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production. This report shall be submitted within ninety (90) days of the final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards, or in the
case of a new source, following the commencement of the introduction of waste discharge into the POTW system.
D. Periodic Reports, Categorical Users: Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment
standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the city during the months of June and
December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the city, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in
the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period for discharges from regulated process streams. At the discretion of the city and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the city may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be
submitted.
Where the city has imposed mass limitations on industrial users this report shall indicate the mass of pollutants, regulated by pretreatment standards,
in the discharge from the industrial user.
A certification is required by an authorized representative of the industrial user of whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, a compliance schedule of additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment required to be in compliance. Records of all
information resulting from any required monitoring activities must be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years.
E. Notice Of Potential Problems/Slug Loadings: All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the POTW immediately of all discharges,
including any slug loadings, that could cause problems to the POTW.
F. Periodic Reports, Significant Industrial Users: Periodic compliance reports are required from significant industrial users not subject to categorical
pretreatment standards. Reports are to be submitted to the city at least once every six (6) months, describing the nature, concentration and flow of the
pollutants required to be reported. These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and
performed in accordance with techniques outlined in 40 CFR 136 and as amended from time to time. The sampling and analysis may be performed by
the city in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user. If this is the case, the significant noncategorical industrial user will not be required to
submit the report.
G. Monitoring And Analysis To Demonstrate Compliance: Reports in subsections A, C, D and F of this section shall contain the results of samplings and
analyses of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the city, of pollutants
contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of the
industrial user. If this is the case, the industrial user will not be required to submit the report. If sampling preformed by the industrial user indicates a
violation, the user shall notify the POTW within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results to the city within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 628/636
H. General Reporting Requirements: All reports required by this section shall contain the following certification:
I certify under penalty of law this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons immediately responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.
I. Signatures: All reports in this section shall be signed as follows:
1. By a responsible corporate officer if the industrial user submitting the reports required by subsections A, C and D of this section is a corporation.
A "responsible corporate officer" shall mean:
a. A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs
similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation.
b. The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty five million dollars ($25,000,000.00), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or
delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
2. By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports required by subsections A, C and D of this section is a partnership or
sole proprietorship, respectively.
3. By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection I1 or I2 of this section if:
a. The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections I1 and I2 of this section;
b. The authorization specifies either an individual or a person having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial
discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent
responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
c. The written authorization is submitted to the control authority.
4. If an authorization under subsection I3 of this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
subsection I3 of this section must be submitted to the control authority prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.
All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administration pursuant to section 304(h) of the act and
contained in 40 CFR part 136 and as amended from time to time or any other test and sampling procedures approved by the city.
If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of subsection D or F of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
city using the procedures in subsection G of this section, then the industrial user shall include the results of this monitoring in their report.
Records of all information resulting from any required monitoring activities must be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-105: MONITORING FACILITIES:
The city shall require, to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of
the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises; but the city may, when
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility,
sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and
all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the
city.
If the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow access for city personnel, such as a gate secured with a city
lock. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-106: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with.
Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all times for the
purpose of inspections, sampling, records examination and record copying or in the performance of any of their duties. Access to the primary sampling
point and meter location shall be unrestricted. All other access shall be requested in advance. The city, approval authority, and (where the NPDES state is
the approval authority) the EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the city, approval authority and the EPA will be permitted to enter without delay for purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 629/636
25-107: PRETREATMENT:
Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported
to, and acceptable to, the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. These requirements apply to both permitted and nonpermitted industrial users.
In addition, all nonpermitted industrial users are required to provide notice of changes in wastewater flow and characteristics to the city so that the city can
review and deny or condition these contribution changes.
The city shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment requirements. "Significant noncompliance" is defined as meeting one or more of the following:
A. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty six percent (66%), or more, of all of the measurements taken during a
six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter;
B. Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty three percent (33%), or more, of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of daily maximum limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
C. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
D. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority under section 25-114 of this article to halt or prevent such a discharge;
E. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the city's control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
H. Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the city's pretreatment
program.
All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request. (Ord.
1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-108: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be
available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
user.
When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; however, such portions of a report
shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
Records of all information resulting from any required monitoring activities must be maintained for a minimum of three (3) years and available for
inspection and copying by the city, state and EPA. This period of retention may be extended during the course of unresolved litigation regarding the
discharge from an industrial user or the operation of the POTW pretreatment program or when requested by the state or EPA. These requirements apply
to both permitted and nonpermitted industrial users. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
Division 5. Enforcement
25-109: ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 630/636
Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, their wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, or limitation of
requirements contained herein, the city may take enforcement action to correct the violation. Enforcement action is through the issuance of notices of
violation, consent orders, compliance orders, cease and desist orders, emergency suspension, termination of discharge, show cause hearings, legal
action, and administrative fines. The level of enforcement is dependent on the level and/or frequency of the violation. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-110: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
The city may issue a notice of violation to a user when a specific violation of this article or their wastewater discharge permit has occurred. The notice will
state the nature of the violation and require the user, within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, to submit to the city a plan for the satisfactory
correction of the violation.
If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of each
violation. The user shall immediately repeat sampling, have the samples analyzed and submit results to the city within thirty (30) days of becoming aware
of the violation. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-111: CONSENT ORDERS:
The city may enter into a consent order with any user responsible for noncompliance of this article. The consent order will contain milestone tasks and
completion dates developed by the user to correct the noncompliance and prevent future violations. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-112: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
The city may issue a compliance order to the user to achieve compliance with this article or with their wastewater discharge permit. The compliance order
shall contain milestone dates for the completion of intermediate tasks, developed by the city, required for the user to achieve full compliance. (Ord. 1636
§ A, 7-1-2003)
25-113: CEASE AND DESIST ORDER:
The city may issue a cease and desist order requiring the user to halt specific activities that are releasing pollutants to the POTW in violation of this article
and/or their wastewater discharge permit. The cease and desist order shall require the user take immediate action to reduce or eliminate the adverse
impact to the POTW caused by its discharge. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-114: EMERGENCY SUSPENSION:
The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the
city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, causes interference to the POTW, or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit and/or state waste
discharge requirement permit.
Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city
shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A
detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the city within fifteen (15) days of the date of the occurrence. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-115: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to having their permit revoked and their discharge terminated:
A. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge;
B. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operation or wastewater constituents and characteristics;
C. Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
D. Violation of conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
The user will be notified of the proposed termination and offered an opportunity to show cause under section 25-117 of this article why the proposed action
should not be taken. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-116: RESERVED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 631/636
25-117: SHOW CAUSE HEARING:
A. The city manager may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city why the
proposed enforcement actions should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
city regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before
the city why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
B. The city may itself conduct a hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the assigned
department to:
1. Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing, requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to
any matter involved in such hearing;
2. Take the evidence; and
3. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon.
C. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be
made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
D. After the city has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period,
the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on the existing
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may
be issued. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-118: LEGAL ACTION:
If any person discharges sewage, industrial waste or other waste into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provision of this article, federal
or state pretreatment requirements, or any other order of the city, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief.
(Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-119: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
A. When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may fine such user in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine allowed under
state law. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall
be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
B. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after the due date, be assessed the same penalties and interest as are required for delinquencies or
nonpayment of water bills. Water services may be discontinued for nonpayment of the unpaid charges, fines, and penalties and any unpaid charge,
fines, penalties or interest may be placed as a lien on the real property involved.
C. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the city to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within thirty
(30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit the city may convene a show cause hearing on the matter under section 25-117 of
this article. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city
may add the costs of preparing administrative actions, such as notices and orders to the fine.
D. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
Division 6. Penalty Costs
25-124: CIVIL PENALTIES:
Any user who is found to have violated a lawful order of the city council or who wilfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of this article and
the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, may be fined in accordance with minimum federal penalty guidelines for each offense. Each
day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may
recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporter fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to
have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
25-125: FALSIFYING INFORMATION:
Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both. (Ord. 1636 § A, 7-1-2003)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 632/636
Chapter 26
WELLS
Chapter
WELLS
26-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this chapter to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the people of the city by ensuring that the groundwaters of the city and
the Tule Subbasin will not be polluted, contaminated, or used in an unsustainable manner. (Ord. 1832, 5-17-2016)
26-2: WELL ABANDONMENT UPON MUNICIPAL SERVICE CONNECTION:
A. Notwithstanding the county's authority to issue permits for wells, upon connection of a property to the Porterville municipal water system, a private well
providing service to said property shall be abandoned, or if more than the subject parcel receives water from the well, the connection from the property
to the well shall be abandoned. Parcels five (5) acres in size or greater are exempt from this requirement. If a well serves both a structure and a
commercial agricultural crop, the structure shall be disconnected from the well, but the well can remain in order to provide irrigation water in a manner
consistent with other chapters of this code.
B. Where a property owner is already connected to Porterville municipal water service and maintains an existing and active well as of the date this chapter
is approved, the property owner may continue the beneficial use of the well until:
1. Well failure or lack of performance for greater than twelve (12) months results in a permanently inactive well, as defined in the Health And Safety
Code; or
2. The property owner obtains a building permit for improvements, construction, or remodeling at a cost of twenty one thousand five hundred sixty nine
dollars ($21,569.00) or more within a two (2) year period. This valuation is to be adjusted, by resolution, each year to reflect changes in the cost of
construction as indicated in the "Engineering News Record".
C. Abandonment of wells shall be completed in conformance with the standards adopted by the department of water resources and the state water
resources control board, in accordance with the California Water Code. (Ord. 1832, 5-17-2016)
26-3: ADOPTION OF COUNTY WELL STANDARDS:
A. The city hereby adopts by reference the county well standards contained in chapter 7 of the county code and such future county amendments as may
be required to satisfy the minimum requirements contained in the state model well standards for construction, reconstruction, repair, and destruction of
water wells, cathodic protection wells, and monitoring wells.
B. The city hereby authorizes the county environmental health department to issue permits, collect fees, and to use all appropriate enforcement powers
within the city limits to carry out the provisions of the county well standards. (Ord. 1832, 5-17-2016)
26-4: AMENDMENTS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to forfeit or otherwise restrict the rights or authority of the city to rescind or amend this chapter, or
to establish local well standards, as the city deems appropriate in order to protect and address matters of local concern. (Ord. 1832, 5-17-2016)
26-5: CONFLICTING PROVISIONS:
All ordinances, municipal code sections, resolutions, city council motions, and all actions of all city boards, commissions and committees in conflict with
this chapter are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1832, 5-17-2016)
Chapter 27
TRANSPORATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
Chapter
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
27-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 633/636
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the development of transportation demand management (TDM) programs at all existing development and at new
development within the city. In order to accomplish this purpose, this chapter establishes certain requirements to enable the city of Porterville to evaluate
the effectiveness of TDM programs and to chart progress toward achieving the average vehicle ridership goals established in this chapter. It is also the
purpose of this chapter to require certain employers to designate specified individuals to ensure the proper coordination of such reporting and
implementation programs.
This chapter is intended to meet the requirements of Government Code section 6508(a) et seq., which mandates the development of a trip reduction and
travel demand element of the congestion management program adopted by the Tulare County Association of Government/Transportation Planning Agency
(TCAG/TPA). Further, the legislation requires all local agencies to prepare and adopt a TDM ordinance. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein described:
APCD: San Joaquin Valley unified air pollution control district.
ALTERNATIVE TRANSPORTATION MODES: Any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of
ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking.
APPLICATION PROJECT: Any development project that is determined to be a worksite for the number of employees equal to or greater than the
employee threshold number established by city council.
AVERAGE VEHICLE RIDERSHIP (AVR): The total number of employees assigned to a worksite, Monday through Friday, divided by the number of
vehicles they drive from home to work. Credit may be given and the calculation for employee work trips eliminated during a biweekly no work period due to
the use of compressed work week or telecommuting.
CARPOOLING: Two (2) or more persons traveling together in a single vehicle.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city of Porterville or his/her duly authorized designee.
COMMUTE: A home to work or work to home trip.
COMMUTE ALTERNATIVES: Any form of commute transportation except by single occupancy vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine.
COMMUTE COORDINATOR: An employee or contractor of an employer, whose responsibility is the day to day management of any transportation
demand management program.
COMPRESSED WORK WEEK: A work schedule for an employee which eliminates at least one round trip commute biweekly. For example, forty (40)
hours of work in four (4) 10-hour days or a work plan that allows one day off every other week, known as the "9/80 plan".
DESIGNEE(S): Any private entity, governmental agency or city employee designated by the city to administer all or any of the provisions of this chapter
except those related to the bringing of enforcement actions under this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT: Any nonresidential or mixed use project which requires discretionary approval by the city.
DIRECTOR: The public works director or designee for the city of Porterville.
EMPLOYEE: One who is assigned to the designated worksite. An employee who works in the service of an employer for either wages or salary, as a
contract employee under the direction of the worksite employer or through a temporary service agency during a period of more than ninety (90) days.
EMPLOYEE THRESHOLD: The number of employees as defined in section 27-3 of this chapter and set by resolution of the city council that determines
when the terms of this chapter apply to an employer.
EMPLOYER: Any public or private employer, including the city of Porterville, which has a worksite in the city. For purposes of this chapter, the annual
average number of full time employees on the day shift at the designated worksite shall determine the size of the employer.
FLEXIBLE WORK HOURS: A variation of an employee's work hours to provide an incentive for the employer to use commute alternatives.
IMPROVEMENT PLANS: Plans submitted to the city as part of an application for a building permit for new nonresidential development or expansion of
existing or change of use (as defined by the uniform building code) of any nonresidential building facility.
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT: The development of a parcel(s) or structures(s) with two (2) or more different land uses such as, but not limited to, a
combination of limited residential, office, commercial retail, public or entertainment in a single or physically integrated group of structures.
PEAK PERIOD: The hours from seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. to six o'clock (6:00) P.M., Monday
through Friday, excluding federal holidays. Peak periods shall mean employees' commute trips to a worksite where the employees' workday begins.
PERSON: An individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association or other business entity, city, county, district, the state,
department or agency thereof, or the United States, to the extent authorized by law.
SINGLE OCCUPANCY VEHICLE: A motor vehicle occupied by one employee for commute purposes.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A plan of development that is subject to public hearing before the city council or project review committee.
TELECOMMUTING: A system of either working at home or at an off site workstation with computer facilities that link to the worksite.
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT (TDM): The provision of information, assistance, incentives or other measures designed to meet an
average vehicle ridership (AVR) and which is intended to reduce the number of vehicles with internal combustion engines driven on streets or highways to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 634/636
the worksite.
TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION (TMA): An organization through which developers, employers and/or local governments cooperate in
designing, implementing or evaluating a TDM program.
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM MANAGEMENT (TSM): Low cost improvements to the transportation system (roads and transit) which increase the
operational efficiency and/or capacity of the system.
TRIP REDUCTION: Reducing the number of work related trips on streets or highways taken during workweek hours in single occupancy vehicles powered
by internal combustion engines.
VANPOOL: A van occupied by five (5) or more persons traveling together.
WORKSITE: A building or group of buildings which are in actual physical contact or separated solely by a private roadway or easement and which are
owned and operated by an employer. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992; Ord. 1614 § 3, 9-17-2002)
27-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all existing employers (both public and private) within the city with the employee threshold number or more employees, defined
by resolution of the city council, or those existing employers which reach the employee threshold, and all new development projects that are estimated to
generate, either in the project itself or as a result of adding the project to an existing development, the employment of the employee threshold number or
more persons, as determined by using the methodology set forth in subsection B of this section.
A. For purposes of determining whether an existing development is subject to this chapter, the number of employees will be based on official payroll
records and shall be calculated on the annual average number of full time employees.
B. For purposes of determining whether a new development project is subject to this chapter, the total number of employees which the project is estimated
to generate will be determined by the city of Porterville as follows:
1. Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the city engineer or responsible staff; or
2. Employment projections developed by the city engineer or responsible staff using the latest institute of transportation engineer's "Trip Generation
Manual"; or
3. In the case of a multiuse development, the employment projection shall be calculated on a case by case basis based upon the proportion of
development devoted to each type of use.
4. The employment projections for land uses not identified above shall be determined pursuant to subsection B1 of this section.
C. The employer shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-4: AVERAGE VEHICLE RIDERSHIP GOAL:
An average vehicle ridership goal shall be established by a resolution of the city council for each employer participating in this program and is intended to
measure progress toward a reduction in vehicle trips to the worksite. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-5: TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT PLAN PREPARATION:
All employers both existing and proposed who meet the employee threshold criteria shall be responsible for the preparation and submittal of a
transportation demand management plan. The plan shall be prepared to meet the average vehicle ridership goal. The plan shall include the following
sections:
A. Employee profile of the business.
B. Existing average vehicle ridership.
C. Transportation demand management strategies selected for implementation.
D. Implementation timetable.
E. Monitoring program.
F. Contact person or commute coordinator. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-6: TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES:
The following strategies should be considered when developing employer based transportation demand management plans or as part of the design of new
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 635/636
projects or the remodeling of existing development:
A. Rideshare Programs: The establishment of a carpool/vanpool program for the employer (if practical) or the participation in an existing carpool/vanpool
matching service. The designation of parking spaces, located as close as is practical to each entrance or at other preferential locations within the
employee parking area, for use by carpool and vanpool vehicles can be part of this program. These spaces, may be reserved and designated for
carpool/vanpool parking by marking such spaces "carpool only".
B. Park And Ride Lots: The establishment of park and ride lots on or near the development project site or at satellite locations should be coordinated with
public transit routing or carpool/vanpool services.
C. Bicycle Programs: Bicycle racks may be provided for use by employees who commute to the site by bicycle. The bicycle parking area may be
established in a secure location and be in close proximity to employee entrances. Provision of connections to existing and planned on street and off
street bike trails may also be incorporated into the site plans. Development projects may also wish to include shower facilities into their facility design.
D. Transit Service Programs: Transit waiting shelters, including bus pullouts, bus pads and right of way for bus stops may be provided for development
projects located along established or proposed bus routes. The applicability of this provision shall be determined in conformance with standard traffic
engineering principles including, but not limited to, the frequency and relative impact of blocked traffic due to stopped buses and the level of transit
ridership at the location. Transit information services or employer based transit pass programs may also be considered as strategies.
E. Alternate Work Schedules: Employers may wish to establish flexible work hours, compressed workweeks or staggered work schedules which move
commute trips out of the peak period (7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.).
F. Pedestrian Access: Sidewalks and other paved pathways may be provided on site to connect off site external pedestrian circulation systems (planned or
existing) to the building site. Sidewalk locations may integrate existing and planned waiting shelters with building entrance(s).
G. Joint Access And Shared Parking: For applicable developments designed as a worksite, provision of joint access and shared parking across multiple
parcels may be incorporated into project design to facilitate integration of TDM strategies.
H. Telecommunications: The employer's use of telecommunications, teleconferencing and telecommuting can be made a part of the strategy as it relates
to the reduction in peak period trips to the worksite.
I. Commuter Information: An area within the facility may be provided to disseminate information on alternative transportation modes. This area shall be
centrally located and accessible to all employees. The space shall be of sufficient size to provide information on alternative transportation modes, such
as current maps, routes and schedules for public transit.
J. On Site Support Facilities: Mixed use developments which include such services as daycare, lunchrooms/cafeterias, banks, restaurants and retail uses.
(Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-7: PROCEDURE:
A. All existing employers which are subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit a transportation demand management plan prepared in
conformance with the city's guidelines by July 1, 1993.
B. Any existing employer which attains the employee threshold contemplated under this chapter shall be required to submit a transportation demand
management plan within twelve (12) months of reaching the employee threshold.
C. Any new development project which begins business at or above the employee threshold established by resolution of the city council as determined
under subsection 27-3B of this chapter shall submit a transportation demand management plan for review at the time an application for a discretionary
permit is submitted.
D. An employer or new development project submitting a transportation demand management plan under this chapter shall submit two (2) copies of the
plan to the city.
E. All transportation demand management plans shall be reviewed by the city engineer or his designated representative. All employers with an approved
transportation demand management plan shall make annual reports to the city of Porterville on the success of their efforts at achieving the average
vehicle ridership goal. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-8: ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be implemented and enforced in accordance with customary methods and procedures of the city of Porterville regarding developments.
(Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-9: FEES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=679 636/636
For the purposes of meeting its obligations under this chapter, the city of Porterville may impose on each transportation demand management plan which
is submitted a fee, as set by resolution of the city council, for the cost of processing and reviewing the plan. A separate fee may be collected for the review
of the annual report. This annual fee shall also be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-10: APPEALS:
An employer may, within ten (10) days following the date of a decision made by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter, appeal said decision to the
director. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set forth the terms upon which the appeal is based and state specifically the error or abuse of discretion or
lack of evidence to support said decision. If said employer is still not satisfied by the decision of the director he shall submit in writing an appeal to city
council. The council shall consider and decide all issues raised in the appeal, and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed to it. The decision
of the council shall be final. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-11: SEVERABILITY:
The city council hereby declares that should any section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter, hereby adopted, be declared for any reason to be
invalid, it is the intent of the city council that it would have passed all other portions of this chapter independent of any such portion as may be declared
invalid. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-12: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
For the purpose of ensuring that applicable developments comply with the provisions of this chapter, city shall, following written notice to the employer,
initiate enforcement action(s) against the employer which may include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Withholding the issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy.
B. Issuance of a stop work order.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person,
firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or by
both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during which any
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable therefor
as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-13: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, the following uses and activities shall be specifically exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Development projects expected to employ fewer than the employee threshold number.
B. Temporary construction activities on any affected project, including activities performed by engineers, architects, contract subcontractors and
construction workers.
C. Other temporary activities, as defined in this code, or as authorized by the city when such temporary activities shall discontinue at the end of the
designated time period.
D. Employers that can show that the implementation of the various transportation demand management strategies will not achieve the goals of
transportation demand management, air quality and congestion management. (Ord. 1482 § 1, 12-15-1992)
27-14: APPLICABILITY TO EMPLOYERS PARTICIPATING IN TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION(S) (TMA):
The requirements of this chapter do not apply individually to members of a local transportation management association if the association is in compliance
with all sections of this chapter on behalf of its members. Should an employer no longer participate in a transportation management association, this
chapter shall be applicable to his/her development immediately. As a result, the affected employer must comply with all sections of this chapter. (Ord. 1482
§ 1, 12-15-1992)