PORT HUENEME, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
the City of Port Hueneme, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 9, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
> 
  
  
  
CITY OFFICIALS 
	
City Manager: 	Rod Butler 
	
City Attorney: 	Mark D. Hensley 
	
City Treasurer: 	Alvin Burrell 
	
Deputy City Manager: 	Carmen Nichols 
	
Police Chief: 	Robert Albertson 
	
Community Development and Housing Director: 	Carmen Nichols 
	
Public Works Director: 	Don Villafana 
	
City Clerk/Public Information Officer: 	Michele Kostenuik 
 
PREFACE 
The Port Hueneme, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 9, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Karen Jackson, City Clerk. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 9, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 752, passed March 4, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Article. 
An article is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 articles. For example, the first article is Article I, General, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The articles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one article. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. 
Table of Contents. At the beginning of the code is the table of contents listing each title. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 9, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the article(s), chapter(s) and/or section(s) will be indicated. If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 9, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 9, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
TAX 5031 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 9, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Article I - GENERAL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - ADOPTION OF CODE 
Sections: 
 
1000 - Short title—Reference to code. 
This Code shall be known as the "Port Hueneme Municipal Code," and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code as such in any prosecution for the violation of any provision hereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing, said Code, or portions hereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the "Port Hueneme Municipal Code", or a portion thereof.  
1001 - Codification. 
This Code consists of the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative regulations of the City of Port Hueneme.  
1002 - Effective date. 
This Code shall be operative on and after the effective date of the ordinance of the Council of the City of Port Hueneme, whereby the same is adopted.  
1003 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal of any ordinance or prior Code or provision thereof (hereinafter "Ordinances") of the City of Port Hueneme shall: 
(1)  Affect the prosecution for violations of such Ordinances, committed prior to the effective date hereof; nor 
(2)  Be construed as a waiver of the requirement for any license or penalty or fee or penalty due and unpaid under such Ordinances; nor 
(3)  Be construed as to affect any of the provisions of such Ordinances relating to the collection of any such license taxes or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof; nor 
(4)  Be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to such Ordinances, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as the same are substantially the same as the prior Port Hueneme Municipal Code and other Ordinances of the City of Port Hueneme relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations of existing laws, and not as new enactments. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect the deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.  
1004 - Status of present employees. 
Any person holding any position of employment with the City of Port Hueneme as of the effective date of this Chapter, shall maintain and carry forward such status; however, each such position, shall, after the effective date hereof, be subject, in all respects, to the provisions of this Code.  
1005 - Validity of code. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Code is, for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional by decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council of the City of Port Hueneme hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions hereof, be declared invalid or unconstitutional.  
1006 - Distribution of code. 
Not less than three (3) copies of this Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. Additional copies shall be prepared in loose-leaf form and shall be mounted to withstand heavy usage, in a manner to be prescribed by the City Manager. Copies hereof shall be distributed as directed by the City Manager.  
1007 - Amendments to code. 
Certified copies of each ordinance changing any provision of this Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk, duly indexed for ready reference.  
1008 - Copies of code. 
The City Clerk shall prepare copies of all changes in the Code, for insertion in the loose-leaf copies hereof, and shall distribute the same as directed by the City Manager.  
Chapter 2 - ENFORCEMENT OF CODE 
Sections:  
Part A. - Violation of Code 
 
1100 - Violation. 
No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code, shall be guilty of an infraction except for those provisions of this Code, the violation of which is expressly declared to be a misdemeanor filing. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 606 § 5 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 4, 11-15-10)  
1101 - Separate offenses. 
A person violating any provision of this Code, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every calendar day during which such violation continues regardless of whether a citation has been issued or a complaint filed. 
(Ord. No. 702, § 4, 11-15-10)  
1102 - Violation penalties. 
Unless otherwise specified in this Code, any person who violates any provision of this Code, the violation of which is expressly declared to be an infraction, shall be punished therefore as follows: 
(a)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
(b)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same Code provision within one (1) calendar year; 
(c)  Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor if a defendant had been cited for the same violation two (2) or more times within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense; and 
(d)  A fourth violation of the same Code provision regardless of the time of occurrence shall be treated as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 606 § 5 (part), 1996) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 4, 11-15-10)  
1103 - Nuisance. 
Notwithstanding any other nuisance provision of this Code to the contrary, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in any manner prescribed by Code or other applicable law, by the City Attorney, or his designee upon direction of the City Manager.  
1104 - Public work by probationers. 
In accordance with applicable provisions of law, any or all persons granted probation by a court of competent jurisdiction (hereafter "Probationer") may be compelled, by judicial order, to perform labor under the direction of the probation officer, or such other person as the court may direct, on public property or works within the City. Public property or works shall include, but not be limited to, public grounds, roads, streets, alleys, highways, trails, parks, beaches, public buildings, or in such other places as the city may deem advisable for the benefit of the public; provided, however, that no probationer shall be compelled to perform labor if the performance of such labor is beyond a person's physical capabilities, or if to do so would endanger the safekeeping of such probationer in any respect.  
1105 - Labor upon public works defined. 
"Labor" as used in this chapter, means and includes, among other things, clerical and menial labor in public buildings, public parks and other public grounds.  
1106 - Status of probationers. 
No probationer engaged in the performance of labor pursuant to Court order shall be deemed, for any purpose, to be an employee of, or to be employed by, the City in any capacity.  
Part B. - Citation Process 
 
1107 - Citation procedure for violations. 
(a)  Any City officer or employee authorized to arrest any person for a violation of any provision of this Code, who does not immediately take such arrested person before a magistrate, as prescribed in the Penal Code of the state, shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the person arrested; 
(2)  The offense charged, the time and place of the alleged violation: 
(3)  Where and when such person shall appear in court. The time specified in the notice for appearance must be at least five (5) days after such arrest. The place specified in the notice to appear and the notice shall be in conformity with the applicable provisions of the Penal Code of the state. 
(b)  The arresting City officer or employee shall deliver one (1) copy of the notice to appear to the alleged violator; the alleged violator in order to secure his immediate release must give his written promise to so appear in court at the time and place indicated on the notice by signing the duplicate notice, which signed copy shall be retained by the City officer or employee. Thereafter, the arresting City officer or employee shall release forthwith from custody the person so arrested. The duplicate copy of the notice to appear shall be filed in the manner prescribed in the Penal Code of the state.  
1108 - Promise to appear. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified therein, and has not posted bail as provided in Penal Code of the State, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after such person has failed to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date with which he promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution, a warrant for his arrest. When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer.  
1109 - Duty of enforcement. 
Unless otherwise directed herein, the duty of enforcing the provisions of this Code shall be the responsibility of the City Manager or his designee.  
1110 - Failure to appear. 
Any person who willfully violates his written promise to appear in court by failing to appear at the time and place stated shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested.  
1111 - Warrant for arrest upon failure to appear. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified therein, and has not posted bail as provided in the Penal Code of the state, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty (20) days after such person has failed to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then within twenty (20) days after delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, such magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest. When such person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer.  
Chapter 3 - RULES OF CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 
 
1200 - Construction—Provisions governing. 
Unless the context hereof clearly otherwise requires, the rules of construction and definitions, hereinafter set forth, shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it shall be construed with a view to effectuate its objects and to promote justice.  
1201 - Headings, effect of. 
Article, Chapter, Part and Section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of this Code. 
Whenever in this Code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall also be unlawful to cause, permit, aid, abet, suffer or conceal such act or omission.  
1202 - Acts by deputy. 
Wherever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.  
1203 - Writing. 
Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided herein to the contrary.  
1204 - Reference applies to amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinance of this City, the reference shall be deemed to apply to all amendments and additions thereto whenever made.  
1205 - Notices. 
Whenever notice is required to be given under this Code, such notice shall be in writing, and given (1) by personal service as required of pleadings in civil actions in this State, delivery thereof to the person to be notified or (2) by deposit in the custody of the United States Postal Service or its successor, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified, at his or her last known business or residence address. Service hereunder by mail shall be deemed to have been given two (2) consecutive calendar days following its deposit in the custody of said Postal Service. Personal service shall be deemed given at the time of such personal service.  
1206 - Definitions. 
(a)  Cash Deposits. Wherever this Code requires a cash deposit for any purpose, a valid and sufficient corporate surety bond may be deposited in lieu thereof, if approved by the City Manager. 
(b)  City. "City" means the City of Port Hueneme. 
(c)  City Manager. "City Manager" means the duly appointed and acting City Manager of the City or his designee except where declaration is prohibited by law. 
(d)  Code. "Code" means the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(e)  Council. "Council" means the duly elected Council of the City of Port Hueneme. 
(f)  County. "County" means the County of Ventura. 
(g)  Director. "Director" means the Director of the specific administrative agency of the City 
(h)  Fire Chief. "Fire Chief' means the Fire Marshal for the County of Ventura or his authorized deputy. 
(i)  Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
(j)  Housing Authority. "Housing Authority" means the Port Hueneme Housing Authority. 
(k)  Oath. "Oath" shall include affirmation. 
(1)  Office. The use of the title of any officer or employee of the City means the then holder of such office. 
(m)  Owner. "Owner" as applied to real or personal property, includes all persons having a legal or equitable ownership interest therein. 
(n)  Person. "Person" as used in this Code includes any natural person, and any legal entity, except the City. 
(o)  Police Chief. "Police Chief' means the duly appointed and acting Police Chief of the City or his authorized deputy. 
(p)  Shall, Must and May. "Shall" and "Must" are mandatory and "May" is permissive. 
(q)  State. "State" means the State of California. 
(r)  Tenant or Occupant. "Tenant" or "Occupant," as applied to any real or personal property, shall mean and include any person who occupies or possesses such real or personal property, whether alone or with others, and shall include any person who is entitled to such occupancy or possession. 
(s)  Time. Whenever an act is required to be accomplished within a specified number of days or months, pursuant to this Code, such time period means consecutive calendar days or months, unless otherwise expressly stated. 
(t)  Redevelopment Agency. Redevelopment Agency means the Port Hueneme Redevelopment Agency. 
(u)  Resolution. "Resolution" means a resolution duly adopted by the Council.  
Chapter 4 - PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1300 - Construction and purpose. 
The procedures of this Chapter are intended to constitute the administrative procedures to be followed when implementing provisions of this Code and shall apply except where alternative procedures are expressly set forth in this Code.  
1301 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this Chapter shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  "Enforcement Officer" means the city officer or employee designated as responsible for enforcing provisions of this Code or related regulations or resolutions. 
(b)  "Hearing Officer" means the City Manager or his designee who shall hear timely appeals filed affecting those decisions of an Enforcement Officer eligible for appeal. 
(c)  "Appellate Body" means the Council who may review decisions of the Hearing Officer and may conduct a de novo hearing. All decisions of the Appellate Body shall be deemed for all purposes final and conclusive. 
(d)  "Fee" means an appeal filing and processing fee in an amount set by resolution. Such fee shall be paid to the Treasurer contemporaneously with the filing of an appeal.  
1302 - Appeals. 
An Appeal from an administrative decision of an Enforcement Officer or a decision of a Hearing Officer shall (a) be in writing and describe the decision appealed from; and shall (b) set forth the basis for appeal; and (c) be filed with the City Clerk not later than ten (10) consecutive calendar days following the giving of notice of that decision appealed from, and be accompanied by evidence of payment of any required fee. No appeal shall be accepted for filing as valid for any purpose, unless it complies with the provisions of the Section. Upon the filing of valid appeal the decision appealed from shall be suspended. Any appeal may be withdrawn in writing by the appealing party; no portion of a required fee shall be refunded in such case.  
1303 - Notice—Hearing. 
Upon compliance with Section 1302, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the Hearing Officer or Appellate Body, whichever is applicable. The City Clerk shall give the appealing party and any other interested person who has, in writing, requested notice, at least five (5) calendar days' written notice of the time and place of the hearing.  
1304 - Burden of proof. 
At each appeal hearing all persons interested in such matter shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The burden of proof shall be on the appealing party to show that the decision appealed thus was arbitrary, unreasonable, or not in conformity with the provisions of this Code. The determination of the Hearing Officer and/or Appellate Body or body shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in this Code relating to the subject of the appeal.  
1305 - Notice of action. 
The City Clerk shall give written notice of the decision of the Hearing officer and/or Appellate Body promptly to the appealing party, and any other interested person who has, in writing, requested the same.  
1306 - Enforcement officer decisions. 
Unless a timely appeal is filed decisions of the Enforcement Officer or the Hearing Officer shall be deemed final and conclusive.  
1307 - Evidence. 
The substance of the Rules of Evidence applicable to Judicial proceedings shall be observed in hearings conducted by the Enforcement Officer, the Hearing Officer and the Appellate Body, to the end that decisions are made based upon reasonably reliable evidence.  
1308 - Right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Chapter, or whenever the Enforcement Officer or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous conditions, the Building Official or Code Enforcement Officer or their authorized representatives shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
When the Building Official or Code Enforcement Officer or their authorized representatives shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Building Official or Code Enforcement Officer or their authorized representatives for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Chapter. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor unless determined by the City Attorney to be an infraction.  
Chapter 5 - CODE ENFORCEMENT COST RECOVERY 
Sections: 
 
1400 - Construction and purpose. 
This Chapter establishes procedures for the recovery of Administrative Costs incurred in enforcing the Port Hueneme Municipal Code ("Code"). 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1401 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this Chapter shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  "Administrative Costs" means Staff Time and all other Incidental Expenses reasonably related to a particular Code enforcement case. 
(b)  "Code Violation" means any violation of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code; when used in the singular, the term "Code Violation" includes multiple infractions and when used in the plural, the number of infractions include the singular. 
(c)  "Department" means the Department of Community Development of the City. 
(d)  "Director" means the Director of the Department. 
(e)  "Enforcement Action" means prosecution of code Violations by infraction citation, misdemeanor complaint, public nuisance abatement or any other remedy afforded by law. 
(f)  "Enforcement Officer" means the Code Enforcement Officer of the Department. 
(g)  "Incidental Expenses" means the actual expenses and costs, other than Staff Time, incurred by the City in the course of enforcing the Code. Incidental Expenses, as a component of Administrative Costs, include, but are not limited to, the printing and mailing of notices, consultant and attorney fees, word processing and document reproduction, and telephone charges. 
(h)  "Responsible Party means the persons or persons who are alleged to have violated the Code. In the case of Code Violations involving real property, a Responsible Party may include the owner or occupant of such property, or person having lawful possession thereof. 
(i)  "Staff Time" means the actual time spent by officers and employees of the city in the course of enforcing the Code. Staff time, as a component of Administrative Costs, shall be calculated at an hourly rate based on a schedule established by Resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1402 - Cost computation. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the Department shall account for and maintain records of all Administrative Costs associated with the processing of Code Violations. The computation of Administrative Costs shall include Staff Time and Incidental Expenses incurred by the City in conjunction with each enforcement Action. For the purpose of this Chapter, the duration of each Enforcement Action and assessment of Administrative Costs therefore shall be measured from the Compliance Date prescribed in the Second Notice until all Code Violations are corrected. Upon conclusion of an Enforcement Action and correction of the Code Violations, the Code Enforcement Officer shall file an itemized statement of all Administrative Costs ("Report") with the City Clerk and City Treasurer. Unless a timely appeal is filed pursuant to Section 1405 of this Chapter, the Report shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1403 - Notification procedures. 
In order to recover Administrative Costs under this Section, the following procedures must be followed: 
(a)  First Notice. Upon investigation and determination that a Code Violation exists, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the Responsible Party of the existence of the violation and date by which the violation is to be corrected ("First Notice"). The First Notice shall be given in the manner provided in Section 1205 of the Code. In no event shall the date proscribed for correction be less than five (5) days from the date of the notice. 
(b)  Second Notice. If the Code Violation is not abated within the time prescribed in the First Notice, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the Responsible Party of its liability for Administrative Costs should an Enforcement Action become necessary ("Second Notice"). Furthermore, the Responsible Party shall be advised that the Administrative Costs are in Addition to whatever fines and penalties may be given in the manner provided in Section 1205 of the Code and shall provide a period of correction of not less than five (5) days from the date of the notice ("Compliance Date"). 
(c)  Third Notice. If the Code Violation is not abated within the time prescribed in the Second Notice, the Enforcement Officer shall take all measures as are necessary to gain compliance. Upon completion of an Enforcement Action and correction of all Code Violations, the Enforcement Officer shall notify the Responsible Party of the total Administrative Costs incurred by the City. The Third Notice shall be given in the manner provided in Section 1205 of the Code, and further in the case of Code Violations involving real property, by conspicuously posting on the affected premises a copy of the notice. The Third Notice shall provided a written summary of Administrative Costs which are chargeable to the Responsible Party; shall advise the Responsible Party of the availability of the Report prescribed in Section 1402 of this Chapter shall require payment from the Responsible Party within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice: and shall advise the Responsible Party of the right to file an appeal contesting the Administrative Costs, provided that such appeal is filed within ten (10) days of the date of the notice.  
1404 - Cost recovery. 
Administrative Costs shall only be charged in those instances where the Responsible Party, after exhausting or forfeiting all administrative remedies, is found to be in violation of the Code by: (i) the issuance of a final Administrative Order under the Code; (ii) the issuance of a final judgment rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction; or (iii) the filing of a written Stipulation by the Responsible Party as provided in Sections 1407 and 1408 of this Chapter. The Third Notice prescribed in Section 1403(c) of this Chapter shall only be issued following correction of all Code Violations. Furthermore, if a Court of competent jurisdiction dismisses an Enforcement Action or subsequently finds the Responsible Party innocent of all alleged Code Violations, no Administrative Costs shall be charged to such Party. 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1405 - Appeals. 
Appeals contesting Administrative Costs charged hereunder shall be filed and heard within the time and manner provided in Article I, Chapter 4 of this Code. For the purpose of hearing appeals hereunder, the City Council shall serve as the Appellate Body. At the time of the hearing, the Council shall consider all matters pertinent thereto and may either uphold, reverse or modify the amount of Administrative Costs chargeable to the Responsible Party. The decision of the City Council shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1406 - Collection of administrative costs. 
All payments for which a responsible party is charged under this chapter shall be paid to the City Treasurer. All payments shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days of the date of the Third Notice as provided in Section 1403(c) of this Chapter or, in the event that a timely appeal is filed, within thirty (30) days of the date that notice of action is given by the City Clerk pursuant to Section 1305 of this Code. The Enforcement Officer shall notify the Treasurer of all payments when due and shall monitor all payments received. Should a Responsible Party fail to pay all Administrative Costs for which it has been charged within the time prescribed herein, the Treasurer may effect payment through a collection agency or through any other legal means at its disposal (Ord 573 § 1 (part) 1991)  
1407 - Alternative cost computation. 
Following commencement of an Enforcement Action, a Responsible Party may limit the amount of Administrative Costs otherwise chargeable to such Party by filing a written stipulation ("Stipulation") as provided in Section 1408 of this Chapter. Where a Stipulation is accepted for filing in the time and manner provided in Section 1408, the amount of Administrative Costs chargeable to a Responsible Party shall be the sum of Staff Time and Incidental Costs incurred by the City from the Compliance Date prescribed in the Second Notice until the effective date of the Stipulation. For the purpose of Section 1405 of this Chapter, the Stipulation shall not preclude a Responsible Party from filing an appeal with respect to Administrative Costs chargeable to such Party hereunder. 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1408 - Stipulation. 
The written Stipulation referred to in Section 1407 of this Chapter shall be on forms prescribed by the City and shall constitute a declaration and acknowledgement by the Responsible Party that it does not contest the alleged Code Violations and waives all administrative rights and remedies relative thereto. The Stipulation shall not be effective nor be accepted for filing by the City until all Code Violations have been corrected. For the purposes of this Chapter, an Enforcement Action shall be deemed completed the soonest of: (i) issuance of final Administrative Order under the Code or by final judgment rendered by a Court of competent jurisdiction; or (ii) filing and acceptance of a Stipulation hereunder (Ord 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
1409 - Exceptions and limitations. 
The procedures prescribed herein must only be followed if the City is to recover Administrative Costs. The recovery of Administrative Costs shall be in addition to any fines or penalties that may be imposed under this Code or by Court order including, but not limited to, Enforcement Actions which are prosecuted to completion after a Responsible Party has satisfied the provisions of Sections 1407 and 1408 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 573 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 6 - ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS 
Sections:  
General Provisions 
 
1500 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the municipal affairs provision of the City charter for the purpose of making any violation of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code subject to an administrative fine and to set forth the procedures for the imposition and collection of such fines. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1501 - Applicability. 
This Chapter provides for administrative citations that are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which the City may pursue to address any violation of this Code. The use of this Chapter is at the sole discretion of the City officer or employee enforcing this Code. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1502 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this Chapter. 
"Citee" means the person(s) to whom a code compliance officer issued an administrative citation pursuant to this Chapter. 
"City Clerk" means the City Clerk or his or her designee. 
"Code Compliance Officer" means any City employee or agent with the authority to enforce any provision of this Code. 
"Code" means the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1503 - Notices. 
Unless otherwise provided, all notices and citations required by this Chapter shall be served on Citee via personal service or first-class mail, postage prepaid, to Citee's last known address. Service is effective when personally served or when deposited into the United States mail. The individual serving a Citee with notice shall complete a declaration of service. Failure to receive any notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings conducted under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
Administrative Citations 
 
1504 - Administrative citations. 
A.  Issuing an administrative citation pursuant to this Chapter is in lieu of any criminal citation that could have been issued for the same violation. The issuance of the administrative citation does not, however, prevent the issuance of a criminal citation for a subsequent violation of the same nature. 
B.  Contents of administrative citation. Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date of the violation; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the geographic location where the violation occurred or is occurring; 
3.  The section of this Code that was violated; 
4.  A description of the conditions causing the code violation; 
5.  The amount of the administrative fine for the code violation; 
6.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place where the fine shall be paid; 
7.  An order prohibiting the continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation described in the administrative citation; 
8.  Notification that payment of a fine under this Chapter does not excuse or discharge any continued or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation; 
9.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the manner in which a request for review of the citation may be requested; and 
10.  The name of the citing Code Compliance Officer. 
C.  Service and filing of administrative citations. The Code Compliance Officer shall serve the original citation on the person cited in the manner set forth in this Chapter and forward a copy of the administrative citation to the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1505 - Amount of administrative fines. 
The amounts of the administrative fines imposed for code violations under this Chapter are established by City Council resolution. That resolution shall also set forth any increased fines for repeat violations of the same code provision by the same person within twelve (12) months from the date of a previous administrative citation. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1506 - Payment of administrative fines. 
An administrative fine shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation or, if a request for an initial administrative review is submitted, within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of the conclusion of that initial administrative review, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1507 - Delinquent administrative fines—Late fee. 
A.  A late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be added to any delinquent fine if not received on or before the due date. 
B.  In addition to penalties provided by this section, delinquent fines accrue interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month, exclusive of penalties, from the due date. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1508 - Issuance of permits. 
If a Code Compliance Officer issued a citation because a Citee lacks a required permit and the fine is delinquent, the City will not issue a permit until the delinquent fine, and any applicable penalty and interest, are paid. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1509 - Compliance order. 
Before issuing an administrative citation for any violation of this Code, the Code Compliance Officer shall first issue a written compliance order to the person(s) responsible for the violation unless the violation constitutes an immediate threat to public health or safety. The compliance order shall contain all of the following: 
A.  The date on which, and geographic location where, the violation was observed; 
B.  The section of this Code violated; 
C.  A description of the conditions causing the code violation; 
D.  Actions required to correct the violation; 
E.  A reasonable time period for the correction of the violation; 
F.  Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the date specified in the compliance order, that an administrative citation may be issued and administrative fines imposed for failure to correct violations by the date specified. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1510 - Correction of violation. 
No further action is required if the Code Compliance Officer determines that all violations in the compliance order were cured. If the Code Compliance Officer determines that all violations were not corrected within the time specified, an administrative citation may be issued to each person named in the compliance order as a responsible person. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
Administrative Review and Hearings 
 
1511 - Initial administrative review—Request. 
Citees may request an initial administrative review of the citation within fourteen (14) days of its issuance. This request shall be made in writing to the City Clerk and set forth, with particularity, the reasons the Citee believes a violation did not occur or that the Citee was not responsible for the violation(s); shall include a copy of the citation; and contain the address to which the conclusions of the City's review should be mailed. A request for an initial administrative review is a mandatory prerequisite to a request for an administrative hearing. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1512 - Initial administrative review—Procedure. 
The City Clerk will forward initial administrative review requests to the appropriate Department Director ("Reviewing Officer.") 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1513 - Initial administrative review—Decision. 
A.  Upon receiving these requests from the City Clerk, the Reviewing Officer will review the requests and provide the City Clerk with a written notification that: 
1.  The citation should be vacated because there was no violation, or the Citee was not responsible for the violation, and setting forth basis for that conclusion; or 
2.  The citation should not be vacated because no justification could be found. 
B.  The City Clerk's office will mail a copy of the notification to the Citee at the address on the request for initial administrative review along with notice establishing the fine due date and the procedure for requesting an administrative hearing. 
C.  The Reviewing Officer should complete his/her review within ten (10) business days of receiving the Citee's request. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
Administrative Hearing Procedures 
 
1514 - Request for administrative hearing. 
Any Citee dissatisfied with the conclusions of an initial administrative review may contest the citation by requesting an administrative hearing. A Citee shall request an administrative hearing within fifteen (15) days after the date the City served the Citee with notice of the administrative review decision. Requests shall be submitted to the City Clerk's office and shall be accompanied by an advance deposit of the fine or a request for a hardship waiver. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1515 - Advance deposit—Hardship waiver. 
A.  Citees financially unable to make an advance deposit of the administrative fine may file for a hardship waiver. The request for a hardship waiver shall be filed with the City Clerk's office on a form containing information that may be required by the City Clerk. The City Clerk in consultation with the Financial Services Director will review the request and determine whether a waiver is justified. A waiver may only be approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating that the Citee's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine. 
B.  The City Clerk will inform the Citee in writing whether the waiver was approved. This determination shall be served upon the Citee by mail at the address provided in the waiver application. The City Clerk's determination is final. 
C.  Should the City Clerk determine that a waiver is unjustified, the Citee shall deposit the fine amount with the City not later than ten (10) days after the date of that decision. Failure to make a deposit within ten (10) days after hardship waiver denial will be deemed a waiver of the Citee's right to an administrative hearing and the administrative fine will be deemed delinquent. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1516 - Hearing officer. 
The City Manager designates the Hearing Officer for the administrative citation hearing. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1517 - Hearing date. 
After receiving a timely hearing request and deposit, or waiver, of the fine amount, the City Clerk shall schedule a hearing on a date not less than fifteen (15) and not more than thirty (30) days from the date the hearing is requested. Written notice of the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing must be provided to the Citee at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing date. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1518 - Conduct of hearings. 
A.  Evidentiary Rules. The administrative citation is prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in the citation. Both the Citee and Code Compliance Officer have the opportunity to testify and present additional evidence concerning the administrative citation. Evidence may include, without limitation, witness testimony, documents, or other similar evidence. Evidence sought to be introduced is not limited to any legal rules of evidence except for the rule that it be relevant and material to the issues of whether the violation alleged in the citation occurred and whether the Citee was responsible for the violation. 
B.  Waiver of Personal Appearance of Hearing. In lieu of personally appearing at an administrative hearing, the Citee may request that the Hearing Officer decide the matter based on the citation itself and any other documentary evidence submitted by the Citee or Code Compliance Officer before the hearing date. 
C.  Failure to Appear at Hearing. Failure of a Citee to appear at the hearing shall be deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at the hearing. The Hearing Officer must then decide the matter based upon the citation itself, any documentary evidence previously submitted, and any additional evidence that may be presented at the hearing by the Code Compliance Officer. 
D.  Attendance of Code Compliance Officer. The Code Compliance Officer who issued the administrative citation may, but is not required to, attend the administrative hearing. If the Code Compliance Officer does not attend, the Code Compliance Officer may, before the hearing date, submit reports, photos, or other documentation regarding the violation to the Hearing Officer for consideration at the hearing. 
E.  Continuation of Hearings. The Hearing Officer may continue any hearing and request additional information from the Code Compliance Officer or Citee before issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1519 - Hearing officer's decision. 
A.  The Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or set aside the administrative citation and shall present the reasons for that decision. 
B.  The City Clerk must send a copy of the Hearing Officer's decision to the Citee with notice of the Citee's right to appeal the decision in Superior Court. 
C.  The Hearing Officer's decision is the City's final action on the matter. There is no right to an appeal other than as provided for in this Chapter. The Hearing Officer's decision is final as of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1520 - Disposition of administrative fines. 
A.  Should the Hearing Officer uphold the administrative citation, then the City can retain the deposited fine amount. 
B.  Should the Hearing Officer vacate the administrative citation, then the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, if any. 
C.  Should the Hearing Officer uphold the administrative citation and a hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the administrative fine is thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of the Hearing Officer's decision. 
D.  The City may use all legal means to collect any past due fines, including penalties and interest, should a Citee fail to pay in a timely manner. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1521 - Right to judicial review. 
A.  A Citee may appeal the Hearing Officer's decision by filing an appeal with the Superior Court pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4, or any successor statute, within twenty (20) days from service of the Hearing Officer's decision. 
B.  Should the Citee file a timely appeal with the Superior Court, the requirement to pay the fine is suspended and the payment of the fine, if any, will be in accordance with the Superior Court decision. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
Collection and Lien Procedures 
 
1522 - Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs. 
In addition to any other legal remedy, the City may place a lien on property owned by the Citee in an amount equal to the sum of the fines delinquent for more than ninety (90) days, plus penalties and interest. Imposition of a lien must stem from a citation for the condition or use of real property, or its improvements, that is owned by the Citee. For purposes of this article, "lien" means both a special assessment and a lien against real property. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1523 - Procedure. 
A.  The City Manager, or designee, may initiate proceedings to record a lien conforming with this article if the decision is not appealed. 
B.  Before recording the lien, the City Manager, or designee, must submit a report to the City Clerk stating the amounts due and owing. 
C.  The City Clerk must fix a time, date, and place for the City Council to consider the report and any protests or objections to it. 
D.  The City Clerk must serve the Citee with a hearing notice not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any other penalties and interest that is due. In addition, the notice must specify that the property may be sold after three (3) years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. Notice must be delivered first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each Citee as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Ventura, whichever is more current. Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of Citee to actually receive notice does not affect its validity. 
E.  At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council will adopt a resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1524 - Recordation. 
Within thirty (30) days following the City Council's adoption of a resolution imposing a lien, the City Clerk will file same as a judgment lien and/or special assessment in the Ventura County Recorder's Office. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1525 - Collection. 
The lien and/or special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1526 - Administrative fee. 
Each Citee against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this Chapter will also be assessed an administrative fee in an amount established by City Council resolution based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee will be included in the lien amount approved by the City Council and recorded against the Citee's property. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
1527 - Satisfaction of lien. 
Once the City receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs, the City Clerk will either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the Citee with a notice of satisfaction for recordation at the Ventura County Recorder's Office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the City's lien. 
(Ord. 647 § 1, 2003)  
Article II - ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 1 - COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
2001 - Meetings. 
(a)  Regular Meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Monday of every month at the time of 5:30 p.m., at the Civic Center of the City, located at 250 North Ventura Road, Port Hueneme, Ventura County, California, or in such other place to which said meeting may be recessed or adjourned. If by reason of some emergency, it shall be unsafe to meet in the Civic Center, the meetings may be held for the duration of the emergency at such other place as is designated by the Mayor, or, if the Mayor should fail to act, by a majority of the City Council. Should the date of a regular meeting fall upon a holiday when City Hall offices are closed, then the regular meeting will be scheduled for the next succeeding business day. 
(b)  Adjourned Meetings. All regular, adjourned regular and special, and adjourned special Council meetings shall be automatically adjourned at or before 12:00 a.m. (midnight) of the day of the meeting. However, the Council may complete any item under discussion if the discussion on said item commenced prior to 12:00 a.m. (midnight). Upon adjournment, the remainder of all agenda items shall be continued to the next following regular meeting, unless otherwise directed by the Council. 
(Ord. 670 § 2 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 689, § 2, 2-18-09; Ord. No. 735, § 2, 2-20-18)  
2002 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 724, § 2, adopted February 16, 2016, repealed § 2002, which pertained to pre-agenda sessions and study sessions and derived from Ord. No. 670, 2006 and Ord. No. 689, adopted February 18, 2009.  
2003 - Meetings to be public—Exceptions. 
All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be public; provided, however, the Council may hold Executive Sessions during a regular or special meeting, from which the public may be excluded, for the purposes permitted by state law. No member of the Council, employee of the City, or any other person present during an Executive Session of the Council shall disclose to any person the content or substance of any discussion which took place during said Executive Session unless the Council shall authorize the disclosure of such information by majority vote.  
2004 - Disruption of meeting. 
In the event that any meeting is willfully interrupted by a group or groups of persons so as to render the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and order cannot be restored by removal of individuals who are willfully interrupting the meeting, the Council may order the meeting room cleared and continue in session.  
2005 - Quorum. 
Three members of the Council constitute a quorum for the purpose of doing business. Where a quorum is present at any meeting of the Council a majority of the Council members present is sufficient to take action on any item except where a greater vote is required by law.  
2006 - Reading of minutes. 
Unless the reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is ordered by a majority vote of the Council, such minutes may be approved as part of the consent agenda without reading if the City Clerk has previously furnished each Councilman with a copy.  
2007 - Council organization. 
(a)  Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall be the Presiding Officer at all meetings of the Council. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside. In the absence of both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore, the City Clerk shall call the Council to order, whereupon a member of the Council shall be elected temporary Presiding Officer who shall serve until the arrival of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tempore or until adjournment. Wherever in this Chapter the term "Mayor" is used, it shall mean and include the Mayor Pro Tempore and a temporary Presiding Officer. 
(b)  Council Reorganization. The Council shall reorganize and select one of its members as Mayor, and one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore, on the following occasions: 
(1)  At the first meeting following each general municipal election; and 
(2)  At such other times as a majority of the Council shall so order.  
2008 - Rules of procedure. 
If necessary to expedite the transaction of the business of the Council in an orderly fashion, the Council may adopt further rules of procedure by resolution.  
2009 - Failure to observe rules. 
The rules set out in this chapter and such further rules adopted pursuant to Section 2008 are intended to expedite the transaction of the business of the Council in an orderly fashion and are intended to be procedural only and the failure to strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the Council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with law.  
2010 - Councilmanic salaries. 
Each Councilmember of the City of Port Hueneme shall receive a salary of seven hundred fifty-one dollars and thirty-eight cents ($751.38) per month to be paid each month that s/he is a Councilmember of the City. 
(Ord. 656 § 1, 2004: Ord. 642 § 1, 2003: Ord. 635 § 1, 2000: Ord. 622 § 1, 1998: Ord. 610 § 1, 1996: Ord. 557, 1990; Ord. 586 § 1, 1992)  
2011 - Redevelopment agency—Creation. 
The Council hereby finds and determines that there is a need for a Redevelopment Agency in the City of Port Hueneme and that there is hereby created and established, pursuant to the Constitution of the State of California and the Community Redevelopment Law of the State (Section 33000 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the State), a Redevelopment Agency in the City of Port Hueneme. The Redevelopment Agency shall be known as "The Port Hueneme Redevelopment Agency." The Members of said Redevelopment Agency shall be the Members of the Council whose functions, duties, powers and responsibilities shall be as set forth in the Community Redevelopment Law and other applicable laws.  
Chapter 2 - CITY MANAGER 
Sections: 
 
2101 - Office of city manager. 
The office of City Manager of the City is hereby created and established. The holder of said office shall be appointed by the Council solely on the basis of merit.  
2102 - Eligibility. 
No member of the Council of the City shall be eligible for an appointment as City Manager while holding office as a member of the Council, nor within one (1) year after the expiration of that person's term of office as a member of the Council. The City Manager need not be a resident of the City.  
2103 - Powers and duties. 
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City Government under the direction and control of the Council. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all of City affairs under his control. The City Manager shall: 
(a)  Prepare and submit to the Council the proposed annual budget and proposed annual salary plan, and be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption; 
(b)  Keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city and make recommendations as he may deem appropriate and desirable. Prepare and submit to the Council periodic financial reports; 
(c)  Prepare administrative rules and regulations necessary or expedient for the general conduct of the administrative offices and all departments of the City; 
(d)  Be responsible for public relations and the dissemination of information to the citizens of the City; 
(e)  Attend all Council, Redevelopment Agency and Housing Authority meetings and other meetings as directed by the Council; 
(f)  Insure that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the Council are faithfully performed and all due conditions met and observed; 
(g)  Appoint competent, qualified officers and employees to the City's administrative service; 
(h)  Dismiss, suspend, remove, promote, demote, transfer and discipline such officers and employees in accordance with the provisions of this Code, regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and after applicable laws; 
(i)  Employ temporary or part-time employees as required; 
(j)  Control, order and give directions to all department heads, subordinate officers and employees of the City, excluding the City Clerk and City Treasurer in matters which State law has confided to their exclusive and uncontrolled jurisdiction; 
(k)  Devote his or her entire time to the duties of his or her office and to the interests of the City; 
(l)  Perform other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the City Council; 
(m)  Act as the City's purchasing officer and set policies providing for the purchase of all materials, supplies, services, and equipment for which funds are provided in the budget, and prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year; 
(n)  Recommend such ordinances and resolutions to the Council for adoption as he or she deems necessary or expedient; 
(o)  Investigate the operation and performance of the City and any department or division thereof and investigate all complaints concerning the administration of the City government, the services maintained by public utilities in the City, and the franchises, permits, or privileges granted to the City; 
(p)  Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and other public property, equipment and supplies under the control and jurisdiction of the Council; 
(q)  Develop and organize necessary improvement projects and programs and aid and assist the Council and the various departments in carrying the same through to conclusion; 
(r)  Cooperate with community organizations whose aim and purpose is to advance the Community spirit and material interests of the City and its people; 
(s)  Receive and open all mail addressed to "The Council" and give immediate attention thereto so that all administrative business referred to in said communications not necessarily requiring councilmanic action may be disposed of between Council meetings; providing that all actions taken pursuant to such communication shall be reported to the Council at its next following regular meeting thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 713, §§ 1—4, 3-3-14)  
2104 - Tenure—Removal. 
Except as provided in any employment agreement with the City Manager, the City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the Council, but in no event including pursuant to the terms and conditions of an employment agreement shall the City Manager be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days from the succeeding municipal election at which a member of the Council is elected. At any other time the City Manager may be removed only: 
(1)  At a regular meeting of the Council; and 
(2)  By a motion carried by not less than the affirmative votes of three members of the council. 
In removing the City Manager, the Council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and such action shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 577 § 1, 1992)  
2105 - Compensation. 
The Council shall, from time to time, establish the compensation to be paid to the City Manager, including, but not limited to, appropriate fringe benefits.  
2106 - Absence or disability. 
The City Manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the Council, one of the other officers or department heads of the City to serve as Manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event of the absence or disability of the City Manager and his failure to so appoint a Manager pro tempore, the Council may designate some qualified City employee to perform the duties of the City Manager during his or her absence or disability.  
2107 - Relationship with council. 
Neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. The City Manager shall take instructions from the Council only when sitting in a duly held meeting of the Council.  
2108 - Cooperation of city officers and managers. 
It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and employees, including, but not limited to, the City Clerk, the City Treasurer, and the City Attorney to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by the laws and regulations of the City.  
2109 - Authority as council agent. 
The City Manager shall act as agent for the Council in the discharge of its administrative functions but shall not exercise any policy making or legislative functions whatsoever nor attempt to commit or bind the Council to any action, plan or program requiring official Council action. It is not intended by this Chapter to grant any authority to, or impose any duty upon said City Manager which is vested in or imposed by general law or valid City ordinances in any other Commission, board, department, officer or employee except as herein specifically set forth.  
2110 - Contracts and purchases during emergencies. 
In the event of an accident, disaster, or other circumstance creating an emergency, the City Manager may award contracts and make purchases for the purpose of meeting such emergency. He shall file promptly with the Council a certificate showing such emergency and the necessity for such action, together with an itemized account of all expenditures.  
Chapter 3 - PERSONNEL AFFAIRS 
Sections:  
Part A. - Classified Service 
 
2201 - Creation and purpose of classified service system. 
The purpose of the Classified Service System, hereby created, is to: (1) establish an equitable and uniform procedure for attracting to the City the best and most competent employees available; (2) assure that appointments and promotions of employees in the Classified Service will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive tests; (3) provide a reasonable degree of security for employees in the said Classified Service and (4) ensure to the City a staff of loyal, qualified and competent employees.  
2202 - Application of system. 
All officers and employees of the City shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be included within the classified service, except the following: 
(a)  Elective officers; 
(b)  Members of Commissions or Committees; 
(c)  Part-time employees; 
(d)  Temporary employees; 
(e)  City Manager; 
(f)  City Attorney; 
(g)  Members of the Executive Management Group. 
Any new full-time permanent position created shall be deemed included in the said Classified Service, unless, at the time of its creation, the Council expressly excludes the same from the classified service. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 1, 10-6-14)  
2203 - Adoption of rules. 
Personnel Rules, as recommended by the City Manager, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, shall be submitted for approval to the Council (hereafter "rules"). Said Rules shall establish specific procedures and regulations governing personnel matters. Said Rules may be amended from time to time, as may be required.  
2204 - Contract for services. 
The Council may contract for any performance of any function relating to the administration of personnel affairs.  
2205 - Officers and employees not included in the classified service. 
Those persons holding an office or position as an employee of the City, which office or position is not included in the Classified Service, shall serve at the pleasure of the person or body having the power to make appointments to such office or position. The other terms and conditions of employment in such office or position, shall be set by the appointing authority.  
Part B. - Conditions of Employment 
 
2206 - Basic salary plan. 
The Council shall adopt, by resolution, a basic salary plan for all officers and employees of the City. Such salary plan may, from time to time, be amended as required by the public interest.  
2207 - Holidays. 
Holidays for all City officers and employees shall be those designated by Resolution.  
2208 - Discrimination. 
No person in employ of the City or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinion or affiliation, race, color, religious belief, age, handicap, sex or marital status.  
2209 - Retirement. 
A contract is hereby authorized between the City and the Board of Administration of the Public Employees' Retirement System, providing retirement benefits for officers and employees of the City designated as qualified participants in such contract.  
2210 - Absence because of injury. 
Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, or any other rule or regulation, the absence of any officer or employee from his position, caused by injury or disease for which he is entitled to compensation pursuant to Section 3201 et seq. of the Labor Code of the State, shall not constitute a break in such person's continuous service for the purpose of salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation leave or seniority rights.  
2211 - Reimbursement for damage to property. 
Any officer or employee who suffers damage to his or her personal property while in the scope of his employment, shall be reimbursed for said damage upon certification by the City Manager that such damage occurred in the course of his employ, and that the amount claimed is reasonable. Upon approval of such item by the City Manager, a warrant in that amount, payable to the employee suffering the damage, shall be submitted to the Council for approval at its next regular Council meeting.  
2212 - Political activities. 
No person, other than elective officers, while holding any City officer position shall engage in any political activity during such time as such person is on duty.  
Chapter 4 - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 
Sections: 
 
2301 - Office established. 
There is hereby created and established the office of Director of Finance. The office of Director of Finance may be combined by the Council with any other office or position not inconsistent therewith, including that of Treasurer.  
2302 - Powers and duties. 
The Director of Finance shall be the head of the Finance Department of the City, and shall: 
(a)  Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the City under the direction of the City Manager; and 
(b)  Compile the budget for the City Manager; and 
(c)  Maintain a general accounting system for the City Government and each of its officers, departments and agencies; and 
(d)  Supervise and be responsible for disbursement of all monies and audit of all expenditures to ensure that fund budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all purchase orders before issuance to ensure that sufficient funds are appropriated and available; audit and approve before payment bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges, against the City Government; and, with the advice of the City Attorney, when necessary, determine the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges; prepare and submit to the Council periodically a register of disbursement; and 
(e)  Submit to the Council periodic statements of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City; and, as of the end of each fiscal year, submit a complete financial statement and report; and 
(f)  Perform all the financial and accounting duties heretofore imposed upon the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall be relieved of such duties, including all such duties imposed upon the City Clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code; and 
(g)  Perform such other duties as may be imposed upon such position by law or by this Code.  
2303 - Bond. 
The Director of Finance shall execute a surety bond in an amount set by the Council, the premium on which shall be paid by the City.  
Chapter 5 - CITY COMMISSIONS 
Sections: 
 
2400 - Creation and dissolution. 
Commissions shall be created or dissolved by Resolution, carried by the affirmative votes of not less than three (3) members of the Council.  
2401 - Removal. 
Each member of a Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. Any member of any Commission may be removed from such office, with or without cause, at any time, by the Council. No such removal shall be effective unless by motion made at a regular, special or adjourned meeting of the Council carried by the affirmative votes of not less than three (3) members of the said Council.  
2402 - Meetings. 
Each Commission shall establish the time and place of its regular meetings subject to the approval of the Council. All such meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act.  
2403 - Absence of members. 
Any member of any Commission who is absent, without cause, from three (3) successive regular meetings of such Commission shall be deemed to have, automatically, vacated his office. 
An absence due to illness or an unavoidable absence from the City shall be deemed an absence for cause, provided that notice thereof is given to the Secretary of the Commission by such member, on or before the day of any regular meeting of the said Commission.  
2404 - Organization. 
Each Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairman and one of its members as Vice Chairman, each of whom shall serve for a term of one (1) year. Each Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its proceedings, which shall be open for inspection by any member of the public.  
2405 - Vacancies. 
Whenever a vacancy occurs on any Commission, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner set forth in this Chapter. Where a vacancy occurs leaving an unexpired term, the subsequent appointment shall be made for the balance of such unexpired term.  
2406 - Qualification of successor. 
Except the removal of a Commission member as provided in Section 2401 hereof, or vacancy due to absence as provided in Section 2403 hereof, notwithstanding the expiration of the term of a Commission member, such member shall continue to serve as such, until a successor is appointed and qualified.  
2407 - Compensation. 
Each member of a Commission shall be entitled to such compensation and expense reimbursement as may be set by the Council from time to time.  
2408 - Continuation in office. 
Members of Commissions holding office as such, as of the effective date of this Code, shall continue in such offices, for the term to which they were appointed; provided, that the provisions of this Chapter shall control and govern such continuance in office.  
2409 - Secretary. 
The City Manager or his designee shall be the ex officio secretary of each Commission. The City Manager shall provide appropriate secretarial assistance for each Commission, and shall provide for the maintenance of all permanent records of each such Commission.  
2410 - Duties. 
The duties of each commission shall be as set forth in the resolution which authorized its creation or by applicable law.  
Chapter 6 - GENERAL ADMINISTRATION 
Sections:  
Part A. - Fiscal Affairs 
 
2501 - Audits. 
Upon recommendation of the City Manager, the Council shall obtain the services of a qualified person or firm to conduct periodic audits of all of the City's financial books and records, if it finds the public interest so requires.  
2502 - Investment policy. 
Upon recommendation of the City Manager, the Council shall adopt policies governing the investment of City money by resolution. No investment shall be made inconsistent with the provisions of such adopted policies.  
Part B. - City Property 
 
2503 - Responsibility for city property. 
The City Manager shall be responsible to the Council for all real and personal property of the City.  
2504 - Use of personal property. 
No person shall use any item of personal property of the City for any purpose, other than in the conduct of authorized City business.  
2505 - Use of real property. 
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall use any real property owned by the City for any purpose other than in the conduct of City business. The City Manager shall establish appropriate rules and regulations for the use of public buildings and grounds by persons for private and/or semi-public purposes, which such rules and regulations shall not take effect until approved by the Council. This Chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit the lease of City property, if executed in accordance with applicable law.  
Part C. - Lost or Unclaimed Property 
 
2506 - Custody. 
All lost, abandoned or unclaimed personal property coming into the possession of the City or any officer or employee thereof shall immediately be turned over to the custody of the Police Chief. Such personal property shall be held by him for a period of at least three (3) months unless sooner claimed and restored.  
2507 - Claiming property. 
If, at any time prior to the sale or destruction thereof, as hereinafter provided, any such property is claimed by any person who establishes his right to the possession thereof to the satisfaction of the Police Chief, such personal property shall be delivered to such person, provided, such person shall first pay to the City the reasonable cost of holding, protecting and returning such property.  
2508 - Sale at public auction. 
If any such property shall remain unclaimed and unrestored for at least three (3) months, such property shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder at such time or times as the Police Chief shall determine. Such auction shall be conducted by the Police Chief. Such property may be sold separately or in such lot or lots as the Police Chief may determine. The purchasers at such auction sale shall take a clear title to the property purchased free of any right of redemption. 
Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, where such unclaimed property can be utilized by the City, upon the direction of the City Manager, such property may be devoted to such use.  
2509 - Notice of auction sale. 
Notice of each such auction sale shall be given by the Police Chief at least five (5) days and not more than twenty (20) days before the time fixed therefor.  
2510 - Disposal of property. 
If any such property shall be so offered for sale at such public auction as herein provided, and shall not be sold, such property shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of, by the Police Chief.  
Part D. - Claims and Actions—Public Entities 
 
2530 - Applicability—Claims by the state or by a state agency or by another public department or entity. 
Pursuant to Section 935 of the Government Code, all claims against the City for money or damages which are excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code from the provisions of Division 3.6 of the Government Code (Section 810, et seq.), and which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto, shall be governed by the procedure prescribed in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 585 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2531 - Suits for money or damages—Claim prerequisites. 
No suit for or damages may be brought against the City on a cause of action for which this Chapter requires a claim to be presented until a written claim therefor has been filed and acted upon in conformity with this Chapter and Sections 945.4 and 945.6 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 585 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2532 - Claims—Time limitation. 
The claim for any cause of action specified in Section 2530 of this Chapter shall be presented in the manner provided in Section 2534 not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action; except that a claim by the State or by a State department or agency or by another local public entity on a cause of action for death or for injury to person or to personal property or growing crops, or on a cause of action for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity, shall be presented not later than six (6) months after the accrual of the cause of action. 
(Ord. 585 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2533 - Claims—Late filing. 
In accordance with Section 935 of the Government Code, the late filing of claims pursuant to this Chapter is regulated by Sections 911.4 to 912.2, inclusive, of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 585 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2534 - Claims—Presentation and contents. 
A signed, written claim shall be presented to the City by mailing or delivering it to the City Clerk, or to the City Attorney, or to the City Council by the claimant or by a person acting on his behalf. The claim shall conform to the requirements of Section 910 of the Government Code or on a form provided by the City, if such claim form is provided. 
(Ord. 585 § 1 (part), 1992)  
2535 - Claims—Statutory procedures for consideration and action adopted. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the procedure for consideration and action upon all claims filed pursuant to this Chapter shall be the same as the procedure provided and required by Sections 910.2 through 915.2 of the Government Code, except Section 911.2, which provisions and sections are hereby adopted as the requirements of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 585 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Part E. - Unclaimed Payments 
 
2550 - Unclaimed payments. 
If any payment may be refunded under this Code and no claim is filed within the applicable time allowed, the payment may be transferred to the City general fund on order of the City Council. 
(Ord. 620 § 2, 1998: Ord. 619 § 2, 1998)  
Part F. - Purchasing 
 
2550.1 - Adoption of purchasing system. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of all supplies, services, and equipment, to secure for the City supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 1, 2-16-16)  
2551 - Purchasing Officer—Office created. 
There is created the position of Purchasing Officer who shall be the City Manager or his or her designee. The Purchasing Officer shall be responsible and have general supervision of the purchasing function. The duties of Purchasing Officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. The Purchasing Officer shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Purchase or contract for all supplies, services, and equipment required by any using agency or department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this Chapter, such administrative regulations as the Purchasing Officer shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the Purchasing Department and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the City Council or City Manager; 
(b)  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of all supplies, services, and equipment; 
(c)  Act to procure for the City the needed quality in supplies, services, and equipment at least expense to the City; 
(d)  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
(e)  Prepare and recommend to the City Council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules; 
(f)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products; 
(g)  Coordinate the inspection of all supplies, services, and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications; 
(h)  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of any supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which becomes unsuitable for City use; 
(i)  At his or her discretion, prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this Chapter and other rules and regulations; 
(j)  At his or her discretion, maintain a bidder's list, vendor's catalog file, and records needed for the efficient operation of purchasing functions; 
(k)  At his or her discretion, prepare and recommend to the City Council rules governing the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment for the City. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, §§ 2—4, 2-16-16)  
2552 - Exemptions from central purchasing. 
The City Manager may authorize in writing any agency or department to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services, and equipment independently of the Purchasing Officer, but shall require that such purchases be made in conformity with the procedures established by this Chapter and may further require periodic reports from the agency or department of the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999)  
2553 - Requisitions. 
Using departments shall submit requests for supplies, services, and equipment to the Purchasing Officer by standard requisition forms as established by the Purchasing Officer. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999)  
2554 - Bidding. 
Purchases of supplies, non-professional services, equipment, the sale of personal property, and public work projects shall be by bid procedures set forth herein. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 5, 2-16-16)  
2555 - Purchase orders. 
Purchases of supplies, non-professional services, and equipment shall be made by procedures established by the Purchasing Officer. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 6, 2-16-16)  
2556 - Encumbrance of funds. 
Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Officer shall not issue any purchase order unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 7, 2-16-16)  
2557 - Inspection and testing. 
The Purchasing Officer or requesting department shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered and contractual services performed to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The Purchasing Officer shall have the right to waive any defect or informality. The Purchasing Officer shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples, submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999)  
2558 - Surplus supplies and equipment. 
All using agencies or departments shall submit to the Purchasing Officer, at such times and in such forms as the Purchasing Officer shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The Purchasing Officer shall keep regular logs showing the supplies and equipment disposed of, the method of disposal, and the amounts (if any) recovered from its disposal and maintain records for public inspection relative to the disposal of supplies and equipment. The Purchasing Officer shall have the authority to sell all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or department, or to exchange the same or trade in the same for new supplies and equipment. Sale shall occur by a bona fide public auction or a competitive process that is approved by the Purchasing Officer. The Purchasing Officer, upon having received the prior written approval of the City Manager, may cause equipment or supplies that cannot be or are not used by any agency or department to be donated or sold to another governmental agency, without a public auction or competitive bid process having been utilized. All supplies and equipment shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and all State and federal laws. 
(Ord. 679 § 1, 2007: Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999)  
2559 - Purchases of equipment, supplies, and non-professional services of under ten thousand dollars. 
Purchases of equipment, supplies and non-professional services of estimated value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less may be made by the Purchasing Officer in the open market. Requests for purchases shall be made on forms prescribed and provided by the Purchasing Officer (requisition forms and purchase orders). 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 8, 2-16-16)  
2560 - Informal bid procedures—Supplies, equipment, and non-professional services. 
Purchases of supplies, equipment and non-professional services of an estimated value of more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be made by informal procedures as described herein. 
(a)  Purchasing Officer shall solicit proposals by telephone or written request to prospective vendors. 
(b)  Informal purchases shall be based on at least three (3) proposals unless the product or service is proprietary, or unless after reasonable efforts are made to obtain three (3) proposals only a lower number can be obtained. The order shall be awarded to the lowest responsible proposer, consistent with quality and delivery requirements. 
(c)  The Purchasing Officer is authorized to award contracts and orders set forth herein. 
(d)  Bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Officer who shall keep a record of all informal orders and bids for a period of twelve (12) months after placement of the order. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 9, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 728, § 3(A), 7-17-17)  
2560.1 - Disposition of surplus property. 
(a)  Disposition of non-real property with value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less. 
Disposition of property, other than real property, with an estimated value of ten thousand dollars or less may, be made by the City Manager or his designee (Disposal Officer) informally in the open market without bids or other formal procedures. 
(b)  Disposition of non-real property with an estimated value in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) but less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be made by informal procedures as described herein. 
(1)  The Disposal Officer shall solicit offers by telephone or written request to prospective purchasers, lessees or persons acquiring the property under any other method of disposition which the Disposal Officer shall determine to be in the public interest. 
(2)  Informal dispositions shall be based on at least three (3) offers, or, if after reasonable efforts are made to obtain other offers, only two (2) offers are received, on the better of the offers received, or, if only one (1) offer is received on that offer. The disposition shall be made to the responsible offeror providing the best overall compensation or expectation thereof to the City, taking into account the terms of purchase and the intended location and use of the property. If no offers are received, the Disposal Officer may seek to dispose of the property on the open market as circumstances require. 
(3)  The Disposal Officer may waive defects in offers, obtain clarification of the terms of any offer, refuse all offers, commence a new disposal process or terminate the disposal process. No defect in any offer or in the process shall cause a final disposition to be invalid. If two or more offers are substantially identical, the City may choose the successful offer at is sole discretion. The Disposal Officer's determination that a proposal offers greater value to the City, taking into account both economic and non-economic benefits is final as to all offerors, but may be overturned, revised or rejected by the City Council on its own volition. No right of appeal exists for unsuccessful offerors. 
The Disposal Officer is authorized to make disposition of the surplus property in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(4)  Informal offers and bids received shall be retained by the Disposal Officer who shall keep them in the records of the City for a period of twelve (12) months after disposition of the property. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(c)  Disposition of Surplus Real Property. Disposition of surplus real property shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The procedures in this section are separate from and independent of any provisions of the Government Code affecting the obligation of a municipality to provide notice to other public entities of the availability of surplus property. 
(2)  The methods available for disposition, permanent or temporary, may include sale, lease, lease-option, or other form of permanent or temporary disposition, and may include: (i) sale of the fee title in the property, with or without possession; (ii) lease for a term of years or rental for a shorter term or month-to-month, with or without an option to purchase, renew or repurchase; (iii) license to use; (iv) lesser interests including easements or limited licenses; (v) or disposition of other real property interests recognized in the law, all of which is cumulatively defined herein as interests. 
(3)  The Disposal Officer shall make a determination, based upon available information and judgment, as to the preferred form of disposition, taking into account the financial benefit or benefits to the City, the preferred use of the property within the community, opportunities for revenue growth to the City from tax revenue or other form of income available through the designated method of disposition or by operation of law, the state of the market for such an interest, and any other considerations that the Disposal Officer shall deem appropriate. 
(4)  The Disposal Officer may seek a disposition by one or more means simultaneously, may abandon any method which the Disposal Officer determines unproductive, and may switch methods for the same reasons. Prior to undertaking efforts to dispose of the interest in the manner which the Disposal Officer has determined to apply, the approval of the City Council as to the type of interest, method and the proposed terms of disposition shall be obtained. The Disposal Officer may, without prior consent of the City Council, take steps, which the Disposal Officer deems reasonable, to preliminarily explore the viability of the proposed method of disposition or the specific terms thereof, none of which may bind the City in any way. In the event of any substantive change in the Disposal Officer's method or means of disposal, the Disposal Officer shall obtain City Council approval or ratification at the first reasonable opportunity. 
(5)  The method(s) of disposition may involve: (i) listing with a licensed real estate broker with demonstrated qualifications in marketing the kind of interest which is the subject of disposition, on brokerage terms which are industry standard or are reasonable given the circumstances; (ii) directly marketing to potential buyers, lessees, or other users of the interest; (iii) working with consultants, industry groups or others experienced in the type of interest and/or method of disposition in question or in a position to assist in the Disposal Officer's efforts; or (iv) undertaking any other reasonable means of seeking persons or entities interested in acquiring the interest. The proposed means of marketing the interest shall be the subject of City Council approval. 
(6)  The Disposal Officer may bundle two (2) or more interests together, whether interests of a similar nature or disparate interests, where the disposition may be assisted by such bundling, and seek disposition of those interests as a group if circumstances make doing so reasonable. 
(7)  The provisions of this section shall be interpreted liberally in favor of providing the Disposal Officer with the maximum flexibility to determine the type of interest to be disposed of, the means or terms of disposing of same or any other condition which the Disposal Officer reasonably believes is in the public interest, subject to the approval rights of the City Council as provided herein. A formal public bid process, requests for statements of qualifications or requests for proposals shall be permitted but are not required if circumstances mitigate in favor of another method or methods of disposal in the reasonable determination of the Disposal Officer after approval by the City Council. 
(8)  Any final agreement or contract for disposition of any interest shall not become final until approved by the City Council after presentation to the City Council of the final agreement or contract. In approving said contract or disposition, the City Council shall make findings that support the method and terms of the disposition, and the type of Interest being marketed. No contract with any third party for the payment of a fee for assistance in marketing or selling the interest, whether licensed by the State of California or otherwise, shall be valid without prior City Council approval or subsequent ratification. 
(Ord. No. 728, § 3(C), 7-17-17)  
2561 - Formal bid procedures—Supplies, equipment, and non-professional services. 
Purchases and contracts for supplies, equipment and non-professional services of estimated value in excess of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) shall be made or let by the formal procedures set forth herein. 
(a)  The Purchasing Officer shall mail notices inviting formal bids. The notices shall be mailed to all qualified vendors on the bid list, if existing, or who have requested their name to be added thereto unless the products or service is proprietary. 
(b)  The notices shall be mailed no later than ten (10) calendar days before the opening date of the bids. The notices shall describe the commodities or services in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information, and state the time and place for submission of bids. 
(c)  The notice inviting bids shall be published at least fourteen (14) days before the opening date of the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five (5) days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the City, or, if there is none, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated within the City. The notice shall be posted in public places in the City that have been designated by resolution as places for placing public notices. 
(d)  The City Clerk shall also post a notice of pending purchases or sales of surplus property on a public bulletin board in the City Hall. 
(e)  Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public by the City Clerk or designee at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening. 
(f)  Contracts shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(g)  In its discretion, the City Council may reject any bids presented, abandon the purchase, or re-advertise. After rejecting the bids submitted, the City Council may re-advertise by declaring that the materials or supplies can be furnished at a lower price in the open market and may award the contract in the open market without further complying with this section. 
(h)  If two (2) or more bids received are the same and lowest, the City Council may accept the one it chooses. 
(i)  If no bids are received, the contract may be let in the open market, or by the informal procedures set forth herein. 
(j)  The City Council shall have the right to waive any defect or informality in the bidding or in the procedures set forth in this section. No defect or informality shall void any contract entered into. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 10, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 728, § 3(B), 7-17-17)  
2561.1 - Applicability. 
For contractual services covered by Section 2561 (non-professional services), contractors that meet the following requirements shall comply with the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10: 
(a)  The contractor has entered into a contract with the City to provide contractual services that have an estimated value of thirty-five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) or more for any consecutive twelve (12) month period; and 
(b)  The contractor has ten (10) or more employees at the time the contract is awarded by the City, or at such time that the contract is renewed or extended. 
Corporations that are organized pursuant to Internal Revenue Service Code Section 501(c)(3) shall not be subject to the requirement of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. The City Council may, in its discretion, require businesses that receive financial incentives from the City to pay the minimum wage amounts identified in Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 pursuant to a contract entered into between the City and the business. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.2 - Living wage. 
All contractors subject to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 shall pay its covered employees during the term of the contract covered by Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10, an hourly rate of not less than nine dollars and thirty-five cents ($9.35) per hour if the employer provides the employee with a health benefit plan offered by the contractor to the employee; or, eleven dollars and eighty-five cents ($11.85) per hour if health benefits are not offered by the contractor to the employee. 
The living wage rates shall be adjusted to coincide with the adjustments made to salaries granted to the City's general unit employees. After application of the adjustments and at the discretion of the City Manager, these rates may be rounded or slightly adjusted to be more uniform. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.3 - Definitions. 
For purposes of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10, the following definitions shall be applicable: 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme and all awarding authorities thereof, including entities which exercise independent control over their expenditure of funds, including, but not limited to, the Port Hueneme Redevelopment Agency, Port Hueneme Housing Authority, and the Port Hueneme Surplus Property Authority. 
"Code" means the City of Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
"Contractor" means any person or business that enters into a non-professional service contract with the City that is subject to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 pursuant to Section 2561.1. 
"Covered employee" means any employee who performs services for purposes of fulfilling the contractor's contractual obligations for contracts subject to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10, except for employees that are providing administrative support services that are ancillary to the purpose of the contract such as copying, janitorial, and secretarial services. Additionally, volunteers shall not be considered "covered employees." 
"Health benefits" means medical, dental and/or life insurance benefits offered by the contractor to its employees that the employer pays at least two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for the benefit of covered employees. Proof of the provision of such benefits shall be provided to the City prior to the execution of the contract covered by Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.4 - City Manager duties. 
The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority and obligation to perform the following acts for purposes of accomplishing the intent of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10: 
(a)  Prepare a notice for contractors to post in their offices for purposes of providing covered employees with notice of the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10; 
(b)  Promulgate rules and regulations for purposes of ensuring that bid specifications and bid requests contain notice of the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10, and incorporation of these requirements into contracts subject to Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10; 
(c)  Review and, as appropriate in the City Manager's judgment, investigate and maintain records of complaints alleging that a contractor has violated the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.5 - Contractor notice posting requirements. 
A contractor subject to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10, shall post in a conspicuous place, as required by State and federal laws for other notices to employees, a copy of the notice referred to in Section 2561.4(a). 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.6 - Exceptions. 
The City Council may grant a whole or partial exception to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 to a contractor, at the time of award of the contract, if it determines that imposition of the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 would violate State or federal laws, or imposition of the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 would result in an undue economic hardship to the contractor. A contractor that desires a determination by the Council that it will not be subject to the requirements of this Chapter must, at the time it submits its bid to the City, provide the City with all of the following: 
(a)  A written request that it desires to not be subject to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10; 
(b)  Reference to the specific State or federal laws, if applicable, that would be violated if the City imposed the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 on the contractor; 
(c)  A detailed explanation, if applicable, of the reasons why, and supporting documents therefore (including financial statements), the contractor would suffer an undue economic hardship if it is subject to the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.7 - Violations process. 
Any covered employee may lodge a complaint with the City Manager, or his/her designee, orally or in writing, that a contractor has violated the requirements of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. Upon receipt of such a complaint, the following process shall apply: 
(a)  The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall review and investigate, in his/her discretion, the complaint and determine if the contractor should be issued a preliminary notice of violation from the City Manager which shall also contain the corrective measures the contractor is required to undertake and/or the remedies that are being imposed. If the contractor does not file a timely and sufficient appeal to the preliminary notice of violation, it shall become final and cannot be appealed to the City Manager or City Council as set forth below. 
(b)  If a contractor receives a notice of violation, the contractor may request in writing an appeal hearing before the City Manager, or his/her designee, to dispute the violation and/or corrective measures and/or remedies required. The request for an appellate hearing shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date the City Manager issued the preliminary notice of violation and shall contain the reasons why the contractor believes that a violation does not exist and/or that the corrective measures are not appropriate. The City Manager, or his/her designee, shall conduct the appeal hearing within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the appeal request. Within fourteen (14) days of the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the City Manager shall issue his/her findings and final decision with respect to the appeal hearing. 
(c)  A contractor may appeal the City Manager's final decision to the City Council, or applicable board or commission, by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the date set forth on the City Manager's final written decision. The City Council shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within forty-five (45) days of its receipt of the appeal request and either uphold, overturn or modify the City Manager's final decision. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.8 - City remedies for violations. 
The City may impose any of the following corrective measures and/or remedies against a contractor for violations of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 in addition to other remedies set forth in this Code: 
(a)  Order the contractor to comply with all regulations of Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10 within sixty (60) days; 
(b)  Order payment to covered employees, including restitution, to compensate the employees up to the compensation level required by Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10; 
(c)  Impose fines in an amount up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per week for each week and each employee that the contractor failed to meet its obligations under Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. 
(d)  Suspend payments under, and/or suspend or cancel contracts between the City and the contractor; 
(e)  Render the contractor ineligible to enter into contracts with the City for up to the longer time period of three (3) years or until all penalties and restitution to covered employees have been paid. 
In addition to the above corrective measures and remedies, the City shall be entitled to seek any and all other equitable and legal rights it may have under federal, State and local laws, including, without limitation, injunctive relief for purposes of enforcing the remedies set forth in this section. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.9 - Covered employee remedies for violations. 
A covered employee shall have the right to seek the following remedies against a contractor in a court of competent jurisdiction: 
(a)  Restitution to compensate the employee for all amounts that should have been paid to the employee pursuant to Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10, including the value of health benefits; 
(b)  Penalties in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each week the employee's rights were violated pursuant to Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10; 
(c)  Reasonable attorney's fees and costs; 
(d)  Any and all other legal and equitable remedies available under federal, State and local laws. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2561.10 - Retaliation prohibited. 
A contractor shall not discharge, reduce the compensation of, or otherwise discriminate or retaliate against any of its employees for making a complaint to the City, asserting the employee's rights, or assisting another employee in making a complaint or asserting his/her rights, under Sections 2561.1 through 2561.10. 
(Ord. 662 § 1 (Exh. A (part)), 2005: Ord. 652 Exh. A (part), 2003)  
2562 - Exception—Supplies, equipment and contractual services. 
The bid procedures set forth herein need not be followed in situations determined by the Purchasing Officer to constitute an emergency or when the commodity or service is proprietary, or for the contracting of professional services (e.g. attorneys, architects, or engineers), or for the contracting for trash and garbage service, or for public relations services, or for services connected with election, or for other similar commodities and services as determined by the Purchasing Officer. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999)  
2563 - Change orders. 
Following the award of a procurement contract for any materials, supplies, equipment, professional or non-professional services pursuant to this Chapter, the contract may be amended by the issuance of a change order, provided the change which is the subject of amendment is reasonably related to the scope of the original contract. The Purchasing Officer or his/her designee will maintain control relative to the scoping, estimating, and negotiating of the proposed change(s) and the Finance Director will certify the availability of funds for the proposed change in the event that the change order increases the contract cost. Annually a report will be submitted by the Purchasing Officer or his/her designee to the City Council outlining all change orders that have been issued to contracts governed by this Chapter during the reporting period. 
Any change order with a total cost in the amount of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) or less may be approved by the Purchasing Officer, provided the aggregate amount of all changes to a particular contract, including the change order under consideration, does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the original contract cost. Any change order in an amount greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be approved by the City Council. Any time extension of the performance deadline up to a total of sixty (60) days under a contract may be granted by the Purchasing Officer. Any time extension of a performance deadline that exceeds sixty (60) days shall be approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 11, 2-16-16)  
2564 - Exemptions from formal contract procedure. 
(a)  Purchases of goods or services in an amount greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) which can be obtained from only one source may be made by the Purchasing Officer without advertising and after approval by the City Council. 
(b)  The City Council may authorize purchase of supplies, equipment, and services without complying with this Chapter when in the opinion of the City Council, compliance with the procedures is not in the best interest of the City. 
(c)  The City Manager may authorize emergency purchases of supplies, equipment, or services. For the purpose of this Chapter, emergency purchases are those procurements required to prevent the immediate interruption or cessation of necessary City services or to safeguard life, property, or the public health and welfare. 
(d)  The Purchasing Officer may authorize purchases when participating in an established governmental "cooperative purchasing program" or when purchasing from a supplier who has been awarded a contract resulting from a formal competitive bid process by another governmental agency within the state or by the federal government. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 12, 2-16-16)  
2565 - Professional services. 
(a)  A RFP and/or RFQ is not required for contracts less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). 
(b)  The City shall not be restricted to engaging in a competitive bidding procedure when seeking to retain specially trained persons or firms to provide services in connection with financial, economic, accounting, engineering, legal, administrative, or other matters involving specialized expertise or unique skills. In securing professional services, the City shall utilize a request for proposals procedure, the method and details of which may be outlined in administrative regulations adopted by the City. The Purchasing Officer may award any contract for professional services when the cost of such contract is equal to or less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). Any contract for professional services which exceeds the cost of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be awarded by the City Council. 
(c)  A recommendation requiring City Council approval of a contract shall contain a detailed summary of the evaluation of all proposals received and the basis for the recommended selection. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 13, 2-16-16)  
2566 - Lowest responsible bidder. 
In addition to price, in determining the lowest responsible bidder, consideration will be given to quality and performance of the supplies to be purchased or services provided by the seller. Criteria for determining low bids shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder, to perform the contract or provide the supplies or services required; 
(b)  The ability of the bidder to provide the supplies or services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
(c)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and efficiency of the bidder; 
(d)  The quality of bidder's performance on previous purchases or contracts with the City; 
(e)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance, repair parts and services for the use of the supplies purchased; 
(f)  Current compliance by the bidder with Federal acts and executive orders and State of California statutes governing the subject of nondiscrimination in employment, provided that the City Manager shall recognize as proof of noncompliance only the final decisions and orders of those Federal and State agencies empowered under the law to make such findings. 
(Ord. 627 § 2 (part), 1999)  
Part G. - Public Projects—Bidding and Procedures 
 
2567 - Public projects—Defined. 
(a)  For purpose of this Code, "public project" means any of the following: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any public owned, leased, or operated facility; 
(2)  Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated facility; 
(3)  In the case of a publicly owned utility system, "public project" shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand (230,000) volts and higher. 
(b)  "Public project" does not include maintenance work. For purposes of this section, "maintenance work" includes all of the following: 
(1)  Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes; 
(2)  Minor repainting; 
(3)  Resurfacing of streets and highways of less than one (1) inch; 
(4)  Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems; 
(5)  Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, power plants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand (230,000) volts and higher. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "facility" means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system subject to subdivision (a)(3) of this section, real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999)  
2568 - Adoption of plans and bidding—Public projects. 
(a)  The City Council shall approve all formal bidding activity for public projects of more than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) prior to the mailing of notices inviting bids. 
(b)  The City shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonable and necessary to protect the best interests of the City. If the City requires a performance bond, the amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids, and its form shall be as determined by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 649 § 1, 2003; Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999)  
2569 - Construction trade journal list—Public projects. 
The journals on the list of qualified construction trade journals, developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22036 of the California Public Contract Code, may be noticed pursuant to Sections 2572 and 2573 herein. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999)  
2570 - Contractors list—Public projects. 
A list of qualified contractors, identified according to categories of work, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999)  
2571 - Purchasing procedures—Public projects. 
Public projects of forty-five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) or less may be performed by employees of the City by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 14, 2-16-16)  
2572 - Informal bid procedures—Public projects. 
Public projects of less than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) or less may be let to contract by the informal procedures set forth herein. 
(a)  The Purchasing Officer shall mail notices inviting informal bids. The notices shall be mailed to all qualified contractors on a list maintained by the City, if any, as well as to all construction trade journals on the list referred to in Section 2569, unless the product or service is proprietary. 
(b)  The notices shall be mailed not less than ten (10) calendar days before the opening date of the bids. The notices shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. 
(c)  The Purchasing Officer and Director of Public Works are authorized to award informal contracts and orders pursuant to this Chapter. Orders shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
(d)  Bids shall be submitted to the Purchasing Officer who shall keep a record of all informal orders and bids for a period of six (6) months after placement of the order. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
(e)  If all bids received are in excess of seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00), the City Council may by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote, award the contract at eighty-thousand dollars ($80,000.00) or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the public agency was reasonable. 
(f)  If no bids are received, the project may be performed by employees of the City by force account, or negotiated contract without further complying with this section. 
(g)  In its discretion, the City Council may reject any bids presented. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999)  
2573 - Formal bid procedures—Public projects. 
Public projects of greater than seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) must, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, be let to contract by the formal procedures set forth herein. 
(a)  The City Clerk shall mail notices inviting formal bids. The notices shall be mailed to all qualified contractors on the list maintained as well as to all construction trade journals on the list referred to in Section 2569, unless the project or service is proprietary. 
(b)  The notices shall be mailed at least thirty (30) calendar days before the date of opening the bids. The notices shall distinctly describe the project and state the time and place for submission and opening of bids. 
(c)  The notice inviting bids shall be published at least fourteen (14) days before the opening date of the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five (5) days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the City, or, if there is none, in a newspaper of general circulation which is circulated within the City. The notice shall be posted in public places in the City that have been designated by resolution as places for placing public notices. 
(d)  The City Clerk shall also post a notice of pending public work projects on a public bulletin board in the City Hall. 
(e)  Sealed bids shall be submitted to the City Clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public by the City Clerk or designee at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening. 
(f)  Bidders on public construction projects shall be required to provide bidder's security. The bidder's security shall be an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the amount of the bid or as prescribed in the public notice inviting bids. The bidder's security shall be in one of the following forms: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  Cashier's check made payable to the City; 
(3)  Certified check made payable to the City; or 
(4)  Bidder's bond executed by an authorized surety insurer, made payable to the City. 
Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his/her bid's security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the City is responsible for the delay. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of a successful bidder to execute the contract, award the contract to the next lowest bidder. If the City Council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
(g)  Contracts shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
(h)  In its discretion, the City Council may reject any bids presented. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the City shall have the option of either of the following: 
(1)  Abandoning the project, or readvertising for bids in the manner described herein; 
(2)  By adoption of a Resolution by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the City Council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by employees of the City, and may have the project done by force account without further complying with this section. 
(i)  If two (2) or more bids received are the same and lowest, the City Council may accept the one it chooses. 
(j)  If no bids are received, the project may be performed by employees of the City by force account, or by negotiated contract without further complying with this section. 
(k)  The City Council shall have the right to waive any defect or informality in the bidding or in the procedures set forth in this section. No defect or informality shall void any contract entered into. 
(l)  The City Council shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all public projects subject to this section or shall delegate such adoption as it deems appropriate to the City Manager. Any person may examine the plans, specifications, and/or working details adopted by the City Council or its designee for any project. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 723, § 10, 2-16-16)  
2574 - Emergencies—Public projects. 
(a)  In cases of emergency when repair or replacements are necessary, the City Council may proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility without adopting plans, specifications, strain sheets, or working details, or giving notice for bids to let contracts. The work may be done by day labor under the direction of the City Council, by contractor, or by a combination of the two. 
(b)  In case of an emergency, if notice for bids to let contracts will not be given, the City Council shall comply with the following procedures: 
(1)  The City Council shall make a finding, based on substantial evidence set forth in the minutes of its meeting, that the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for bids, and that the action is necessary to respond to the emergency. 
(2)  The City Council, pursuant to a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote, may repair or replace a public facility, take any directly related and immediate action required by that emergency, and procure the necessary equipment, services, and supplies for those purposes. 
(3)  The City Council, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote, may delegate to the City Manager, Chief Engineer, or other nonelected City officer, the authority to order any action specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of this section. 
(4)  If a person with authority delegated pursuant to this section orders any action specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (b), that person shall report to the City Council, at its next meeting required pursuant to this section, the reasons justifying why the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive solicitation for bids and why the action is necessary to respond to the emergency. 
(5)  If the City Council orders any action specified in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b) of this section, the City Council shall review the emergency action at its next regularly scheduled meeting and, except as specified below, at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, to determine, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote, that there is a need to continue the action. If the City Council meets weekly, it may review the emergency action in accordance with this paragraph every fourteen (14) days. 
(6)  If a person with authority delegated pursuant to this section orders any action specified in paragraph (2) of subsection (b), the City Council shall initially review the emergency action not later than its next regularly scheduled meeting and at least at every regularly scheduled meeting thereafter until the action is terminated, to determine, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote, that there is a need to continue the action, unless a person with authority delegated pursuant to this section has terminated that action prior to the City Council reviewing the emergency action and making a determination pursuant to this subsection. 
(7)  When the City Council reviews the emergency action pursuant to paragraphs (5) or (6), it shall terminate the action at the earliest possible date that conditions warrant so that the remainder of the emergency action may be completed by giving notice for bids to let contracts. 
(Ord. 627 § 3 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 7 - TAXES 
Sections:  
Part A. - Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance 
 
2701 - Short title. 
This Chapter is entitled the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." The term "City," as used within this Chapter, is the City of Port Hueneme. This Chapter is applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2702 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2703 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that its provisions be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(a)  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this Chapter which becomes operative if a majority of the electors voting on the ballot measure approving the Chapter vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose; 
(b)  To adopt retail transactions and use tax regulations that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
(c)  To adopt retail transactions and use tax regulations that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes; 
(d)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2704 - Contract with State. 
Before the operative date, the City must contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax Chapter; provided, that if the City cannot have contracted with the State Board of Equalization before the operative date, it must nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date is the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2705 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of 0.5% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2706 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated is determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2707 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this Chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of 0.5% of the sales price of the property. The sales price includes delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2708 - Adoption of provisions of State law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2709 - Limitations on adoption of State law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
(a)  The City is substituted wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency. However, the substitution is not made when: 
(1)  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
(2)  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this Chapter; 
(3)  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
(A)  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or 
(B)  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provision of that Code; 
(4)  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(b)  The word "City" is substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2710 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit is not required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2711 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)  There is excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any State-administered transactions or use tax. 
(b)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
(1)  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the County in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government; 
(2)  Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the City is satisfied: 
(A)  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence, and 
(B)  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address; 
(3)  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into before the operative date of this Chapter; 
(4)  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease before the operative date of this Chapter; 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (b)(3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property is deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(c)  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this Chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property: 
(1)  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax ordinance; 
(2)  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California; 
(3)  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into before the operative date of this Chapter; 
(4)  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease before the operative date of this Chapter; 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (c)(3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property is deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised; 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the City is not required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, without limitation, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer; 
(7)  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" also includes any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer is required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City. 
(d)  Any person subject to use tax under this Chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2712 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Parts 1.6 and 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, automatically become a part of this Chapter, provided however, that no such amendment operates so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this Chapter. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2713 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process may issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this Chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. 685 § 1 (part), 2008)  
2714 - Sales tax sharing program. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide an incentive program for the opening, operation, and expansion of retail businesses which i) enhance the quality of facilities, goods, and services that businesses make available to the public and the City's residents, ii) provide desirable and attractive shopping experiences for the City's residents and visitors, and iii) increase the sales tax revenue to the City. In the implementation of this program, the City Council finds: 
(1)  The general welfare and material well-being of the residents of the City depend in substantial measure upon the growth and expansion of retail businesses in the City. 
(2)  The opening, operation, and expansion of the inventory of retail businesses in the City will i) enhance the quality of facilities, goods, and services that businesses make available to the public and the City's residents, ii) provide desirable and attractive shopping experiences for the City's residents and visitors, and iii) increase the City's sales tax revenue. 
(3)  It is in the best interest of the City to induce and encourage the opening, operation, and expansion of retail businesses that might not otherwise exist or might not be as successful, thereby creating new sources of revenues for the City's general fund which supports the public services the City provides its residents, visitors and businesses. 
(4)  The authority granted and the purposes to be accomplished by this section are proper local governmental and public purposes for which public funds can be expended and that the opening, operation, and expansion of the inventory of retail businesses is of paramount importance to the City, its residents, and businesses. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Approved business" means any existing retail business or new retail business which has submitted an application for participation in the program and been approved by the City to participate in the program after a public hearing on a sales tax sharing agreement. 
"Business" means any "existing retail business" or "new retail business" as defined in this section. 
"Developer" means any person or entity in the business of developing real property for the purpose of operating a business thereon, and with whom the City Council may, in its sole discretion, enter into a sales tax sharing agreement. 
"Existing retail business" means a retailer in the business of selling tangible personal property or services which are subject to sales tax, which was operating with a valid business license anywhere within the City not less than one (1) year prior to the filing of an application by the existing retail business for assistance under this Chapter. 
"Indemnification agreement" means the agreement between the City and an owner in which the owner agrees to indemnify and defend the City against any claims or lawsuits that are brought against the City (and all liabilities, damages, and costs incurred by the City in connection therewith, including attorneys' fees) as a result of the application of this section to a business participating in the sales tax sharing program. 
"New retail business" means a retailer in the business of, or which proposes to be in the business of, selling tangible personal property or services which are subject to sales tax, which desires to open a business within the City, and is not operating said business within the City as of the date of the application by the new retail business for assistance under this Chapter, and has not operated such a business within the City within one (1) year of the date of the application. 
"Operating covenants" means the operating covenants to be recorded against business properties for businesses participating in the program, which shall include provisions regarding continuing use of the business, maintenance, and nondiscrimination. 
"Owner" means the person or entity which owns and operates the business, and has legal authority to enter into a sales tax sharing agreement on behalf of the business with the City. 
"Sales tax" means that portion of local sales taxes accrued on account of sales made by a business that would be payable to the City from the State Board of Equalization, from the imposition of the Bradley Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law, provided that such sales taxes are legally available for use by the City's General Fund, and the use of which by the City is not otherwise restricted by the state or federal government, and are not subject to offset or appeal. However, "sales tax," for the purposes of this section, does not include the .05 percent sales tax imposed by a vote of the people in 2008 (the "additional sales tax"). Notwithstanding any language in this provision to the contrary, the City Council expressly excludes any revenues derived from the Additional Sales Tax from sharing under this program. 
"Sales tax base" means the historical production of sales tax by an existing retail business as calculated in the sales tax sharing report. The sales tax base shall be calculated in a manner as to take into account the then-current economic state relative to the historical performance of the business. In addition, it shall use a method determined by the preparer of the tax sharing report, for averaging production over an appropriate period adjusted for inflation, or other similar adjustment index, it being the intent that an approved business should receive a tax sharing arrangement which does not reward the business for improvements in sales tax arising from general economic conditions as opposed to the improvements made by the business owner. 
"Sales tax increment" means, on an annual basis, the difference between the sales tax base and the amount of sales tax actually generated by a business and received by the City from the State Board of Equalization after a business begins participating in the Program, which is not subject to offset or appeal. It is determined by reference to actual receipts by the City of Sales Tax from the State Board of Equalization. With respect to new retail businesses, all sales tax received shall be deemed to be sales tax increment. Under no circumstances shall the City be liable for any reimbursement of sales tax increment not actually received and permanently retained by the City. 
"Sales Tax sharing" means the rebate from the City to the owner of an approved business of a portion of that business's sales tax increment, as determined each year for which the agreement is valid. The payment of the approved business's portion of the sales tax increment shall be paid to the approved business within a reasonable time after the conclusion of each year, consistent with the City's ability to verify its actual sales tax receipts relative to the approved business. 
"Sales tax sharing agreement" or "agreement" means an agreement between the City and an approved business which provides for the rebate from the City to the business owner of a portion of the business's sales tax increment, at a rate and for a time period as determined by the City. Said agreements may include such provisions, restrictions, conditions or other provisions as the parties then agree are necessary to give effect to the intent and spirit of this Chapter. 
"Sales tax sharing program" or "program" means the sales tax sharing program established by this Chapter. A Business's participation in the Program extends as long as the time period provided for in a sales tax sharing agreement. 
"Tax sharing report" means the report which shall be completed for any applicant business which shall analyze the projected economic factors relating to the expansion of an existing retail business, or construction of a new retail business, and the projected impact of such expansion or construction on the business's generation of sales which are subject to sales tax and which generate general fund revenues to the City, which shall be considered by the City Council in making its decision as to a particular business, and which the City Council may use, along with other evidence presented, in its sole discretion, to determine whether the subject business is approved to participate in the program, and if so, the appropriate sales tax sharing rate and time period for the sales tax sharing agreement. The tax sharing report shall be prepared by staff or by a qualified consultant employed by the City. The cost of preparing the tax sharing report, whether prepared by staff or an outside consultant shall be paid by the owner of the business applying for participation in the program, unless the City, in its sole discretion, waives this requirement. 
(c)  Participation Requirements. 
(1)  To participate in the sales tax sharing program, the owner of: (1) any existing business which plans a renovation or expansion to improve and/or expand its operations or (2) any new business must: 
(A)  Complete and submit to the City Manager an application for participation in the sales tax sharing program on the City's official sales tax sharing program application form; 
(B)  Receive approval for participation in the Program from the City, after the public hearing as provided in this section; 
(C)  If approved by the City, enter into a sales tax sharing agreement in the form approved by the City; 
(D)  If approved by the City, execute and record against the business property the operating covenants provided in this section; and 
(E)  If approved by the City, execute an indemnification agreement in a form approved by the City. 
(2)  It is recognized that some businesses will be located in premises which are not owned by the owner of the business and are rented or leased from a third party. In such circumstances, the City and the business shall seek the permission of the owner of the property to record the operating covenants against the subject property, applicable only to the business. The City Council, at its sole discretion, may approve such terms or conditions as it deems appropriate in order to obtain the property owner's consent, or may, in its sole discretion, waive the requirement of recording the operating covenants. If the land owner and the owner are under common control, recording the operating covenants shall be a requirement of approval of the sales tax sharing agreement. 
(d)  Sales Tax Sharing Program. The City Council is authorized to enter into sales tax sharing agreements with retail businesses in accordance with this section. 
(1)  The City may not enter into any sales tax sharing agreement with a vehicle dealer or big box retailer which is relocating from the territorial jurisdiction of another local agency within the same market area, if said agreement would violate the provisions of Cal. Gov. Code Section 53084, as this section may be amended; 
(2)  The City may not enter into any sales tax sharing agreement if said agreement would violate Cal. Gov. Code Section 53084.5, as this section may be amended. Said violation may arise, subject to exception, if the agreement would result in reduced sales tax revenues received by another local agency from a retailer that is located within the territorial jurisdiction of that other local agency from the tax proceeds collected under the Bradley Burns Act, and the retailer maintains a physical presence in the territorial jurisdiction of that other local agency. 
(3)  In order to determine the appropriate rate of sales tax sharing for each retail business that has submitted an application under this section, the City Council shall cause to be prepared a tax sharing report, which shall analyze factors including the following. The City Council, in its sole discretion, may consider additional factors, or require additional studies or reports, as it deems appropriate. 
(A)  For existing businesses, the existing level of sales tax generated by the business, and the projected sales tax to be generated after a planned expansion project; 
(B)  For new businesses, the projected sales tax to be generated by the new business; 
(C)  The amount of expected sales tax increment; 
(D)  For new and existing businesses, the type, quality, and price point of the goods and services sold or provided by the business; 
(E)  For new and existing businesses, the total projected cost to construct the new business or expand the existing business; 
(F)  The impact and benefits of the proposed expansion or construction of the Business on the residents of the City and the surrounding region; and 
(G)  The necessity for public assistance. 
(4)  After considering the sales tax sharing report and such other factors, studies or reports as it, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate, and subject to the limitations set forth in subdivision (h), the City shall determine the rate of sales tax sharing to be provided to a business that will be necessary or appropriate to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. The rate may vary over time as determined by the City Council in its sole discretion. 
(5)  After considering all of the material provided, and subject to the limitations set forth in this section, the City shall determine, in its sole discretion, the time period over which sales tax sharing will be necessary or appropriate to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. The time period may be subject to possible reduction or termination as the City Council may determine in its sole discretion. 
(6)  The City Council shall hold a public hearing on all contemplated sales tax sharing agreements. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. At this hearing, the City Council shall consider all evidence before it, including the information contained in the tax sharing report. 
(7)  The City shall make all tax sharing reports available for public inspection and copying, at a cost not to exceed the cost of duplication, no later than the time of publication of the first notice of the public hearing mandated by this section. 
(8)  After the public hearing on a contemplated tax sharing agreement and if the City Council approves the business, the City may, by resolution, authorize City staff to negotiate and prepare a sales tax sharing agreement with the owner or developer of the approved business, which agreement shall be brought back for final approval on an open session agenda, unless the Council shall by majority vote authorize an alternative procedure. Subject to the limitations set forth in subdivisions (h) and (i), a tax sharing agreement may provide for the City to rebate to a Business an appropriate rate of sales tax increment for an appropriate time period, as necessary to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter, as determined by the City Council in its sole discretion. The rate and time period determinations made by the City Council pursuant to this section shall be final and conclusive. 
(9)  The rate of sales tax sharing determined by the City Council is subject to the following limitations: 
(A)  For existing businesses, the amount of sales tax to be rebated shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the business's sales tax increment actually received and retained by the City, unless the City Council, in its sole discretion, determines otherwise. 
(B)  For new businesses, the amount of sales tax to be rebated shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the business's sales tax increment actually received and retained by the City, unless the City Council, in its sole discretion, determines otherwise. 
(10)  The time period of sales tax sharing determined by the city council is subject to the following limitations: 
(A)  For existing businesses, the sales tax sharing agreement shall not exceed a time period of ten (10) years, unless the City Council determines, in its sole discretion, that a longer time period is warranted to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
(B)  For new businesses, the sales tax sharing agreement shall not exceed a time period of ten (10) years, unless the City Council determines, in its sole discretion, that a longer time period is warranted to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
(e)  Operating Covenants. Each owner or developer which enters into a sales tax sharing agreement with the City shall record against the participating Business property the following operating covenants, to run with the land: 
(1)  Continuing Use. During the business's participation in the sales tax sharing program, the owner covenants and agrees for itself, its successors, assigns or designees, to continually operate and use the business property for the same purposes, in the same manner, and at the same level of quality, or higher, as that which the business operates upon execution of the sales tax sharing agreement. All uses conducted on the business property shall conform to all applicable provisions of the City's Municipal Code. 
(2)  Maintenance. During the business's participation in the sales tax sharing program, the owner covenants and agrees for itself, its successors, assigns or designees, to continually maintain and repair or cause to be maintained and repaired, the business property, including but not limited to buildings, structures, parking areas, lighting, signs, and landscaping, to be in good condition conforming to all applicable laws, including all applicable provisions of the City's Municipal Code, and shall keep the business property free from any accumulation of debris or waste materials. 
(3)  Non Discrimination. During the business's participation in the sales tax sharing program, the owner covenants and agrees for itself, its successors, assigns or designees, that the business and any of its employees shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex, marital status, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, physical handicap, sexual orientation, or domestic partnership status. 
(f)  General Fund Revenues. All sales tax revenues or sales tax increment remitted to the City by the State Board of Equalization, which were collected by a retail business, are general fund revenues of the City and shall be deposited in the City's general fund. 
(g)  Termination of Tax Sharing. The City may terminate the sales tax sharing agreement on ten (10) days' notice if the business violates any of the operating covenants, provided that such violation or violations continue to exist at the end of said ten (10) day period. The City shall give notice to the owner as required by the terms of the sales tax sharing agreement. 
(h)  Additional Sales Tax Revenues. No revenues received by the City under the imposition of an additional .05 percent sales tax, provided in Chapter 7, Part A, Sections 2711—2713, inclusive, shall be subject to sharing under this program. 
(i)  Administrative Rules and Regulations. Consistent with the intent and goals of this chapter, the City Manager may adopt administrative rules and regulations for implementation and furtherance of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 730, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Part B. - Transient Occupancy Tax 
 
2716 - Transient occupancy tax. 
The tax levied by this Chapter shall be known as the "Transient Occupancy Tax."  
2717 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction of this Chapter: 
(a)  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
(b)  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for temporary occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. "Hotel" shall include any inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer or other building or structure which is occupied, or intended or designed for temporary occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(c)  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
(d)  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this Chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
(e)  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(f)  "Tax Administrator" means the City Manager of the City. 
(g)  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy or a space in a hotel by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying the same space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired.  
2718 - Rate. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the City which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the City. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel.  
2719 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon: 
(a)  Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the City to impose the tax herein provided; 
(b)  Any state or federal officer or employee when on official business and only when: 
(1)  Room reservations are made by a state or federal agency; and 
(2)  The state or federal government is billed directly for rent; and 
(3)  The rent is paid by the state or federal government in response to the billing in 2719(b)(2). 
(c)  Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. 
No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the City Manager.  
2720 - Operator's duties. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this Chapter at the time the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state, in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided.  
2721 - Registration. 
Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel shall register said hotel with the License Officer who shall issue a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate", which shall, at all times, be posted in a conspicuous place on the hotel premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
(a)  The name of the operator; and 
(b)  The address of the hotel; and 
(c)  The date upon which the certificate was issued.  
2722 - Reporting and remitting. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the City Manager, make a return to the City Manager, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the City Manager. The City Manager may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this Chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the City Manager.  
2723 - Penalties and interest. 
(a)  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any portion of any tax imposed by this Chapter, within the times required, shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) equal to the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the tax. 
(b)  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) equal to the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed. 
(c)  Fraud. If the City Manager determines that the non-payment of any remittance due under this Chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subparagraphs (a) and (b) of this Section. 
(d)  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed pursuant to this Chapter, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this Chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month or fraction thereof, on the unpaid balance of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid in full.  
2724 - Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by city manager. 
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this Chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof, the License Officer shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the License Officer shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this Chapter due and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this Chapter. In case such determination is made, the License Officer shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known address. Such operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the License Officer for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the License Officer shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the License Officer shall give not less than five (5) days written notice, in the manner prescribed here, to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the License Officer shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 2725.  
2725 - Appeal. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the License Officer with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal such decision under the provisions described in Article I, Chapter 4 of this Code.  
2726 - Records. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City or the tax imposed by this Chapter, to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of any payment to the City, which records the City Manager shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.  
2727 - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this Chapter, it shall be refunded as provided in subparagraphs (b) and (c) of this Section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the City Manager within three (3) years of the date of payment; any such payment for which a claim is not filed within said three (3) year period shall conclusively be deemed to have been lawfully and properly due to City. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the City Manager. 
(b)  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once if erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in the manner prescribed by the City Manager that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
(c)  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in subparagraph (a) of this Section, but only when such tax has been received by the City.  
2728 - Actions to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable therefor in an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.  
2729 - Transient occupancy tax sharing program. 
(a)  The purpose of this Chapter is to provide an incentive program for the operation, maintenance, renovation and expansion of hotel facilities which: i) enhance the tourist and travel experience for visitors to the City, ii) provide attractive amenities to the public and desirable visitor service facilities and experiences, iii) assist the City in achieving its tourism goals, and iv) increase the transient occupancy tax revenue to the City. In the implementation of this program, the City Council finds: 
(1)  The general welfare and material well-being of the residents of the City depend in substantial measure upon the growth and expansion of the tourism and travel industries in the City. 
(2)  The operation, maintenance, renovation and expansion of the inventory of hotels in the City will create desirable visitor-serving facilities that will: i) contribute to the growth and expansion of tourism and travel opportunities in the City, ii) provide employment opportunities for the residents of the City, iii) provide additional transient occupancy tax revenues to the City, and iv) promote and enhance the economy of the City. 
(3)  It is in the best interest of the City to induce and encourage the opening, operating, expanding, renovating and maintaining of hotel facilities that might not otherwise be as successful, thereby creating new sources of revenues for the City's general fund which supports the public services the City provides its residents and visitors. 
(4)  The authority granted and the purposes to be accomplished by this Chapter are proper local governmental and public purposes for which public funds can be expended and that the opening, operating, renovating, maintaining and expanding of the inventory of hotels is of paramount importance to the City, its residents, and businesses. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Approved hotel" means any existing hotel or new hotel which has submitted an application for participation in the program and been approved by the city to participate in the program after a public hearing on a transient occupancy tax sharing agreement. 
"Existing hotel" means any property containing four (4) or more guest rooms used by four (4) or more guests for compensation and where the guest rooms are: (i) designed and intended as transient occupancy accommodations; and (ii) that was issued a final certificate of occupancy on or before July 17, 2017. 
"Hotel" means any property containing four (4) or more guest rooms used by four (4) or more guests for compensation and where the guest rooms are designed and intended as Transient Occupancy accommodations. 
"Indemnification agreement" means the agreement between the City and an operator in which the operator agrees to indemnify and defend the City against any claims or lawsuits that are brought against the City (and all liabilities, damages, and costs incurred by the City in connection therewith) as a result of the application of this section to a hotel participating in the incentive program. 
"New hotel" means any property containing four (4) or more guest rooms used by four (4) or more guests for compensation and where the guest rooms are designed and intended as transient occupancy accommodations that is issued a certificate of occupancy as a hotel after July 17, 2017. The term "new hotel" does not include all, or any portion of, an existing hotel. 
"Operating covenants" means the operating covenants to be recorded against hotel properties for hotels participating in the program, which shall include provisions regarding continuing use of the hotel as a hotel, maintenance, and non-discrimination. 
"Operator" means the person who runs and operates a hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, franchisee, or any other capacity, or the assignee or designee of such proprietor. 
"Tax sharing report" means the report which shall be completed for any hotel which shall analyze the projected economic factors relating to the renovation of an existing hotel, or construction of a new hotel, and the projected impact of such renovation or construction on the hotel's receipt of transient occupancy tax, which shall be considered by the City Council in making its decision as to a particular hotel, and which the City Council may use, along with other evidence presented, in its sole discretion, to determine whether the subject hotel is approved to participate in the program, and if so, the appropriate transient occupancy tax sharing rate and time period for the transient occupancy tax sharing agreement. The tax sharing report shall be prepared by staff or by a qualified consultant employed by the City. In the case of a consultant, the cost of preparing the tax sharing report shall be paid by the operator of the hotel applying for participation in the program, unless the City, in its sole discretion, waives this requirement. 
"Transient occupancy" means a stay of no more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days. 
"Transient occupancy tax" means the tax established by and paid to the City pursuant to Chapter 7, Part B of this Code, except that any increase in the rate of the transient occupancy tax approved by the voters after the date on which this Section 2729 becomes effective shall be excluded from the term transient occupancy tax for the purposes of this section, it being the intent of the City Council that any revenue derived from such a rate increase will not be shared. 
"Transient occupancy tax base" means the historical production of transient occupancy tax by an existing hotel as calculated in the transient occupancy tax sharing report. The transient occupancy tax base shall be calculated in a manner as to take into account the then-current economic state relative to the historical performance of the hotel. In addition, it shall use a method determined by the preparer of the tax sharing report, for averaging production over an appropriate period adjusted for inflation, or other similar adjustment index, it being the intent that an approved hotel should receive a tax sharing arrangement which does not reward the hotel for improvements in transient occupancy tax arising from general economic conditions as opposed to the improvements made by the hotel operator as owner. 
"Transient occupancy tax increment" means, on an annual basis, the difference between the transient occupancy tax base and the amount of transient occupancy tax actually received by the City from the approved existing hotel after renovation. It is determined by reference to actual receipts by the City of transient occupancy tax from the improved approved hotel. With respect to new hotels, all transient occupancy tax received shall be deemed to be transient occupancy tax increment. Under no circumstances shall the City be liable for any reimbursement of transient occupancy tax increment not actually received and permanently retained by the City. 
"Transient occupancy tax sharing" means the rebate from the city to the operator of an approved hotel of a portion of that hotel's transient occupancy tax increment, as determined each year for which the agreement is valid. The payment of the approved hotel's portion of the transient occupancy tax increment shall be paid to the approved hotel within a reasonable time after the conclusion of each year. 
"Transient occupancy tax sharing agreement" or "agreement" means an agreement between the City and an approved hotel which provides for the rebate from the City to the hotel operator of a portion of the hotel's transient occupancy tax increment, at a rate and for a time period as determined by the City. Said agreements may include such provisions, restrictions, conditions or other provisions as the parties then agree are necessary to give effect to the intent and spirit of this section. 
"Transient occupancy tax sharing program" or "program" means the transient occupancy tax rebate program established by this section. A hotel's participation in the program extends as long as the time period provided for in a transient occupancy tax sharing agreement. 
(c)  Participation Requirements. To participate in the transient occupancy tax sharing program, the operator of: (1) any existing hotel which plans a renovation to improve the hotel facility, or (2) any new hotel must: 
(1)  Complete and submit to the City Manager an application for participation in the transient occupancy tax sharing program on the City's official transient occupancy tax sharing program application form; 
(2)  Receive approval for participation in the program from the City, after the public hearing as provided in this section. 
(3)  If approved by the City, enter into a transient occupancy tax sharing agreement in the form approved by the City; 
(4)  If approved by the City, execute and record against the hotel property the operating covenants; and 
(5)  If approved by the City, execute an indemnification agreement in a form approved by the City. 
(d)  Transient Occupancy Tax Sharing Program. 
(1)  The City Council is authorized to enter into transient occupancy tax sharing agreements with hotels in accordance with this section. 
(2)  In order to determine the appropriate rate of transient occupancy tax sharing for each hotel that has submitted an application pursuant to this section, the City Council shall cause to be prepared a tax sharing report, which shall analyze factors including the following. The City Council, in its sole discretion, may consider additional factors or require additional studies or reports, as it deems appropriate: 
(A)  For existing hotels, the existing level of transient occupancy tax generated by the facility, and the projected transient occupancy tax to be generated after a planned renovation project; 
(B)  For new hotels, the projected transient occupancy tax to be generated by the new facility; 
(C)  The amount of expected transient occupancy tax increment; 
(D)  For new and existing hotels, the quality of the facility and services provided by the hotel; 
(E)  For new and existing hotels, the total projected cost to construct the new hotel or renovate the existing hotel; and 
(F)  The necessity for public assistance. 
(3)  After considering the transient occupancy tax sharing report and such other factors, studies or reports as it, in its sole discretion, deems appropriate, and subject to the limitations of this section, the City shall determine the rate of transient occupancy tax sharing to be provided to a hotel that will be necessary or appropriate to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter, if any. 
(4)  After considering all of the material outlined in this section, and subject to the limitations set forth in this section, the City shall determine, in its sole discretion, the time period over which transient occupancy tax sharing will be necessary or appropriate to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
(5)  The City Council shall hold a public hearing on all contemplated transient occupancy tax sharing agreements. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. At this hearing, the City Council shall consider all evidence before it, including the information contained in the tax sharing report. 
(6)  The City shall make all tax sharing reports available for public inspection and copying, at a cost not to exceed the cost of duplication, no later than the time of publication of the first notice of the public hearing mandated by this section. 
(7)  After the public hearing on a contemplated tax sharing agreement and if the City Council approves the hotel, the City may, by resolution, authorize City staff to negotiate and prepare a transient occupancy tax sharing agreement with the operator or owner of the approved hotel, which agreement shall be brought back for final approval on an open session agenda, unless the Council shall by majority vote to authorize an alternative procedure. 
(8)  Subject to the limitations set forth in this section, a tax sharing agreement may provide for the City to rebate to a hotel an appropriate rate of transient occupancy tax increment for an appropriate time period, at the rate and for the time necessary to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter, as determined by the City Council in its sole discretion. The rate and time period determinations made by the City Council pursuant to this section shall be final and conclusive. 
(e)  The rate of transient occupancy tax sharing determined by the City Council is subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  For existing hotels, the amount of transient occupancy tax to be rebated shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the hotel's transient occupancy tax increment actually received and retained by the City, unless the City Council, in its sole discretion, determines otherwise. 
(2)  For new hotels, the amount of transient occupancy tax to be rebated shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the hotel's transient occupancy tax increment actually received and retained by the City, unless the City Council, in its sole discretion, determines otherwise. 
(f)  The time period of transient occupancy tax sharing determined by the City Council is subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  For existing hotels, the transient occupancy tax sharing agreement shall not exceed a time period of ten (10) years, unless City Council determines, in its sole discretion, that a longer time period is warranted to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
(2)  For new hotels, the transient occupancy tax sharing agreement shall not exceed a time period of ten (10) years, unless the City Council determines, in its sole discretion, that a longer time period is warranted to achieve the goals and intent of this chapter. 
(g)  Operating Covenants. Each operator of a hotel which enters into a transient occupancy tax sharing agreement with the City shall record against the participating hotel property the following operating covenants, to run with the land: 
(1)  Continuing Use. During the hotel's participation in the transient occupancy tax sharing program, the operator covenants and agrees for itself, its successors, assigns or designees, to continually operate and use the hotel property as a hotel. None of the rooms in the hotel will at any time be utilized as a non-transient residential property. No part of the hotel will at any time be owned by a cooperative housing corporation. All uses conducted on the hotel property shall conform to all applicable provisions of the City's Municipal Code. 
(2)  Maintenance. During the hotel's participation in the transient occupancy tax sharing program, the operator covenants and agrees for itself, its successors, assigns or designees, to continually maintain and repair or cause to be maintained and repaired, the hotel property, including but not limited to buildings, structures, parking areas, lighting, signs, and landscaping, to be in good condition conforming to all applicable laws, including all applicable provisions of the City's Municipal Code and to hotel industry standards applicable to that type of hotel, and shall keep the hotel property free from any accumulation of debris or waste materials. 
(3)  Non Discrimination. During the hotel's participation in the transient occupancy tax sharing program, the operator covenants and agrees for itself, its successors, assigns or designees, that the hotel and any of its employees shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of sex, marital status, race, color, religion, ancestry, national origin, physical handicap, sexual orientation, or domestic partnership status. 
(4)  Payment of Transient Occupancy Tax. During the term of the hotel's participation in the transient occupancy tax sharing program, the operator covenants to accurately and faithfully report the receipt of all transient occupancy taxes received and/or collected by it from its guests or any other source whatsoever, and to faithfully report the full amount of all such receipts to the City, and to faithfully remit in a timely manner consistent with ordinance and statute the full amount of the collected transient occupancy taxes to the City. 
(h)  General Fund Revenues. All transient occupancy tax revenues or transient occupancy tax increment remitted to the City by an operator of a hotel which enters into a transient occupancy tax sharing agreement with the City shall be deemed general fund revenues of the City and shall be deposited in the City's general fund. 
(i)  Termination of Tax Sharing. The City may terminate the transient occupancy tax sharing agreement on ten (10) days' notice if the operator violates any of the operating covenants, or fails to pay in a timely manner any of the transient occupancy tax received by the operator from the guests of the hotel, provided that such violation or violations continue to exist at the end of said ten (10) day period. The City shall give notice to the operator as required by the terms of the transient occupancy tax sharing agreement. 
(j)  Administrative Rules and Regulations. Consistent with the intent and goals of this chapter, the city manager may adopt administrative rules and regulations for implementation and furtherance of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 729, § 1, 8-21-17)  
Part C. - Real Property Transfer Tax 
 
2730 - Real property transfer tax. 
This Chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.  
2731 - Rate. 
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof.  
2732 - Person responsible. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 2731 hereof shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued.  
2733 - Exception—Mortgage. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.  
2734 - Exception—governmental agency. 
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefore.  
2735 - Exception—Reorganization. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment: 
(a)  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
(b)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
(c)  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code as amended; or 
(d)  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subdivisions (a) to (d), inclusive, of this Section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.  
2736 - Exception—Securities and exchange commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if: 
(a)  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
(b)  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; or 
(c)  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.  
2737 - Exception—Partnership. 
(a)  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
(1)  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
(2)  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
(b)  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this Chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(c)  Not more than one (1) tax shall be imposed pursuant to this Chapter by reason of a termination described in subdivision (b), and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.  
2738 - Administration. 
The County Recorder shall administer this Chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.  
2739 - Claims. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this Chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State.  
2740 - Effective date. 
This Chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County of Ventura, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, or upon the effective date of this Chapter, whichever is the later.  
Part D. - Development Tax 
 
2750 - Development tax. 
Every person constructing any new dwelling unit or mobile home space in the City shall pay to City the following fees: 
A.  The sum of Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) for each dwelling unit containing not more than one bedroom and the sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each additional bedroom contained therein; provided, however, the total fees for any new dwelling unit shall not exceed the sum of Four Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($450.00). 
B.  The sum of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) for each new mobile home space in a mobile home park. 
Such fees shall be due and payable in the Department of Community Development of the City upon application to the City for a building permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit or any such mobile home space; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such fees in the event the building permit is not approved or is not used for such construction.  
2751 - Definitions. 
A.  Person—As used herein the term "person" includes every person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or entity constructing a dwelling unit or mobile home space itself or through the services of any employee, agent, servant or contractor. 
B.  Dwelling Unit—As used herein the term "dwelling unit" includes each single family dwelling in each separate habitation unit of an apartment or duplex or multiple dwelling structure designated as a separate habitation for one or more persons although a part of the same building or structure. 
C.  Bedroom—As used herein the term "bedroom" shall include any room used as a bedroom, guest room, den, or other room intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
D.  Mobile Home Space—As used herein the term "mobile home space" includes any space upon which the mobile home may be parked and connected to utilities commonly necessary for the habitation for that mobile home.  
2752 - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed or construed to apply to any dwelling unit or mobile home space which shall be used exclusively for housing elderly persons or handicapped persons or persons whose gross income is such a category that those persons are designated under current federal standards as found in the Federal Housing Acts of 1937, 1949, 1950, 1954, 1956, 1959, 1961, 1964, 1968, 1969, 1970 to be eligible for low or moderate-income housing subsidy. 
Any person claiming to construct housing which is entitled to an exemption under this Chapter shall file a sworn statement with the Director of Finance of the City stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed and in the absence of such substantiated statement, such a person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this Chapter. The Director of Finance, upon proper showing contained in the sworn statement and any investigation of said statement, shall issue an exemption to such person claiming exemption under this Section without payment to the City of the fees required by this Ordinance. The Director of Finance, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to the person holding an exemption under this Section, may revoke said exemption granted pursuant to the provisions of this Section upon evidence and proof that the holder of the exemption is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein.  
2753 - Fees solely for revenue. 
The City Council hereby declares that the fees required to be paid hereby are assessed pursuant to the taxing power of the City and are solely for the purpose of producing revenue. The continued increase in the development of dwelling units in the City with the intended increases to the population of the City has created an urgency in that there are insufficient funds available for the increased demand for capital items required to serve the increasing population of the City or for providing the necessary services. 
To implement the foregoing declaration, the City Council hereby creates, pursuant to Section 53730 through 53737 of the California Government Code, a special capital outlay funds to be kept and held by the Director of Finance of the City in a special capital outlay fund as provided in Title V, Division 2, Article 4 of said Government Code, the funds of which are to be budgeted and expended by the Council for the purposes set forth in this Section only.  
Part E. - Tax Procedure Law 
 
2900 - Tax procedure law—Adoption of. 
From and after the effective date of this Chapter, the duties of assessing property and of collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the City, shall be performed by the County Assessor and the County Tax Collector of the County of Ventura, State of California, in accordance with all provisions of applicable law.  
Chapter 9 - SURPLUS AUTHORITY 
Sections: 
 
2910 - Activation of Surplus Property Authority. 
Pursuant to Section 40500 et seq., of the Government Code, and other applicable law, the Surplus Property Authority for the City of Port Hueneme is needed and is hereby activated. 
(Ord. 591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2911 - Powers. 
Powers of the Surplus Property Authority shall be as set forth in Section 40500 et seq., of the Government Code and other applicable law. The Authority shall exercise its powers in the manner prescribed by applicable law, including, but not limited to, Section 40560 et seq., of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
2912 - Designation of subordinate officers of the Authority. 
(a)  The Manager of the Authority shall be the City Manager of the City, unless otherwise directed by the Commission. 
(b)  The Clerk of the Authority shall be the City Clerk of City, unless otherwise directed by the Commission. 
(c)  The Treasurer of the Authority shall be the Director of Finance of the City, unless otherwise directed by the Commission. 
(d)  The City Attorney of City shall serve as the legal advisor to the Authority, unless the Commission otherwise directs. 
(Ord. 591 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Article III - PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 1 - ANIMALS 
Sections: 
 
3001 - Adoption of the animal control ordinance of the County of Ventura. 
Animal Control Ordinance of the County of Ventura (Chapter 4 — "Animals" of the County Code) is hereby adopted by reference as the Animal Control Ordinance for the City (hereinafter "Animal Control Ordinance") to the extent such does not conflict with the City's Municipal Code. The City Clerk shall maintain a copy of the Animal Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. 640 § 1, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 720, § 1, 9-21-15)  
3002 - Definitions. 
Whenever the following words or phrases are used, they shall have the following meaning ascribed to them: 
(a)  "County" or "County of Ventura" means the City of Port Hueneme under the Animal Control Ordinance in those instances where the City has not contracted with the County of Ventura to provide animal control services and in those instances where the Animal Control Ordinance makes reference to the jurisdiction boundaries of the County of Ventura. 
(b)  "Person" shall have the definition ascribed to such term by Section 1206 of this Code. 
(c)  "Poundmaster" shall mean the Police Chief of the City in those instances where the City has not contracted with the County of Ventura to provide animal control services. 
(d)  "Unincorporated Territory" shall mean the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Port Hueneme. 
(Ord. 640 § 2, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 720, § 2, 9-21-15)  
3003 - Penalties. 
The penalties for any violation of any provision of said Animal Control Ordinance and this Chapter 1 in its entirety (including without limitation activities that constitute nuisances) shall be infractions and misdemeanors as set forth in this Code for violations of this Code and shall also be deemed, for all purposes, public nuisances. The Council may instruct and direct the City Attorney to file an action to abate a public nuisance with respect to such violations. 
(Ord. 640 § 3, 2002) 
(Ord. No. 720, § 3, 9-21-15)  
3004 - Annual dog licenses. 
Provisions for dog licenses including fees shall be set in the manner described by the Council by Resolution and/or contract.  
3005 - Effect of zoning regulations. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter, no person shall keep, or maintain, on any lot, or in any building or structure, any animal, mammal, fish, or fowl, for any purpose, except in strict conformity with the provisions of the City Zoning Regulations set forth in Article X of this Code.  
3006 - Unsanitary condition. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to keep or permit to be kept upon any premises, any animals, poultry or household pets in a foul, offensive, obnoxious, filthy or unsanitary condition. 
(Ord. 601 § 1, 1994)  
3007 - Leash law. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, harbored, or controlled to be on any public street, alley, lane, park or place of whatever nature open to and use by the public in the City of Port Hueneme unless such dog is securely leashed and the leash is held continuously in the hands of a responsible person capable of controlling such dog, or unless the dog is securely confined in a vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, harbored, or controlled to be on any private property in the City of Hueneme without the permission of the person owning or occupying said private property. 
(Ord. 607 § A, 1996)  
3008 - Pooper scooper required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person having custody or control of a dog (except a guide dog used by the physically handicapped) to allow that dog to defecate upon any public beach, public street, alley, lane, park, school ground, private property or place of whatever nature open to and used by the public in the City of Port Hueneme and not promptly pick up and remove the feces in a wrapper, bag or container suitable for the purpose of picking up and removing the feces of such dog. 
(Ord. 607 § B, 1996)  
Chapter 2 - DISASTER COUNCIL 
Sections: 
 
3101 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of a disaster, and to provide for the coordination of the civil defense and disaster functions of the City with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations.  
3102 - Definitions—Civil defense. 
As used in this Part, the term "civil defense" means preparation for and carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damages resulting from disasters. "Disaster" as used in this Chapter, means actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity.  
3103 - Civil defense and disaster council. 
(a)  Membership. The Civil Defense and Disaster Council is hereby created. It shall consist of the following: The Mayor, who shall be Chairman; the City Manager, who shall act as the Director of Civil Defense and Disaster, and the Police Chief who shall be the Vice Chairman. 
(b)  Powers and Duties. It shall be the duty of the Civil Defense and Disaster Council, and it is hereby empowered, to review and recommend for adoption by the Council, civil defense and disaster plans, as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Council shall meet upon call of the Chairman or, in his absence, upon the call of the Vice Chairman.  
3104 - Director of Civil Defense and Disaster—Powers and duties. 
The Director of Civil Defense and Disaster is hereby empowered: 
(a)  To request the Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a disaster or an emergency and the termination thereof, if the Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the Council is not in session, subject to confirmation by the Council at the earliest practicable time; 
(b)  To request, upon authorization of the Council if time permits the obtaining of such authorization, the Governor to proclaim a state of disaster or a state of extreme emergency when in the opinion of the Director the resources of the area or region are inadequate to cope with the disaster; 
(c)  To control and direct the effort of the civil defense and disaster organization of the City; 
(d)  To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the civil defense and disaster organization of the City, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; and 
(e)  To represent the civil defense and disaster organization of the City in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to civil defense and disaster.  
3105 - Director of Civil Defense and Disaster emergency powers during disaster or emergency. 
In the event of the proclamation of a disaster or emergency as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of disaster or a state of extreme emergency by the Governor or the Director of the California Disaster Office, the Director is hereby empowered: 
(a)  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the Council; 
(b)  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people and bind the City for the payment of fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use; 
(c)  To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and to command the aid of as many private persons as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by State law for registered civil defense and disaster service volunteers; 
(d)  To exercise all powers conferred by any lawful authority, including, but not limited to, those set forth in Section 38791 et seq. of the Government Code.  
3106 - Civil defense and disaster organization. 
(a)  Membership. All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of Section 3105(c) of this Part, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the City during such disaster, shall constitute the civil defense and disaster organization of the City. 
(b)  Organization, Duties and Functions. The organization, duties and functions of the City civil defense and disaster organization, its relationship with the American National Red Cross, and the order of emergency succession to the position of Director of Civil Defense and Disaster shall be as set forth in the current civil defense and disaster emergency operations plan of the City. Insofar as possible, the form of organization titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the civil defense and disaster agencies of the Federal Government and the State.  
3107 - Punishment for violations. 
No person shall: 
(a)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense and disaster organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this Part, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this Part; 
(b)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this Part, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
(c)  Wear, carry or display without authority, any means of identification specified by the civil defense and disaster agency of the State.  
Chapter 2A - PRICES OF EMERGENCY ITEMS AND SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
3110 - Regulation of prices. 
This Chapter and its sections apply to the regulation of prices of emergency items and services during an emergency or disaster for which a proclamation of a local emergency has been issued for the County of Ventura, by the Board of Supervisors or the Sheriff, as the Director of Disaster Services, pursuant to Government Code Section 8630 or Ventura County Ordinance Code Sections 5323-1.1 or in accordance with Section 3105 of this Code. 
(a)  Findings. As a result of local emergencies, consumers have sought to purchase emergency items and services necessary for their health, safety and welfare. In such local emergencies, there have been reports of excessive price increases for emergency items or services, in relation to their price that existed before the local emergency, even accounting for price increases incurred by the provided of the emergency items or services. 
(b)  Legislative Intent. It is the intention of the City Council, in adopting this Chapter, to protect consumers from excessive and unjustified increases in the prices of emergency items and services necessary for their health, safety and welfare during an emergency or disaster for which a proclamation of a local emergency has been issued. 
(c)  Excessive Price Increases Prohibited. Upon the proclamation of a local emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person, including a natural person, a contractor, a business or other entity, to sell or offer to sell any emergency items or services for a price which exceeds ten (10) percent of the price charged by such person for said emergency items or services immediately prior to the proclamation of the local emergency, unless said person can prove that the excess was directly attributable to additional costs imposed by the supplier of the emergency items or resulting from the labor and/or materials used to provide the emergency service. 
(1)  The applicability of this subsection can be expressly reduced or eliminated by providing within the proclamation of the local emergency. 
(2)  The applicability of this subsection terminates upon the termination of the local emergency, unless terminated earlier by the City Council. 
(d)  Definitions. For purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Emergency items" include, but are not limited to: food, drink, confection or condiment for man or animal; water, flashlights, radios, batteries, candles, blankets, soaps, and diapers; and prescription and nonprescription drugs, bandages, gauze and isopropyl alcohol. 
(2)  "Emergency services" include, but are not limited to: contractor services for repairs to residential and commercial property of any type which are damaged. Incorporated herein are the definitions contained in Sections 7025, 7026, 7026.1 and 7026.3 of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(e)  Hearing. If there is reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated the provisions of this section, the District Attorney or the City Attorney shall, prior to the filing of a criminal complaint, conduct a hearing upon due notice and an opportunity to be heard. At the conclusion of such hearing, the District Attorney or the City Attorney may, in his discretion, file a criminal complaint. The District Attorney or City Attorney may, for good cause, dispense with the requirement of conducting a hearing prior to the filing of a criminal complaint. 
(f)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person who shall be convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person believing that a violation of said ordinance has been committed may file a complaint with the District Attorney or the City Attorney. 
(2)  The District Attorney or City Attorney or any affected may prosecute a civil action under applicable state law to enforce this section and in any action a civil penalty may be imposed as provided by law and, where appropriate, restrictions to aggrieved consumers may be ordered. 
(Ord. 596 § 2, 1994)  
Chapter 3 - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections:  
Part A. - Vehicular Traffic Regulations  
Division 1. - General 
 
3200 - Definitions of words and phrases. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this Chapter, shall for the purpose of this Chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein. Whenever any words or phrases used herein are not defined, but are defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California and amendments thereto, such definitions shall apply. 
(a)  "Director and Traffic Engineer," for purposes of this Chapter, means the Public Works Director of the City. 
(b)  "Coach" means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(c)  "Curb" means the lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb be marked by curbing, construction, or not so marked; the word "curb" as herein used shall not include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the center of a street, nor from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies. 
(d)  Divisional Island means a raised island located in the roadway and separating opposing or conflicting streams of traffic. 
(e)  Holidays for purpose of this Chapter means those days designated by Section 6700 et seq. of the Government Code as holidays. 
(f)  Loading Zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(g)  Official Time Standard means standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the City. 
(h)  Official Traffic Signals means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. 
(i)  Park means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
(j)  Parkway means that portion of a street other than a traveled roadway or a sidewalk. 
(k)  Parking Meter means a mechanical device installed, in or near an area designated as a pay parking zone, which collects parking fees and regulates the time during which parking is permitted in the pay parking zone. 
(l)  Passenger Loading Zone means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
(m)  Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
(n)  Police Officer means every officer of the Police Department of this City or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(o)  Stop or Stand: 
(1)  When required, means complete cessation of movement. 
(2)  The term "stop or stand" when prohibited means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(p)  Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for travel. 
(q)  Vehicle Code means the Vehicle Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 1, 7-6-10)  
Division 2. - Administration and Enforcement 
 
3201 - Traffic engineer. 
The office of Traffic Engineer is hereby established.  
3202 - Powers and duties of traffic engineer delegation. 
It shall be the duty of the Traffic Engineer to carry out the powers and duties imposed upon him by this Code, and to perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Council.  
3203 - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
Police and Fire Officers are hereby authorized to direct traffic by voice, hand, or other signal in conformance with traffic laws, except that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, such officers may direct traffic as conditions may require.  
3204 - Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic. 
No person other than a Police or Fire Officer or a person authorized by the Police Chief or a person otherwise authorized by law shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal.  
3205 - Obedience to police or authorized officers. 
No person shall fail or refuse to comply with nor refuse to perform any act commanded by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a person authorized by the law to issue such order, signal or direction.  
3206 - Obstruction of or interference with police or authorized officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of this City in their enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this City in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this Chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this Chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction.  
3207 - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, any county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any said operator to violate any of the provisions of this Chapter except as otherwise permitted by law.  
3208 - Exemption of certain vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this Chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to public emergency vehicles or any public utility vehicle or any private ambulance which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call. 
(b)  The foregoing exemptions shall not relieve the operator of any such vehicle from the obligation to exercise due care for the safety of others or the consequences of his willful disregard of the safety of others. 
(c)  The provisions of this Chapter regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicles of a City department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or any vehicle owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States Mail.  
3209 - Report of damage to certain property. 
(a)  The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or owned by a public utility, including but not limited to any fire hydrant, parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic control device or other property of a like nature located in or along any street, within twenty-four (24) hours after such accident, shall make a written report of such accident to the Police Department of this City. 
(b)  Every such report shall state the time of and the place where the accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of every such vehicle, and shall briefly describe the property damage in such accident. 
(c)  The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make a report as required in Subdivision (a) within twenty-four (24) hours after regaining ability to make such report.  
Division 3. - Traffic Control Devices 
 
3210 - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained official traffic control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the Vehicle Code requires, or for the effectiveness of any provision thereof, traffic control devices shall be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices subject to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the laws applicable thereto. 
(c)  The Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained, such additional traffic control devices as he may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this Chapter.  
3211 - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any official traffic control device placed in accordance with this Chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized person subject to the exceptions granted the operator of an authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.  
3212 - Installation of traffic signals. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineer is hereby directed, subject to the approval of the City Manager, to install and maintain official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or to protect life or property from exceptional hazard. 
(b)  The Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations where such signals are required by field investigation, traffic counts and other traffic information as may be pertinent. 
(c)  Whenever the Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official traffic signal at any intersection he shall likewise erect and maintain at such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and are maintained at any such intersection. 
(d)  The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speed otherwise applicable under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 2, 7-6-10)  
3213 - Lane marking. 
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the highway.  
3214 - Distinctive roadway markings. 
The Traffic Engineer is authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Public Works pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code.  
3215 - Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices. 
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue, subject to the approval of the City Manager, the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or this Chapter whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist.  
3216 - Traffic control devices—Hours of operation. 
The Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this Chapter.  
3217 - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person, unless authorized by this City, shall paint any street or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person authorized to do so by this Code or by order of the Council.  
Division 4. - Turning Movements 
 
3218 - Authority to place turning markers. 
When determined to be necessary by the Traffic Engineer, he shall place and maintain markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and he shall locate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which vehicles may make right or left turns.  
3219 - Obedience to turning markers. 
All motorists shall obey the directions of such turning markers placed in accordance with Section 3218 of this Code.  
3220 - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
The Traffic Engineer shall determine those intersections at which vehicles should not make right, left or U-turns, and he shall place proper signs at such intersections regulating said turns or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.  
3221 - Obedience to no turn signs. 
All motorists shall obey the directions of such signs placed in accordance with Section 3220 of this Code.  
Division 5. - One-way Streets and Alleys 
 
3222 - The traffic engineer to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever the Council designates any street or alley for one-way traffic, the Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof.  
3223 - Traffic flow on one-way streets. 
When all or a portion of any street or alley is designated for one-way traffic, no person shall operate a vehicle thereon in any direction except as indicated by signs giving notice of such restriction.  
Division 6. - Special Stops Required 
 
3224 - The traffic engineer to erect stop signs. 
Whenever any street or portion thereof is designated as a through street, or when the Council directs the installation of special stop signs, the Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated by council resolution. Every such sign shall conform with and be placed as provided for in the Vehicle Code. 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof so designated and at those entrances of other intersections where a stop is required and at any railroad grade crossing so designated. Every such sign shall conform with and shall be placed as provided in Section 21400 of the Vehicle Code. 
When any stop signs are in place, the driver of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to the same.  
3225 - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the street right-of-way, sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alley way.  
Division 7. - Miscellaneous Driving Rules 
 
3226 - Driving through funeral procession. 
No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession or a parade, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders of the Police Department.  
3227 - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on to, or hold on to with his hands or by other means, to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of receiving motive power therefrom.  
3228 - Commercial vehicles using private driveways. 
No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on or across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, if a sign or markings are in place indicating that the use of such driveway is prohibited. 
For the purpose of this section a commercial vehicle means a vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of one-half ton.  
3229 - Riding or driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride, drive, propel, or cause to be propelled any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk excepting over permanently constructed driveways and excepting when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk.  
3230 - New pavement and markings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when any such device is in place indicating that the street or any portion thereof is closed.  
3231 - Obedience to barrier and signs. 
No person, public utility or department in the City shall erect or place any barrier or sign on any street unless of a type approved by the Traffic Engineer, nor shall any person disobey the instructions, remove, tamper with or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street or other public place.  
3232 - No entrance into intersection that would obstruct traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.  
3233 - Limited access roadway. 
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.  
3234 - No driving on flood control channels. 
No person shall operate any vehicle upon any flood control channel within the City which is owned, operated or under the control of either the Ventura County Flood Control District or the United States Corps of Engineers. This section shall not apply to vehicles owned or in the service of the United States Corps of Engineers, the Ventura County Flood Control District or the City, nor shall it apply to the driving or operating of a motor vehicle on the traveled portion of any public highway crossing any such flood control channel.  
Division 8. - Pedestrian Regulations 
 
3235 - Traffic engineer to establish marked crosswalks. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineer shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections and other places by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway where the Traffic Engineer determines that there is particular hazard to pedestrians crossing the roadway subject to the limitation contained in (b) of this section. 
(b)  Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be established in any block which is less than four hundred (400) feet in length except by direction of the City Manager. 
(c)  The Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross except in the crosswalk so indicated.  
3236 - When pedestrians must use crosswalks. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway, other than in a crosswalk or at an intersection, if no crosswalk has been established.  
3237 - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except in a marked crosswalk.  
3238 - Standing in roadways. 
No person shall stand in any roadway other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic. This section shall not apply to any public officer or employee, or employee of a public utility when necessarily upon a street in line of duty.  
Division 9. - Stopping, Standing and Parking for Certain Purposes or in Certain Places 
 
3239 - Application of regulations. 
(a)  The provisions of this Chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device.  
3240 - State regulations. 
The provisions of this title imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the vehicle code or this code prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times.  
3241 - Prohibition of stopping, parking or standing. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control device in any of the following places: 
(a)  On a cross-walk, except that a bus engaged as common carrier or a taxi cab may stop to load or unload passengers. 
(b)  Within fifteen (15) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station other than fire department vehicles or within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(c)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(d)  On any public sidewalk. 
(e)  Alongside or opposite any street or highway excavation or obstruction. 
(f)  On the roadway side of any vehicle, parked or standing at the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(g)  Within any parkway. 
(h)  On other than a truck route, if vehicle is in excess of 6,000 pounds weight.  
3242 - Stopping or standing in parkways prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any parkway.  
3243 - Traffic engineer to maintain no stopping zones and no parking areas. 
The traffic engineer is hereby directed to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no-stopping zones, parking areas, and restricted parking areas, as defined and described in this chapter.  
3244 - No parking areas. 
No owner and/or operator of any motor vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal: 
(a)  Within or along side of any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated with appropriate signs or markings; 
(b)  Upon, along or across any railway track in such manner as to hinder, delay, or obstruct the movement of any train traveling upon such track; 
(c)  On any street or alley where the restricted use of such street or alley or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway or the installation of underground utilities or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided that signs giving notice of such restriction are erected or placed in said areas; 
(d)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone, when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
(e)  At any location where the traffic engineer determines that parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
(f)  At any location established by resolution of the council as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
(g)  At the approaches to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device, within a distance determined by the traffic engineer to be sufficient to permit a safe orderly movement of traffic at the location of said traffic devices.  
3245 - Reserved for future use.  
3246 - Parking for purpose of displaying for sale sign. 
No person shall display, or cause to be displayed for sale sign or signs on vehicle or any part thereof, upon any public street or alley in this city.  
3247 - Repairing or greasing vehicles on public streets. 
No person shall construct, or cause to be constructed, repair, or cause to be repaired, grease, or cause to be greased, dismantle, or cause to be dismantled, any vehicle or any part thereof, upon any public street or alley in this city; except for temporary emergency repairs.  
3248 - Washing or polishing vehicles. 
No person shall wash or cause to be washed, polish or caused to be polished any vehicle or any part thereof upon any public street or alley in this city.  
3249 - Stopping or parking prohibited—Signs required. 
The traffic engineer shall appropriately sign or mark the following places and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of said places: 
(a)  At any place within twenty (20) feet of a point on the curb immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone. 
(b)  Within twenty-five (25) feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop sign, or official electric flashing device. 
(c)  At any place where the traffic engineer determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate unusual traffic hazard.  
3250 - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet.  
3251 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.  
3252 - Unlawful parking—Peddlers, vendors. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street within this city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or fixed place of business or distribution. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle, lunch wagon, eating cart or vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale. Such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the traffic engineer which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand, on any street or at any curb within this city, any vehicle, wagon or cart upon which has been placed or erected any advertising structure, sign or display for the primary purpose of directing public attention to a place of business, or advertising the sale of services or merchandise at a place of business. 
(d)  Cart permit. No person shall park or stand any vehicle, or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city manager which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand. 
(e)  Revoking permits. Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the city manager upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the city manager, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six (6) months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.  
3253 - Reserved for future use.  
3254 - Display of warning devices when commercial vehicle disabled. 
Every motor truck having an unladen weight of 4,000 pounds or more, and every truck tractor irrespective of weight when operated upon any street or highway during darkness shall be equipped with and carry at least two flares or two red lanterns or two warning lights or reflectors, which reflectors shall be of a type approved by the Department of California Highway Patrol. When any vehicle above mentioned or any trailer or semi-trailer is disabled upon streets or highways outside of any business or residential district within this city and upon which street or highway there is insufficient street lighting to reveal a vehicle at a distance of two hundred (200) feet during darkness, a warning signal of the character indicated above shall be immediately placed at a distance of approximately one hundred (100) feet in advance of, and one hundred (100) feet to the rear of, such disabled vehicle by the driver thereof. The continuous flashing of at least four (4) approved class A-Type I turn signal lamps, at least two (2) toward the front and at least two (2) toward the rear of the vehicle, shall be considered to meet the requirements of this section until the devices mentioned above can be placed in the required locations. The warning signals herein mentioned shall be displayed continuously during darkness while such vehicle remains disabled upon such street or highway.  
Division 10. - Stopping, Standing and Parking Restricted or Prohibited on Certain Streets 
 
3255 - Twenty minute parking. 
(a)  Green curb marking means no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty (20) minutes at any time. 
(b)  When authorized signs, or curb markings have been placed in areas designated by the traffic engineer, giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle adjacent to any such area for a period of time in excess of twenty (20) minutes. 
(Ord. 631 § 2A, 2000)  
3256 - Streets designated where stopping, standing or parking prohibited. 
(a)  When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street designated by council. 
(b)  Vehicles parked on the designated streets shall be towed away and stored at the owner's expense.  
3257 - Four hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been placed in areas designated by the traffic engineer, giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle in such areas for a period of time longer than four (4) hours. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1, 2-7-11)  
3258 - One hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been placed in areas designated by the traffic engineer, giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle in such areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day for a period of time longer than one (1) hour. 
(Ord. 602 § 1, 1994)  
3259 - Two hour parking. 
When authorized signs or curb markings have been placed in areas designated by the traffic engineer, giving notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park said vehicle in such areas between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for a period of time longer than two (2) hours. 
(Ord. 602 § 2, 1994)  
3260 - Parking parallel. 
(a)  Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle shall be stopped or parked within eighteen (18) inches of the curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any street unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing. 
(b)  In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking. 
(c)  The Traffic Engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two (2) or more separate roadways and shall erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(d)  The requirement of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading freight or goods, and if such vehicle does not extend beyond the center line of the street and does not block traffic thereby.  
3261 - Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
The Traffic Engineer is authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of vehicles to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit.  
3262 - Diagonal parking. 
On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution of the Council as diagonal parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except: 
(a)  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space; 
(b)  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six (6) inches of said curb. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight or goods, in which event the provisions of Section 3260(d) of this Chapter shall be complied with.  
3263 - Parking space markings. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineer is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces for on- and off-street public parking. 
(b)  When such parking space markings are placed on a highway or publicly-owned and maintained off-street public parking facility, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 618 § 1, 1998)  
3264 - No stopping zones. 
The Traffic Engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by placing and maintaining appropriate signs indicating that stopping of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and day when stopping is prohibited. 
During the hours and on the days designated on said signs, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop said vehicle on any of the streets or parts of streets established by resolution of the Council as no stopping zones.  
3265 - Parking of truck tractors regulated. 
No person shall park or leave standing any truck tractor on any City street for more than two (2) hours at any one time. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or to any vehicle actually being used for the pick up or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise or for the delivery of materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building.  
3266 - One hour and two hour parking—Temporary removal. 
The City Manager may, for good cause, order the temporary removal of the parking limitation established pursuant to Sections 3258 and 3259 hereof for days or portions of days other than Sundays or holidays. Upon receipt of such an order from the City Manager, the Traffic Engineer shall proceed to remove or cover the parking limitations signs and curb markings or other designations for the duration of the parking limitation temporary removal period.  
3267 - Parking of trailers, semi-trailers and trailer coaches prohibited. 
No person shall park or leave standing any trailer, semi-trailer or trailer coach on any city street unless the same is attached to a vehicle capable of moving the trailer, semi-trailer or trailer coach in a normal manner upon the street. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any trailer, semi-trailer or trailer coach owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while actually then in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility, or to any trailer, semi-trailer or trailer coach which is actually then in use for the pickup or delivery of goods, wares and merchandise or for the delivery of materials to be used in the repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building.  
3268 - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited on certain streets. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street designated by council when authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof.  
3270 - Parking time limited on certain streets in the vicinity of Hueneme Beach. 
When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle for a period of time longer than two (2) hours at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays upon any street designated by Council.  
3271 - (Reserved).  
3272 - (Reserved).  
3273 - Parking prohibited in school zones during school hours. 
School zones in the City of Port Hueneme will have curbs painted red as designated by the Chief of Police. When authorized signs are in place giving notice thereof, there will be no parking in this school zone during the hours that school is in session or when there is an authorized school activity in progress. 
(Ord. 621 § 2, 1998)  
3274 - Special prohibition for parking vehicles. 
(a)  Ignition keys shall not be left in an unattended, parked vehicle. 
(b)  A child, incapable of removing himself from a vehicle, shall not be left unattended in a parked vehicle, on public or private property.  
3275 - Parking on private property. 
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle, trailer, or motorcycle on private property unless: 
(a)  The permission of the owner of the property or the tenant of the property is obtained; and 
(b)  If parking spaces on the property are assigned to specific persons, dwelling units, or leasehold interests, and permission of the assignee of the parking space is obtained.  
3276 - Parking on private property visible from public streets. 
It shall be unlawful to park or store a vehicle on any portion of private property visible from a public street unless said vehicle is operative and is parked on a driveway. 
For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
(a)  "Vehicle." A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, street, alley, or road except as a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(b)  "Operative vehicle." A vehicle which is currently registered and in condition to be legally operated upon a public street or highway within the State. 
(c)  "Public Street." A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to use of the public for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(d)  "Private Property." All real property in the city which is not publicly owned. 
(e)  "Private Property Visible from a Public Street." All private property which can be seen while standing in a public street and which is not behind a six foot (6') high opaque fence. 
(f)  "Driveway." A poured-in-place asphalt or concrete slab which covers less than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard area and is connected to a public right-of-way by a curb cut.  
3277 - Designation of parking for disabled persons and disabled veterans. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park or leave standing any vehicle in any parking stall or space, or to obstruct, block or otherwise bar access to those parking stalls or spaces, whether on public or private property, if such stall or space has been designated pursuant to Section 22511.7 or 22511.8 of the Vehicle Code for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code. 
(b)  The Council may from time to time designate by resolution parking stalls or spaces located on City owned property for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 592 § 1, 1993)  
3278 - Parking of inoperative vehicles on public property or public streets. 
It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle on any portion of public property or public street unless said vehicle is operative as defined in Section 3276 of this Chapter. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectfully ascribed to them: 
(a)  "Vehicle." As defined in Section 3276 of this chapter. 
(b)  "Operative Vehicle." As defined in Section 3276(b) of this Chapter. 
(c)  "Public Street." As defined in Section 3276(c) of this Chapter. 
(d)  "Public Property." All real property in the city which is not privately owned.  
3279 - Parking of vehicles leaking fluids on public streets or public property. 
No vehicle shall be parked or stored on any public street or public property unless the vehicle is so maintained, constructed, covered or loaded, as to prevent any fluid, other than clear water, from leaking spilling, or otherwise escaping therefrom. 
For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases "vehicle", "public street", and "public property" shall have the meanings ascribed to them by Section 3276 of this Code. 
The owner of any vehicle parked or stopped in violation of this Section shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City for cleaning, treating, or repairing public streets or public property affected by fluids from such vehicle.  
3280 - Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited. 
(a)  Maximum Time Limit. No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours. 
(b)  Removal of Vehicle. In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two (72) hours, any member of the police department authorized by the Police Chief may remove said vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of Sections 22651(k), 22850, 22852 and 22853 of the Vehicle Code.  
3281 - Emergency parking signs. 
(a)  Authority to Require. Whenever the Police Chief shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, the Police Chief shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Police Chief shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the Police Chief shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
(b)  Compliance. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.  
Division 11. - Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only 
 
3282 - Authority to establish loading zones. 
(a)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine and mark loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows: 
(1)  At any place adjacent to a commercial area where traffic safety permits. 
(2)  In front of the entrance to any place of business or in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly, where traffic safety permits. 
(b)  In no event shall more than one-half of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes. 
(c)  Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zone. 
(d)  Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs in said zones.  
3283 - Curb markings to indicate no stopping and parking regulations. 
The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and required, subject to the provisions and limitations of this Chapter, to place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth. 
(a)  Red means no stopping, standing, or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone. 
(b)  Yellow means no stopping, standing or parking at any time between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three (3) minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(c)  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three (3) minutes and such restrictions shall apply between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
(1)  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
(2)  When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed. 
(d)  When the Traffic Engineer as authorized under this Chapter has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in violation of any of the provisions of this section.  
3284 - Effect of permission to load or unload. 
(a)  Permission herein granted to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes. 
(b)  The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pick-up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
(c)  Permission herein granted to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three (3) minutes. 
(d)  Within the total time limits above specified the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges hereby granted.  
3285 - Standing for loading or unloading only. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials for such time as is specified in Section 3284.  
3286 - Standing in passenger loading zone. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers except for such time as is specified in Section 3284.  
3287 - Standing in an alley. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose, other than for the purpose of loading or unloading of persons or materials, in any alley.  
3288 - Coach zones to be established. 
(a)  The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof. 
(b)  Coach zones shall be established at locations adjacent to intersections in a manner consistent with traffic safety.  
3289 - Bus zones to be established. 
(a)  Authority. The Police Chief is hereby authorized to establish bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses of common carriers of passengers and to determine the location thereof subject to the directives and limitations set forth herein. 
(b)  Bus Defined. The word "bus" as used in this section means any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, coach or passenger stage used as a common carrier of passengers. 
(c)  Size of Zone. No bus zone shall exceed eighty (80) feet in length, except that when satisfactory evidence has been presented to the Police Chief showing the necessity therefor, the city Police Chief may extend bus zones not to exceed a total length of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet. 
(d)  Intersection Location. Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an intersection. 
(e)  Safety Zone. No bus zone shall be established opposite and to the right of a safety zone. 
(f)  Marking Curb. The Police Chief shall authorize the painting of a red line stenciled with white letters "no standing," together with the words "bus zone" upon the top or side of all curbs and places specified as a bus zone. 
(g)  Other Vehicle Prohibited. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus zone.  
Division 12. - Restricted Use of Certain Streets 
 
3290 - Restricting trucks to certain routes. 
(a)  Posting Routes. Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the City Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as "truck traffic routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons. 
(b)  Application. When any such truck traffic route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except when necessary to traverse another street or streets to a destination for the purpose of loading or unloading, but then only by such deviation from the nearest truck route as is reasonably necessary. The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission. 
(c)  Designation. Those streets and parts of streets described in Section 3290.1 hereof are hereby declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons.  
3290.1 - Truck routes designated. 
In accordance with Section 3290 and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following streets or portions of streets are hereby declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum of gross weight of three tons. 
Port Hueneme Road from the easterly City limits to Port of Hueneme entrance adjacent to Market Street. 
Pleasant Valley Road from Ventura Road to San Pedro Street Ventura Road from north City limits to Port Hueneme Road Channel Islands Boulevard from Ventura Road to western City limits. 
Ponoma Street from Pleasant Valley Road to Clara Street. 
(Ord. 560, 1990: Ord. 589 § 1, 1993)  
Division 13. - Pay Parking 
 
3291 - Pay parking zones. 
The parking of vehicles on streets, portions of streets or municipal parking lots as designated by the Council, by ordinance or resolution, as pay parking zones, shall be controlled as provided in this Division.  
3292 - Manner of installation. 
The Traffic Engineer shall cause pay parking machines to be installed and maintained in all pay parking zones.  
3293 - Time of operation of parking meters. 
The provisions of this Chapter relating to pay parking shall be effective during the hours set by Council ordinance or resolution.  
3294 - Administrative rules. 
The City Manager may promulgate administrative regulations relating to the pay parking matters which are not specifically provided for in this Division.  
3295 - Periodic parking permits. 
Nothing in this Division prohibits the issuance by the City of parking permits which, when displayed in the manner set forth by regulations issued pursuant to Section 3294 pertaining to parking receipts, shall substitute for a parking receipt. The fees for issuance of such parking permits shall be set by Council resolution.  
3296 - Exclusive permit parking. 
Specific pay parking zones may be designated as pay parking by permit only by resolution. When signs are in place so designating such areas, only vehicles displaying a valid unexpired parking permit issued by the City may park in such zones. Time restrictions and other conditions may be imposed upon the parking privileges granted by the permits issued under this section by the City Manager. 
Fees for the issuance of parking permits under this section shall be set by Council resolution.  
3297 - Parking meter fees. 
Pay parking fees for the pay parking zones herein established shall be as set by resolution.  
3298 - Unlawful to park after meter time has expired. 
No operator of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle to remain parked in any parking space after the expiration of the parking time purchased.  
3299 - Beach parking. 
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on any public street or public parking lot which lies between Hueneme Road and the Pacific Ocean and which is designated by resolution as an area of parking regulated by a parking meter unless the motor vehicle so parked has displayed prominently on the driver's side of the dashboard, visible through the windshield, or, in the case of a motorcycle, on the handlebars, an unexpired receipt for parking issued by a parking meter. For the purposes of this section, the term "parking meter" means a mechanical device which, when the mechanism thereof is set in motion, issues a receipt indicating unexpired parking time.  
3300 - Improper use of machines. 
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any pay parking machine any defaced or bent coin, or any slug, device or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States, or deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any pay parking machine.  
3301 - Parking meters and parking meter standards not to be used for certain purposes. 
No person shall attach anything to or allow a bicycle, newsrack or any other article or thing to lean against a pay parking machine.  
3302 - Annual parking passes. 
(a)  When an annual parking pass is issued, the vehicle license number shall be recorded by the City. All annual parking passes shall be permanently affixed to the driver's side windshield for the vehicle recorded. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to display an annual parking pass which has expired or to display any parking pass on a vehicle that does not correspond with the vehicle license that has been recorded with the City. 
(Ord. 594 § 1, 1993)  
Division 14. - Trains 
 
3310 - Railway gates. 
No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.  
3311 - Trains not to block crossings. 
No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars or similar vehicle on rails to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident.  
Division 15. - Speed Limits[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 700, § 3, adopted July 6, 2010, repealed the former Division 15, §§ 3315—3317, and enacted a new Division 15 as set out herein. The former Division 15 pertained to special speed zones and derived from Ord. No. 660, 2005 and Ord. No. 661, 2005. 
 
3315 - State speed limits applicable. 
The speed limits set forth in the Vehicle Code shall be applicable upon all streets within the City except as this Division, pursuant to authority granted in the Vehicle Code, declares that a certain prima facie speed limit shall be applicable upon a specified street or portion thereof, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any such prima facie speed limit so declared when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 3, 7-6-10)  
3316 - Prima facie speed limits declared. 
(a)  It is hereby determined on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour will facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and will be reasonable and safe upon the streets designated in Section 3317 of this Division that are otherwise subject to a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour under the Vehicle Code, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon such streets so designated shall be as therein stated, which speeds so declared shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street; provided however, that this section shall not apply to any twenty-five (25) miles per hour prima facie speed limit under the Vehicle Code that is applicable when passing a school building or the grounds thereof, or when passing a senior center or other facility primarily used by senior citizens. 
(b)  It is hereby determined on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that the speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour for two-lane undivided streets and sixty-five (65) miles per hour for other streets is more than is reasonable and safe upon the streets designated in Section 3317 of this Division that are otherwise subject to a speed limit of fifty-five (55) miles per hour or sixty-five (65) miles per hour, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limit upon such streets so designated shall be as therein stated, which speeds so declared shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the street. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 3, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 3-16-15)  
3317 - Prima facie speed limit schedule. 
It is hereby determined on the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that the prima facie speed limits set forth in this section and declared pursuant to Section 3316 of this Division are reasonable, safe, and most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to erect appropriate signs upon the streets giving notice of the prima facie speed limits set forth in this Section. 
(a)  Bard Road between Ventura Road and the City's easterly limits: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(b)  Channel Islands Boulevard between Victoria Avenue and Ventura Road: Forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(c)  Crossjack Street between Anchor Avenue and Wheelhouse Avenue: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(d)  Hemlock Street between Patterson Road and the City's easterly limits: Thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(e)  Market Street between Surfside Drive and Port Hueneme Road: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(f)  Ocean View Drive between Surfside Drive and Hueneme Beach Park Lot C: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(g)  Patterson Road between Channel Islands Boulevard and Hemlock Street: Forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(h)  Pearson Road between Ventura Road and 8th Street: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(i)  Pleasant Valley Road between San Pedro Street and the City's easterly limits: Thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(j)  Port Hueneme Road between Market Street and Ventura Road: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(k)  Port Hueneme Road between Ventura Road and the City's easterly limits: Thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(l)  San Pedro Street between Clara Street and Pleasant Valley Road: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(m)  Seaside Drive between Crossjack Street and Hemlock Street: Twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(n)  Seaview Street between Market Street and Ventura Road: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(o)  Surfside Drive between Market Street and Port Hueneme Road: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(p)  Ventura Road between Surfside Drive and Port Hueneme Road: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(q)  Ventura Road between Port Hueneme Road and Pleasant Valley Road: Thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(r)  Ventura Road between Pleasant Valley Road and Channel Islands Boulevard: Forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(s)  Victoria Avenue (northbound) between Channel Islands Boulevard and Hemlock Street: Fifty (50) miles per hour. 
(t)  Wheelhouse Avenue between Channel Islands Boulevard and Crossjack Street: Thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 700, § 3, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 718, § 2, 3-16-15)  
Division 16. - Private and Public Property Traffic Regulations 
 
3320 - Parking on private property prohibited. 
No person shall stop, stand, park or leave standing, any motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State, whether attended or unattended, on any private property within the City, except with the consent of the owner or person in possession of such private property. Such consent, for the purpose of this section, shall be deemed, for all purposes, not to have been given if the private property has displayed thereon, in plain view, a sign which: 
(a)  States that public parking is prohibited; and 
(b)  Refers to this Code section or consistent Vehicle Code sections; and 
(c)  Contains the telephone number of the Police Department.  
3321 - Parking on private property—Removal. 
The owners or persons in lawful possession of such private property may cause vehicles parked in violation of Section 3320 hereof to be removed in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State.  
3322 - Speed on private property. 
No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle in a private driveway or on private property in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour when the owner of said driveway or property has erected a sign giving notice thereof.  
3323 - Interfering with or blocking the view of traffic at street intersections. 
No person shall park, place, store, erect or permit any vehicle, sign, fence or other object or material of any kind, on the public streets or on private property, within twenty five feet (25') of an intersection of streets and/or at a distance whereby the placement of such objects, by their size, height or configuration, would interfere with or block the traffic view of pedestrians or vehicles at such intersection.  
Division 17. - Peddlers and Vendors 
 
3327 - Peddling or soliciting with pushcarts—Sidewalk vendors. 
It is unlawful for any peddler or solicitor, vendor or miscellaneous sidewalk peddler or vendor to sell goods from a pushcart or any other device: 
(a)  From public property or along any public right-of-way or parkway; 
(b)  On private property without first obtaining the owner's consent and a Special Use Permit pursuant to Code Section 10355. 
(Ord. 588 § 1, 1993)  
Part B. - Bicycle Regulations 
 
3330 - License required. 
No person shall operate a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any street of the City without first obtaining a license therefor.  
3331 - Duration of license. 
The City Clerk or such other person as may be designated by the Council is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application therefor, bicycle licenses which will entitle said bicycle to be operated upon all the streets, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the City.  
3332 - License plates and registration cards. 
The City shall provide bicycle license indicia (license plates) together with registration cards, said licenses and registration cards having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order. Such licenses shall be purchased from the California State Department of Motor Vehicles and shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames of bicycles, and the City Clerk or such other person who may be designated by the Council shall attach one such license to the frame of each bicycle, and shall issue a corresponding registration card to the owner thereof upon the payment of the license fee herein provided for. Such license shall remain attached during the existence of such license. The City Clerk or other such person who may be designated by the Council shall also keep a record of the date of issue of each license, the number thereof, the name and address of the licensee, and the make, type and model of the licensed bicycle.  
3333 - Removing or altering plates, etc. 
No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy or alter the number of the frame of any bicycle licensed pursuant to this Chapter. No person shall remove, destroy or alter any license or registration card during the time in which such license or registration card is valid; provided, however, that nothing in this Chapter shall prohibit the City Clerk or other such person who may be designated by the Council, from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which said number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.  
3334 - License fee. 
The license fees to be paid for each bicycle shall be paid in advance as follows: 
(a)  For each new bicycle license and registration certificate, the sum of one dollar ($1) per two (2) calendar years or any portion thereof; and 
(b)  For each replacement of a bicycle license or registration certificate, the sum of one dollar ($1); and 
(c)  For each bicycle license renewal, the sum of one dollar ($1) per two (2) calendar years.  
Chapter 4 - PUBLIC NUISANCES 
Sections:  
Part A. - Premises 
 
3400 - Maintenance of property—Nuisances. 
It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property in this City: 
(a)  To maintain any building or structure on such property which is structurally unsafe, or is not provided with adequate ingress and egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life; 
(b)  To maintain such property, the topography or configuration of which, whether in natural state or as a result of grading operations, causes, or will cause, erosion, subsidence, or surface water run-off problems which will, or may be, injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to adjacent properties or nearby properties; 
(c)  To maintain such property so that the same constitutes a fire hazard or likely habitat for vermin by reason of overgrowth of vegetation or the accumulation of debris; 
(d)  To maintain such property, or any building or structure thereon, in such condition so that the same is defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes depreciable diminution of the property values of surrounding properties or is otherwise materially detrimental to adjacent properties and improvements; 
(e)  To maintain any property or any building or structure on such property which has been constructed, maintained or used in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such property, building or structure contained in the Building or Zoning Regulations of this City or any law or ordinance of the City or State relating to the condition, location, use, occupancy, maintenance or construction of such property or buildings; 
(f)  To maintain any building or structure on such property whereby reason of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, or other cause, the condition of the same is such as to constitute a fire hazard; 
(g)  To store, discharge, hold, handle, maintain, use or otherwise deal with hazardous substances, as defined by applicable State or federal laws or regulations: 
(1)  In violation of federal, State or local laws or regulations, 
(2)  In such a manner to affect in any way air or water quality, or 
(3)  In such a manner as to create an identifiable risk to the health or safety of persons, or to adversely affect air or water quality; 
(h)  To keep, operate or maintain any machinery which by reason of its dust, exhaust or fumes creates a health or safety hazard; 
(i)  To maintain any vacant building or a structure as a potential earthquake hazard; 
(j)  To throw, deposit, keep or place, or to allow or suffer to be thrown, deposited, kept or placed or scattered upon any public street, alley, or any premises in the City any metal cuttings or shavings, or glass, thorny branches, clippings, rags, cans, papers, skins, peelings or other vegetables or vegetable matter or soap or chemical solution in any unusual amount or in an injurious amount, or any foul or noisome substances or other waste or castoff matter or parts of vehicles or machinery, or wrecked machinery, or the carcasses of animals or fowls; 
(k)  To trespass upon the land of another in the City for the purpose of dumping or to dump upon any such land, garbage, refuse, junk, waste or waste material or property of any kind or nature; 
(l)  To place or pile or allow to be placed or piled any vegetable or other matter which will decay or putrefy or attract flies or other insects unless the same shall be completely removed from such premises within twelve (12) hours from the placing thereon; 
(m)  To deposit or place, or to allow or suffer to be deposited or placed any trash can or container for longer than a continuous period of twenty-four (24) hours upon any public street, alley, curb or sidewalk in the City; 
(n)  To keep or maintain such property so that the same constitutes a hazard or nuisance for any motor vehicle or pedestrian by reason of overgrown tree limbs and/or foliage obstructing the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 598 § 1, 1994)  
3401 - Abatement of nuisance. 
All or any part of any real property or any building or structure located thereon found to constitute a public nuisance, as provided herein, shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth herein.  
3402 - Notice of hearings for nuisance abatement. 
(a)  Where the Code Compliance Officer determines that a public nuisance within the meaning of this Chapter exists, he or she shall advise the Director thereof, who shall give not less than fourteen (14) days' written notice of a hearing to determine whether a public nuisance exists. Notice of the hearing will be served by posting the subject property and by registered or certified mail (postage fully prepaid) addressed to the owner of the property at the address appearing on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before the hearing notice is mailed. Proof of posting and mailing will be by declaration. Failure of any person to receive the notice will not affect the validity of any order issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
(b)  Written notice of the hearing must be mailed and conspicuously posted on the property containing a nuisance. Notice will be titled in letters at least one (1) inch in height and read substantially as follows: 
  
Notice of Public Nuisance Hearing 
  
On ________, 20___, the City of Port Hueneme will determine whether this property known and designated as _______, constitutes a public nuisance. If this property is found to constitute a public nuisance as defined by the Port Hueneme Municipal Code ("PHMC"), and if the public nuisance is not promptly abated by the responsible person as ordered by the hearing officer, then the City will abate the nuisance. If the City abates the nuisance, the cost of these proceedings, all previous code compliance efforts concerning the condition of the property, and the cleaning, clearing, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition by the City will constitute a special assessment and a Nuisance Abatement Lien upon such land until paid. The City may foreclose on any such lien in order to reimburse the City for these costs. 
The alleged violations consist of the following: 
The methods of abatement available are: 
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters should attend a hearing to be conducted by the City Manager or designee, to be held at _______ on _______, _______ at the hour of _____.m., when testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration. 
Dated: 
________ 
Department Officer 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2005)  
3403 - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  All parties have the opportunity to testify at the hearing and present additional evidence at the public nuisance hearing. Evidence may include, without limitation, witness testimony, documents, or other similar evidence. Evidence sought to be introduced is not limited to any legal rules of evidence except for the rule that it must be relevant and material to the issues of whether the public nuisance exists. 
(b)  Failure to appear at the public nuisance hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at the hearing. The Hearing Officer must decide the matter based upon any documentary evidence submitted to it before the hearing, and any additional evidence that may be presented at the public nuisance hearing by the Code Compliance Officer. 
(c)  The Hearing Officer may continue any hearing and request additional information before issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2005)  
3404 - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  A Hearing Officer selected by the City Manager must conduct the hearing. At the time set for such hearing, the Hearing Officer will conduct a hearing to determine, based upon the evidence presented, whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. At the hearing, the Hearing Officer will accept reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue of whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. The Hearing Officer is authorized to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations under the Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a). Based upon the evidence submitted including, without limitation, any written staff reports regarding the alleged nuisance, the Hearing Officer will determine whether or not a public nuisance exists on the subject property. 
(b)  As soon as is practical following the close of such hearing, the Hearing Officer will render a decision on the matter. If a public nuisance is found to exist, the Hearing Officer will issue an order requiring the abatement of the public nuisance in a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the order. The Hearing Officer will promptly give written notice to the responsible person and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such decision, including, a copy of the order. The order issued by the Hearing Officer will be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. There is no right to a City Council appeal. 
(Ord. 659 § 1 (part), 2005)  
3409 - Cost of abatement. 
Where the City Manager is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, he shall keep an accounting of the cost thereof, including incidental expenses for the abatement. The term "incidental expenses" includes but is not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the City in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the work, consultants' fees and the costs of printing and mailings required under this Chapter. Upon conclusion of the abatement, he shall file the itemized statement of costs ("report") with the City Clerk who will set the same for a hearing before the Council. The City Clerk shall cause notice of the time and place of the hearing to be given to the owners and any person, having a legal or equitable interest in the property to which the same relates, and to any other person requesting the same.  
3410 - Report—Hearing and proceedings. 
At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering such report, the Council shall hear and pass upon the decision of the City Manager, together with any objections or protests raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the cost of abating such nuisance. Thereafter the Council may make such revision, correction or modification to such report as it may deem just, after which the report as submitted, or as revised, corrected or modified shall be confirmed by resolution. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.  
3411 - Assessment of costs liens against property. 
The confirmed cost of abatement of a nuisance upon any lot or parcel of land shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates, and, after its recording as made and confirmed by the Council, the same shall constitute a lien on such property in the amount of such assessment. A copy of the confirmed cost of abatement shall be transmitted to the Assessor and Tax Collector for the City, whereupon it shall be the duty of such Assessor and Tax Collector to add the amounts of such assessment or assessments to the next regular bills or taxes levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes; thereafter such amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.  
3412 - Alternates to administrative hearing. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the Council from ordering the City Attorney to commence a civil action to abate a nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with, proceedings as set forth in this Chapter; nor shall anything in this Chapter be deemed to prevent the City from commencing a criminal action with respect to the abatement of a public nuisance in addition to, alternatively to, or in conjunction with the proceedings set forth in this Chapter.  
3413 - Emergency abatement. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter with reference to the abatement of public nuisance, whenever the City Manager determines that a public nuisance exists upon any real property located in the City, which is, or reasonably appears to be dangerous to human life or to adjacent property, and such condition constitutes an immediate hazard or danger, he shall, without observing the provisions of this Chapter with reference to abatement procedures, immediately and forthwith abate the public nuisance.  
3414 - Penalties for violations. 
The owner and any other person having charge or control of any real property located in the City, upon which a public nuisance exists, or who violates or fails to comply with an Order, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee or agent of the City who is abating or causing the abatement of a nuisance pursuant to an Order issued pursuant to this Chapter.  
Part B. - Vehicles 
 
3417 - Public nuisance—Motor vehicles. 
The provisions of this Part shall govern the abatement and removal of motor vehicles, or part or parts thereof, which are abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative. "Motor Vehicle" as used in this Part shall be defined as set forth in Section 670 of the Vehicle Code.  
3418 - Declaration of nuisance. 
Any motor vehicle which is abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, or any part or parts thereof, located on any private property, or public property, excluding highways, in the City, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(a)  Abatement. Where such motor vehicle is found to constitute a public nuisance, by reason of its condition and location, as herein provided, such nuisance shall be abated and the motor vehicle, and all parts thereof, shall be removed and disposed of as provided in this Part. 
(b)  Declaration. The Enforcement Officer shall give the notice required hereinafter whenever any motor vehicle is being maintained contrary to the provisions of this Part by reason of its condition and location.  
3419 - Public hearing—Procedure. 
(a)  Notice. Prior to removal of any such vehicle, or part or parts thereof, the Enforcement Officer shall give a ten (10) day notice of his intention to abate the nuisance by removal. Such notice shall contain the information required pursuant to Section 22661 of the Vehicle Code and shall describe the vehicle involved and the property whereon the same is located, including, but not limited to, the correct identification number and license number thereof, if available. Such notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in said Section 22661. 
(b)  Request for Hearing. Within ten (10) days after the mailing of said notice, the owner of the lot upon which such vehicle or part or parts thereof is located, or the owner of the vehicle, may file a written request, as provided in said Section 22661, with the City Clerk, requesting a hearing on such matter. If no such request is made, the Enforcement Officer shall abate the nuisance as provided in the notice relating thereto. 
(c)  Notice. Notice of the hearing to determine whether a vehicle or part thereof constitutes a public nuisance, if requested within the time permitted, shall be given by the City Clerk to the owner of the land whereon the vehicle is located, whose name appears, as such, on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the vehicle owner as shown on the last registration of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. Such notice shall be given by United States mail, certified or registered, with a five (5) day return requested and postage thereon prepaid. "Owner" as used herein shall include any person in possession of the affected premises, and any person having or claiming to have, any legal or equitable interest in said premises. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings hereunder. 
(d)  Hearing. If a request for a hearing is made, the same shall be held before the Council. At the time and place of hearing, the Council shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including, but not limited to, applicable staff reports, objections or protests relative to the existence of such alleged public nuisance and the manner proposed for abatement of the same. Said hearing may be continued from time to time. 
Upon conclusion of said hearing, the Council, based upon the evidence presented at such hearing, shall determine whether the vehicle, or any part thereof, as maintained constitutes a public nuisance as defined herein. If the Council finds that a public nuisance exists, it shall order by resolution the same abated within a reasonable time to be set by it. 
The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at such hearing, or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, together with his reasons for such denial. If the Council determines that the vehicle was placed upon the land without the consent or the landowner, and the landowner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the cost of abatement thereof shall not be levied against such property owner.  
3420 - Service on owner of order of abatement. 
A copy of the resolution ordering the abatement of said nuisance shall be served upon the owners of said property in accordance with the provisions of Section 3403 hereof.  
3421 - Abatement of public nuisance. 
After a final determination that a motor vehicle, or parts thereof, constitutes a public nuisance within the meaning of this Part, the owner of the motor vehicle, and/or the owner of the property whereon the same is located, shall abate the said public nuisance by removing the same in the time set forth in the order of abatement relating thereto. If such person or persons fail to abate such public nuisance, the Enforcement Officer shall abate the same by City forces or private contract in the time and manner permitted by Section 22661 of the Vehicle Code.  
3422 - Abatement by city. 
Where the abatement of a public nuisance pursuant to this Part is accomplished by City forces, the provisions of Section 3411 et seq. hereof shall be applicable to such proceedings.  
3423 - Administration. 
The provisions of this Part shall be administered by the City Manager or his designee.  
3424 - Disposal of vehicles. 
Motor vehicles or parts thereof, declared to be a public nuisance pursuant to this Part, shall be disposed of in the manner provided by Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code; provided that, after a motor vehicle has been declared to be a public nuisance and has been removed from the premises where located, the same shall not be reconstructed or otherwise made operable.  
3425 - Identification of vehicle. 
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of a vehicle or part thereof, the Enforcement Officer shall cause to be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of California notice identifying the vehicle or part thereof, and any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, registration certificates of title or license plates on any such vehicle.  
3426 - Exceptions. 
This Part shall not apply: 
(a)  To a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner, where the same is not visible from the street or other public or private property; and 
(b)  To a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in conjunction with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard; provided, however, that this latter exception shall not authorize the maintenance of any premises contrary to the provisions of this Code.  
Part C. - Unruly Gatherings 
 
3427.10 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the City's police powers for the purpose of prohibiting and deterring unruly events that constitute a public nuisance and, accordingly, threaten public health, safety, and welfare. Persons who actively or passively aid, allow, or tolerate such nuisances will be held strictly liable for the City's abatement costs. It is in the public interest to require persons responsible for such nuisances to pay the costs of special public services rather than to burden the general public. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.20 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this Chapter. 
"Alcohol" has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 23003. 
"Alcoholic beverage" has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 23004. 
"Controlled substance" means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor, as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health and Safety Code Sections 11000, et seq.). 
"Illegal drug activity" means a violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 6 (commencing which Section 11350) or Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section 11400) of the Health and Safety Code, and any successor statute or regulation. 
"Minor" means any person under the age of eighteen (18). 
"Premises" means any unimproved or improved real property, including, without limitation, business establishments, dwelling units, rental units, garage facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells, elevators, and, as the context permits or requires, any public or private property which is abuts any of such areas. 
"Rental unit" includes: 
(1)  Any dwelling unit as defined in this Code, including, without limitation, any single and multifamily residence, duplex, or condominium located in the City; 
(2)  Any hotel or motel room; 
(3)  Any assembly hall or banquet facility; 
(4)  Any mobile home, whether rent is paid for the mobile home, the land upon which the mobile home is located, or both; and 
(5)  Any recreational vehicle, as defined in Civil Code Section 799.24, if located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, whether rent is paid for the recreation vehicle, the land upon which it is located, or both. 
"Response costs" means the cost associated with responses by law enforcement, fire, and other public services (for example, and not limitation, public works or building safety) to unruly gatherings including, without limitation: 
(1)  Salaries and benefits of personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise addressing unruly gatherings and the administrative costs attributable to such response(s); 
(2)  The cost of any medical treatment to or for any personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving an unruly gathering; 
(3)  The cost of repairing any City equipment or property damage, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at or leaving unruly gatherings; and 
(4)  Any other costs recoverable in compliance with Civil Code Section 1714.9. 
"Responsible person" means any person owning, leasing, maintaining, or otherwise controlling a premises including, without limitation, the agent or representative of a person with possessory interest in a premises who organizes, permits (actively or passively), supervises, officiates, conducts, or controls the activities that constitute an unruly gathering. 
"Unruly gathering" means any activity involving two (2) or more persons on a premises which includes any of the following and interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, public or private property, or public safety: 
(1)  Violations of this Code with regard to noise; 
(2)  Interference with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic in violation of this Code or other applicable law; 
(3)  Curfew violations of this Code by minors; 
(4)  Consumption of alcohol and alcoholic beverages in violation of this Code or other applicable law including, without limitation, consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors or individuals younger than twenty-one (21) years; or 
(5)  Illegal drug activity or use of controlled substances in violation of any applicable law. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.30 - Prohibitions. 
It is unlawful for a responsible person to cause, knowingly permit, or by insufficient control to allow any premises under the responsible person's control to be used or maintained for an unruly gathering after the person is aware of or has been made aware of the unruly gathering and has made no reasonable attempt to cease the activities that constitute an unruly gathering. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.40 - Administration—Policies and procedures. 
The Police Chief will administer this Chapter under the direction of the City Manager. The City Manager may promulgate such administrative procedures as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.50 - Second response—Response costs. 
Utilization of any public employee during any response to unruly gatherings after the first warning, where responding police officers determine there is a violation of this Chapter, is a public service over and above the services generally provided within the City's jurisdiction and, accordingly, constitutes a special public service. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.60 - Notice—Responsible person signature. 
(a)  When police officers respond to unruly gatherings, the police officers can, but are not required to, issue written notice to the responsible person stating as follows: 
(1)  If police officers are required to return to the same premises within the following twelve (12) hour period in response to a complaint; or 
(2)  If police officers are required to return to the same premises hosting a unruly gatherings a total of three (3) times or more within a six (6) month period in response to a complaint; and 
(3)  The responding police officers determine there is a violation of this Chapter; then 
(4)  Such additional responses by police officers, or other public employees, will constitute response costs the cost of which must be paid by the responsible person. Any such costs will become the responsible person's personal obligation and be a debt to the City. 
(b)  Notices issued pursuant to this section must be signed by the responsible person which acknowledges receipt of the warning. A signed copy may be left with the responsible person. If a second or subsequent response is required, police officers must have a responsible person sign a response cost invoice acknowledging the special public services and additional invoices for any further responses. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.70 - Notice—Signature unavailable. 
If no responsible person is available on the premises when the police are present, or the responsible person refuses to sign receipt of the notice, a copy of the notice must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises on each occasion the police respond. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.80 - Response cost invoice. 
(a)  The Police Chief must provide a written response cost invoice to the responsible person by certified mail. The response cost invoice must state the following: 
(1)  The identification of the responsible person; 
(2)  The address of the premises; 
(3)  The factual circumstances constituting the unruly gathering; 
(4)  The date(s) and time(s) that special public services were provided; and 
(5)  A copy of the warning notice(s) provided to the responsible person. 
(b)  The response cost invoice must also state that the responsible person may file a written appeal of the determination within ten (10) days after receiving the notice and describe the procedure required for such an appeal. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.90 - Collection of fees. 
(a)  All fees and charges levied for response costs are due and payable upon presentation. 
(b)  All response costs constitute a valid debt to the City and against the responsible person or, if the responsible person is a minor, the responsible person's parents and guardians. 
(c)  If a responsible person does not timely appeal the response cost invoice in accordance with this Chapter, and if any amount remains unpaid after reasonable and practical attempts have been made by the City to obtain payment, the City Manager, or designee, is authorized to take all legal and practicable collection efforts to recover the outstanding debt, together with any penalties, any related charges and fees accrued due to nonpayment. 
(d)  The City Attorney is authorized to file an action on the City's behalf for injunctive relief, or other appropriate civil action, to require the responsible person to comply with this Chapter. 
(e)  Fees and charges to be levied for recovering City costs for notification and collection of delinquent accounts will be established by City Council resolution. Such fees and charges are part of the response costs. 
(f)  A court rendering a judgment pursuant to this section may, in addition to any other order provided by law, require the payment of reasonable attorney's fees, and costs of investigation, discovery and court costs. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.100 - Administrative appeals. 
Responsible persons served with a response cost invoice in accordance with this Chapter may appeal the response cost invoice to the City Manager, provided: 
(a)  A request for review must be commenced within ten (10) days from the date on which the response cost invoice is served on the responsible person. If an appeals request is untimely, the City Manager may, nevertheless, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown. 
(b)  A request for appeal must be on a form provided by the City and contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request; 
(2)  A copy of the response cost invoice or, if that document is unavailable, the approximate date, time, address, and amount of response costs; 
(3)  A brief description of all grounds for making the request; 
(4)  Whether an administrative hearing is requested; 
(5)  Be accompanied by an advance deposit of the response costs or a request for a hardship waiver; and 
(6)  Such other information as the City may require. 
(c)  Upon receiving an appeal, the City Manager must appoint an independent Hearing Officer to review the request. 
(d)  If a responsible person requests a hearing, the City Clerk will schedule a hearing on a date not less than fifteen (15) nor more than sixty (60) days from the date the hearing is requested. Written notice of the date, time and location of the administrative hearing must be provided to the responsible person at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing date. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.110 - Advance deposit—Hardship waiver. 
(a)  Responsible persons financially unable to make an advance deposit of the response costs, may file for a hardship waiver. The request for a hardship waiver must be filed with the City Clerk's office on a form containing information that may be required by the City Clerk. The City Clerk will review the request and determine whether a waiver is justified. A waiver may only be approved if the request for waiver is accompanied by a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating the responsible person's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine. 
(b)  The City Clerk will inform the responsible person in writing regarding whether the City Clerk approved the waiver. This determination must be served upon the responsible person by mail at the address provided in the waiver application. The City Clerk's determination is final. 
(c)  Should the Clerk determine that a waiver is unjustified, the responsible person must deposit the response cost amount with the City not later than ten (10) days after the date of that decision. Failure to make a deposit within ten (10) days after waiver denial is deemed a waiver of the responsible person's right to an administrative appeal and the response costs will be deemed delinquent. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.120 - Conduct of hearings. 
(a)  Waiver of Personal Appearance at Hearing. In lieu of personally appearing at an administrative hearing, the responsible person may request that the Hearing Officer decide the matter based on the written appeal and any other documentary evidence submitted by the responsible person or Police Chief, or designee, before the hearing date. 
(b)  Failure to Appear at Hearing. Failure of a responsible person to appear at the hearing is deemed a waiver of the right to be personally present at the hearing. The Hearing Officer must then decide the matter based upon the written appeal, the response cost invoice, any documentary evidence previously submitted, and any additional evidence that may be presented at the hearing by the Police Chief or designee. 
(c)  Continuation of Hearings. The Hearing Officer may continue any hearing and request additional information from the Police Chief, or designee, or responsible person before issuing a written decision. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.130 - Hearing Officer decision. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days of receiving the appeal or, if a hearing is requested, after a hearing, the Hearing Officer must provide the responsible person with a written notification that: 
(1)  The response cost invoice is affirmed; 
(2)  The response cost invoice is modified; or 
(3)  The response cost invoice is vacated. 
(b)  The Hearing Officer's decision is a final determination. There is no right of City Council appeal. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.140 - Right to judicial review. 
(a)  A responsible person may appeal the Hearing Officer's decision by filing an appeal with the Superior Court pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4, or any successor statute, within twenty (20) days from service of the Hearing Officer's decision. 
(b)  Should the responsible person file a timely appeal with the Superior Court, the requirement to pay the response costs is suspended and the payment of the response costs, if any, will be in accordance with the Superior Court decision. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.150 - Disposition of response costs. 
(a)  Should the Hearing Officer uphold the response cost invoice, then the City can retain the deposited response costs. 
(b)  Should the Hearing Officer vacate the response cost invoice, then the City must promptly refund the amount of the deposited amount, if any. 
(c)  Should the Hearing Officer uphold the response cost invoice and a hardship waiver was previously granted, the due date for paying the response costs will be thirty (30) days from the date of the notice of the Hearing Officer's decision. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.160 - Recovery of response costs—Liens. 
In addition to any other legal remedy, the City may place a lien on property owned by the responsible person in an amount equal to the sum of the response costs delinquent for more than (90) days, plus penalties and interest. If multiple responsible persons exist, they will be jointly and severally liable for any payments so ordered. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.170 - Lien procedure. 
(a)  The City Manager, or designee, may initiate proceedings to record a lien conforming with this Article if the decision is not appealed. 
(b)  Before recording the lien, the City Manager, or designee, must submit a report to the City Clerk stating the amounts due and owing. 
(c)  The City Clerk will fix a time, date, and place for the City Council to consider the report and any protests or objections to it. 
(d)  The City Clerk must serve the responsible person with a hearing notice not less than ten (10) days before the hearing date. The notice must set forth the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, and any penalties and interest that is due. Notice must be delivered first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each responsible person's address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Ventura, whichever is more current. Service by mail is effective on the date of mailing and failure of responsible person to actually receive notice does not affect its validity. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council will adopt a resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the lien amount. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.180 - Recording a lien. 
Within thirty (30) days following the City Council's adoption of a resolution imposing a lien, the City Clerk will file same as a judgment lien in the Ventura County Recorder's Office. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.190 - Administrative fee. 
Each responsible person against whose property an assessment is levied pursuant to this Chapter will also be assessed an administrative fee in an amount established by City Council resolution based on the costs incurred in levying the assessment. The administrative fee will be included in the lien amount approved by the City Council and recorded against the responsible person's property. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.200 - Satisfaction of lien. 
Once the City receives full payment for outstanding principal, penalties, and costs, the City Clerk will either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the responsible person with a notice of satisfaction for recordation at the Ventura County Recorder's Office. This notice of satisfaction will cancel the City's lien. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
3427.210 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this Chapter may be enforced as follows: 
(1)  Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the City Attorney's discretion. For three (3) or more violations at the same premises occurring within any twelve (12) consecutive month period, a violation of this Chapter is deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Abated as a Public Nuisance. Because unruly gatherings constitute an immediate threat to public health, safety, and welfare, the procedures for emergency abatement may be used as provided by this Code and can include, without limitation, an order requiring dispersal of the unruly gathering. 
(b)  The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies including, without limitation, those set forth elsewhere in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 677 § 2 (part), 2007)  
Part D. - Graffiti 
 
3427.301 - Purpose. 
This Part is adopted in accordance with California Constitution Article XI, § 7 and Article I, § 1.1 of the City Charter; Government Code §§ 38771-38773.7, 53069.3, including any successor statutes; and Civil Procedure Code § 731, including any successor statutes, for the purposes of identifying graffiti as a public nuisance; authorizing abatement of graffiti; and imposing criminal and civil penalties upon persons for causing or permitting graffiti. Adopting this Part is a municipal affair and will protect public health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that graffiti is prohibited; providing for its prompt removal; and imposing criminal and civil penalties upon persons permitting graffiti to occur. Nothing contained in this Part is intended to, nor will it, preclude the City from pursuing any other available civil or criminal remedies concurrently or in addition to the proceedings established by this Part to enforce this Code. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.302 - Findings. 
The City Council finds as follows: 
A.  Graffiti on either public or private property, results in blight, decreases property values and deprives surrounding residents and owners of the right to comfortable enjoyment of life and property. 
B.  Graffiti is obnoxious, constitutes a public nuisance, and is a threat to public safety which must be abated to prevent its proliferation. 
C.  Graffiti must be removed as quickly as possible to minimize harm to persons and property in the community. 
D.  This Part of PHMC Chapter 4 is intended to be complementary to, and not in conflict with, Penal Code § 594, which provides that any person who maliciously defaces property is guilty of vandalism, and Penal Code § 594.1, which provides that certain activities involving the possession, sale and use of aerosol paint containers are misdemeanors. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.303 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this Part: 
A.  "Aerosol Paint Container" means any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
B.  "Felt Tip Marker" means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which at its broadest width is one-eighth-inch or greater, containing an ink that is not water-soluble. 
C.  "Glass Cutters" means any tools or instruments designed, or intended, to cut or etch glass surfaces. 
D.  "Graffiti" means any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, pasted, or otherwise placed on property without the prior approval of the property owner or person in lawful possession or control of the property. 
E.  "Graffiti Implement" means any implement capable of marking a surface to create graffiti including, without limitation, any aerosol paint container, paint stick, felt tip marker, marking pen, gum label, marking instrument, drill bit, grinding stone, scribe, glass cutter, or etching tool, or other implements capable of marking or scarring glass, metal, concrete or wood. 
F.  "Graffiti Removal Costs" means all costs that would be considered abatement costs in the context of a nuisance abatement proceeding pursuant to this chapter. In addition, such costs expressly include, without limitation, costs of removal of graffiti or other material, costs of repair and replacement of the defaced property, all city staff time, costs of the police investigation, attorney time and fees, and any court costs incurred. 
G.  "Gum Label" means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which, when placed on a surface, is not easily removed. 
H.  "Hearing Officer" means City Manager or designee. 
I.  "Incidental expenses" include, without limitation, actual expenses, city administrative costs and other costs of the city of all previous code enforcement efforts, the preparation of the abatement work specifications, contracts, and staff time in inspecting the work, as well as the costs of printing, posting and mailings required by this Part. 
J.  "Minor" means, except as otherwise provided, a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
K.  "Paint or Graffiti Stick" means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure and, upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty (20) feet, and not water-soluble. 
L.  "Responsible person" means any person or persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining any public nuisance as defined by this code including, without limitation, any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of real property and any parent or legal guardian of a minor creating graffiti. 
M.  "Self-service merchandising" means open display of graffiti implements to which the public has access without the intervention of any employee. 
N.  "Spray Actuator" means an object, such as a spray tip, nozzle, or button, which is capable of being attached to an aerosol paint container for the purpose of spraying the substance contained therein. 
O.  "Vendor-assisted" means only an employee has access to the graffiti implement and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take possession of the product until it is purchased. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.304 - Abatement authority. 
The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to abate graffiti in the manner provided by this Part. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.305 - Possession prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while on public or private property or to mark, apply, or etch graffiti on any structure located on public or private real property within the city. Any law enforcement officer who observes a violation of this section may take immediate possession of the graffiti implements. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.306 - Possession by minors. 
It is unlawful for any minor to possess any graffiti implement while on public or private property without the consent of the property owner, or the person in lawful possession or control of the property. Any law enforcement officer who observes a violation of this section may take immediate possession of the graffiti implements. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.307 - Possession in designated public places. 
Except as may be authorized by the City Manager, or designee, no person may possess any graffiti implement while on any property owned or operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.308 - Possession with intent to deface, mark or damage property. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement for the purpose of defacing, marking, or damaging any public or private property without the express consent of the property owner or the person in lawful possession or control of the property. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.309 - Parental liability. 
Any parent or other legal guardian of a minor is personally liable for any and all graffiti removal costs associated with graffiti caused by the minor. This section does not limit the amount of recovery against the parent or other legal guardian for their own common law negligence. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.310 - Accessibility to graffiti implements. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, or otherwise furnish any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian. Evidence that a person, his or her employee, or agent, demanded and was shown bona fide evidence of majority and acted upon such evidence of majority in a transaction or sale is a defense to any criminal prosecution. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display for sale any graffiti implement by means of self-service merchandising or by means other than vendor-assisted sales. 
C.  In addition to the sign required by Penal Code § 594.1(c), persons selling, allowing to be sold, offering for sale, or displaying for sale any graffiti implement must post a sign with lettering at least three-eighths-inch high which states as follows: 
"WARNING: IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR DISTRIBUTE AEROSOL PAINT, PAINT STICKS OR BROAD-TIPPED MARKERS TO ANY MINOR OR FOR ANY MINOR TO POSSESS OR ATTEMPT TO PURCHASE SAME. IF YOU ARE OVER EIGHTEEN YEARS OLD, IT IS ILLEGAL FOR YOU TO PURCHASE AEROSOL PAINT, PAINT STICKS OR BROAD-TIPPED MARKERS FOR A MINOR IF YOU ARE NOT THAT PERSON'S PARENT OR GUARDIAN. VIOLATIONS ARE PUNISHABLE BY A FINE, IMPRISONMENT, OR BOTH." 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.311 - Authorization to remove. 
Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods: 
A.  Wherever the City Manager, or designee, determines that graffiti, as defined in this Part, is located on public or privately owned property within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, the City Manager is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti upon the following conditions: 
1.  If the graffiti is located on property owned by the city, the City Manager, or designee, may immediately remove the graffiti by any practicable means. 
2.  If graffiti is located on property owned by a public entity, graffiti removal is authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property and such entity executes a release and waiver, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and agrees to an assumption of costs incurred by the city for the removal of the graffiti. 
3.  Except as provided below, where a structure is privately owned, the removal of graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of the owner and the owner having executed a release and waiver approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
B.  Graffiti located on privately owned structures or privately owned real property in the city and which can be viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way within the city may be removed by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance. This section applies under the following circumstances: 
1.  The private property owner persuaded, allowed or encouraged the graffiti problem; 
2.  The private property owner's consent cannot be obtained; or 
3.  The City Manager determines that the removal of graffiti or other inscribed material from a privately owned property exceeded three (3) occurrences per privately owned real property during one calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.312 - Notice to abate graffiti. 
Whenever the City Manager, or designee, determines that graffiti is located on privately owned structures or privately owned real property in the city in violation of this Part, the City Manager, or designee, may abate such public nuisance in the manner set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.313 - Recovery of costs from property owner. 
The costs of graffiti abatement may be recovered as set forth in this Part. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.314 - Failure to remove graffiti upon notice. 
In addition to any graffiti removal costs incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti from private property, failure to voluntarily abate graffiti after notification will result in the penalties set out in this Part. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.315 - Recovery of costs from minor or parent or guardian. 
A.  If the City Manager, or designee, abates graffiti in accord with this Part, the city may recover the graffiti removal costs by making such costs a lien against the property of the minor creating, causing, or committing the nuisance. Further, such costs may be recovered against the property of the parent or guardian having custody or control of the minor up to and including the sum of $25,000. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, the terms "expense of abatement," "graffiti" and "minor" have the same meaning set forth in Government Code § 38772. 
C.  The cost recovery procedures against the property of a minor or a parent or guardian of the minor are the same as set forth in this Part. 
D.  The graffiti removal costs are also a personal obligation of the minor and his or her parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.316 - Community service. 
A.  After the conviction of any person for violation of this Part, the city may petition the sentencing court to impose community service time, pursuant to Penal Code §§ 640.6 or 1203.1. The sentencing court may require the performance of community service within the city in addition to any monetary penalties imposed. 
B.  Any minor violating any provision of this Part or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement who is found to be a person described in Welfare and Institutions Code § 602 by reason of the commission of vandalism, may be required to perform community service time pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code § 742.16. For any minor adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the city will petition the juvenile court and the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed by the city, require the unemancipated minor to provide the necessary labor to clean up, repair, or replace defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or otherwise make restitution to the property owner. 
C.  If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating any provision of this Part or is otherwise unable to make restitution for damages, the minor's parent or legal guardian are liable for payment of the fine or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make restitution, the sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or community service time by the parent or legal guardian upon finding good cause. If the sentencing court waives payment of the fine by the parent or legal guardian, the city will petition the sentencing court, and the court, at the court's option, may order the parent or legal guardian to provide the necessary labor, equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor adjudicated guilty of violating any provision of this Part, to clean up, repair, or replace property damaged by the unemancipated minor. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.317 - Suspension or delay of driving privileges. 
For each conviction of a person aged thirteen (13) to twenty-one (21) for violating this Part, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the city may petition the sentencing court to suspend driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance with Vehicle Code § 13202.6. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.318 - Penalty. 
A.  Any person who violates any provision of this Part for which no other penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  Any person failing to remove graffiti within the prescribed time period is guilty of an infraction and may be punished with a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first conviction, three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the second conviction, and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent violation. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.319 - Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures. 
A.  Lien. Pursuant to Government Code §§ 38773, 38773.1, and 38773.5, and any successor statutes, persons failing to abate a public nuisance as ordered pursuant to this Part, will be obligated to pay all city expenses of abating the nuisance and all administrative costs associated therewith. A nuisance abatement lien in favor of the city for such expenses of the city will be created and recorded, pursuant to this section, against the property on which the nuisance is maintained. The lien will specify the amount of the lien, the name of the city, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. 
B.  Notice of proposed recordings. Notice will be sent by certified mail at least ten (10) days before recording the lien, an itemized notice of the lien amount and proposed recording will be sent by certified mail to the property owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated by the city, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current before recordation of the lien. The notice will be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure §§ 415.10, et seq. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten (10) days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located. 
C.  Recording. The city's nuisance abatement lien will then be recorded in the Ventura County Recorder's Office, and from the date of recording, will have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien. 
D.  Special Assessment. The city's total costs described in this Part may also be collected as a special assessment against the lot or parcel on which the nuisance existed. After recordation of the nuisance abatement lien the city may provide a copy of the notice of proposed recordation, proof of service, and the recorded lien to the tax collector and the tax collector will add the described special assessment payments to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective lots or parcels and the amounts will be collected and subject to the same penalties and the same procedure under foreclosure and sale as in the case of tax delinquencies. However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been created and attached thereon, before the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the cost of abatement will not result in a lien against the real property but instead will be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. 
E.  Satisfaction. In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a notice of the discharge containing the information specified in the lien will be recorded by the city. 
F.  Fees. Any fees incurred by the city for processing, recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by the city as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.320 - Order for treble costs of abatement. 
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two (2) year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this Part, except conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 17980, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.321 - Judicial remedies. 
A.  Nothing in this Part will be deemed to prevent the City Attorney from: 
1.  Commencing a civil action in the superior court to enforce all or any of the provisions of any abatement order; 
2.  Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to or in conjunction with an administrative proceeding pursuant to this Part; 
3.  Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it relates; or 
4.  Filing a criminal action to enforce this Code. 
B.  Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting, the court will also award the city its actual costs of abatement, including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in such judicial proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
3427.322 - Reward. 
A.  The City Manager, or designee, is authorized to offer and pay a reward to any person who provides information leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person who willfully or maliciously places graffiti on any public or private property within the city. The City Council will establish the maximum amount available for rewards by minute action or resolution. 
B.  The City Manager, or designee, may determine the exact amount of the reward to be offered and paid in accordance with this section. City elected officials, appointed officials and employees are ineligible to receive such rewards. 
(Ord. No. 692, § 2, 6-15-09)  
Chapter 5 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections:  
Division 1. - General Provisions 
 
3427 - Declaration of policy. 
In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises in the City, it is declared to be the policy of the City to prohibit noise which is detrimental to the health and welfare of its residents. It shall be the policy of the City to maintain and preserve the quiet atmosphere of the City, and to implement programs and enact legislation consistent with that policy.  
3428 - Definitions. 
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings as indicated: 
(a)  "Ambient noise" means the composite of all noise from sources near and far, excluding the alleged intrusive noise source, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
(b)  "A weighted sound level" means the sound level as measured on a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network. The level so read is designated in units of db(A). 
(c)  "Commercial property" means a parcel of real property which is zoned "C-S" (Special Commercial), "C-1" (General Commercial), or is otherwise used for commercial purposes regardless of the underlying Zoning Regulations. 
(d)  "Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
(e)  "Decibel" means a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty times the logarithm to the base of ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty micropascals. 
(f)  "Designated Noise Zone" means a zone consisting of certain real property as shown on that certain noise map, on file with the City Clerk. 
(g)  "Emergency Work" means work made necessary to protect, provide or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service. 
(h)  "Fixed noise source" means a stationary device which creates sounds while in a fixed or stationary position, including but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fan compressors, generators, air conditioners and refrigeration equipment. 
(i)  "Impulsive noise" means a sound of short duration, and lasting less than one (1) second, with an abrupt onset and rapid delay. 
(j)  "Industrial property" means a parcel of real property which is zoned M-1 (Light Industrial), M-PR (Port-Related Industry), or is otherwise used for industrial purposes regardless of the underlying zoning regulations. 
(k)  "Intrusive noise" means that alleged offensive noise which intrudes over and above the ambient noise for the receiving property. 
(l)  "Mobile noise source" means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
(m)  "Noise Level Limit" means the maximum noise level acceptable under this Article for the stated time period. 
(n)  "Noise Sensitive Property" means all permitted and conditional uses allowed within Residential (R) and Park Reserve (PR) Zones as listed in Article X of this Code. 
(o)  "Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or corporation. 
(p)  "Pure tone" means any sound which can be judged as audible as a single frequency or set of single frequencies. 
(q)  "Receiving property" means the property for which the intrusive noise is alleged to be offensive. 
(r)  "Residential property" means a parcel of real property which is zoned R-1 (Single Family Residential), R-2 (Limited Multifamily Residential), R-3 (Multiple Family Residential), R-4 (Mixed Use Residential), R-5 (Transitional Residential Coastal-Related Industry) or is otherwise used for residential purposes regardless of the underlying zoning regulations. 
(s)  "Sound amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other sound regardless of location, but shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicle or horns or other warning devices on any vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(t)  "Sound level meter" means an instrument for the measurement of sound levels which satisfies the requirements pertinent for sound level meters in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meter, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof. 
(Ord. 626 § 2(27), (28), 1999)  
Division 2. - Designated Noise Zones 
 
3429 - Assignment of noise zones. 
Receiving properties are assigned to Designated Noise Zones as follows: 
(a)  Designated Noise Zone I: Noise Sensitive Properties. 
(b)  Designated Noise Zone II: Residential Properties. 
(c)  Designated Noise Zone III: Commercial Properties. 
(d)  Designated Noise Zone IV: Industrial Properties.  
3430 - Noise zones—Exterior noise levels. 
The following Exterior Noise Levels, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to all receiving properties within a Designated Noise Zone for the purpose of establishing Noise Level Limits in Section 3431 below: 
Designated Zone 	Time Intervals 	Exterior Noise Levels 
Zone I Noise Sensitive Properties 	7 a.m.—10 p.m. 
10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	50 
55 
Zone II Residential Properties 	7 a.m.—10 p.m. 
10 p.m.—7 a.m. 	55 
50 
Zone III Commercial Properties 	Anytime 	65 
Zone IV Industrial Properties 	Anytime 	75 
  
3431 - Noise level limits. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Article, no person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location within the City, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level when measured on any receiving property to exceed the following Noise Level Limits or more restrictive standards established elsewhere in this Code: 
(a)  The Exterior Noise Levels for that land use, as specified in Section 3430 above, for a total period of more than thirty minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes; or 
(b)  The Exterior Noise Levels plus 5 dB for a total period of more than fifteen minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes; or 
(c)  The Exterior Noise Levels plus 10 dB for a total period of more than five minutes in any consecutive sixty minutes; or 
(d)  The Exterior Noise Levels plus 15 Db for a total period of more than one minute in any consecutive sixty minutes; or 
(e)  The Exterior Noise Levels plus 20 dB for any period of time.  
3432 - Ambient noise level in excess of noise level limit. 
If the ambient noise level exceeds that permissible for any of the Noise Level Limits, the Noise Level Limit shall be increased in 5 dB increments as appropriate to encompass or reflect said ambient noise level.  
3433 - Boundary between different zones. 
If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different Designated Noise Zones, the lower Noise Level Limit applicable to the two zones shall apply.  
3434 - Content of intrusive noise. 
In the event the intrusive noise is judged by the Enforcing Officer to contain a steady, audible, pure tone such as a whine, screech, or hum, or is an impulsive noise, or is a repetitive noise exceeding one second in duration or contains music or speech, the Noise Level Limits set forth in Section 3431 above shall be reduced by 5 dB.  
3435 - Sound level measurement. 
(a)  Use of "A" Weighted Sound Level. Any sound levels measured pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall be "A" weighted sound levels, measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting and slow response, except for impulsive noise, for which the fast response shall be used. The microphone shall be located four to five feet above the ground and ten feet or more from the nearest reflective surface. 
(b)  Calibration Prior to Measurement. Calibration of the measurement equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed prior to making any noise measurements.  
Division 3. - Special Noise Sources 
 
3436 - Sound amplifying equipment. 
No person shall use or operate any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, except for those exceptions noted in Section 3444 which exceed the noise level limits of this Article or more restrictive standards prescribed elsewhere in this Code in such a manner as to create any noise which interferes or is likely to interfere with the peace of the neighborhood.  
3437 - Animals and fowl. 
No person shall keep or maintain or permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which by any sound, cry, or behavior, creates any noise which exceeds the noise level limits of this Article.  
3438 - Machinery, equipment, fans and air conditioning. 
No person shall operate any machinery, equipment, pump, fan, air-conditioning apparatus, or tool of any nature or similar mechanical device so as to create any noise exceeding the noise level of this Article.  
3439 - Construction of buildings and structures. 
Between the hours of seven p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the next, Monday through Saturday, and no earlier than 9 a.m. or later than 6 p.m. on Sunday and federal holidays, no person adjacent to or within any residential zone in the city shall operate power construction equipment or tools or perform any outside construction or repair work on buildings or structures, or operate any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, steam or electric hoist, or other construction device so as to create any noise which exceeds the noise level limits of this Article. The performance of emergency work is exempt from the provisions of this Section. 
(Ord. 584 § 1, 1992)  
3440 - Domestic power tools, machinery. 
Between the hours of seven p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the next, Monday through Saturday and from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Sunday and federal holidays, no person in a residential zone shall operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawnmower or garden tool, or similar tool, so as to create any noise which exceeds the noise level limits of this Article.  
3441 - Vehicles off public right-of-way. 
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle, off a public right-of-way, in such a manner that the sound levels emitted therefrom exceed the noise level limits of this Article.  
3442 - Vehicle repair and testing. 
No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to create any noise which exceeds the noise level limits of this Article.  
3443 - Standing motor vehicles. 
No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than five (5) minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, on a public right-of-way or public space within two hundred (200) feet of a residential area between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m.  
3444 - Exemptions. 
The following sources of noise emission are exempt from the provisions of this part: 
(a)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; 
(b)  Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as, for example, police and fire and ambulance sirens, including the testing of such devices; 
(c)  Activities conducted on public playgrounds, parks, school yards and any other public facility or building including but not limited to athletic and entertainment events, grounds maintenance and special ceremonies; 
(d)  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment utilized for emergency work; 
(e)  All locomotives and rail cars operated by any railroad which is regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.  
3445 - Enforcement. 
(a)  The Director of Community Development shall enforce provisions of this part. 
(b)  Any noise exceeding the noise level limits for a designated noise zone as specified in this chapter, or any noise constituting an occurrence of any prohibited act specified in this chapter, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in Section 1102. 
(d)  Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to subsection (f) of this section, violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the Director of Community Development or other responsible enforcement official according to procedures which the Director of Community Development may prescribe. 
(e)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the Director of Community Development or other responsible enforcement official may issue an order requiring abatement, within a reasonable time period, of a sound source alleged to be in violation of this Chapter. No complaint or further action shall be taken in the event that the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within the time period specified in the written notice. 
(f)  As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this Chapter, which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels exceeding the allowable limits as specified in this Chapter, shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily pursuant to the procedures in Article III, Chapter 4, Part A. Additionally, no provision of this Chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this Chapter or from other law.  
3446 - Abatement. 
Abatement shall be pursuant to Article III, Chapter 6, Part A.  
Chapter 6 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 
Sections: 
 
3501 - Intoxication. 
(a)  In Private. No person shall be in any private house or on any private premises in the City in a state of drunkenness or intoxication to the annoyance of any other person. 
(b)  In Public Areas. No person shall consume any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, while such person is upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway within the City.  
3502 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 725, § 2, adopted March 6, 2017, repealed § 3502, which pertained to profanity.  
3503 - Gambling prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deal, play, carry on, open or conduct any game or contest played with cards, dice, or any other device, for money, checks, credit or thing of value; nor shall any person bet at any of said prohibited games. This section shall not be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by any section of the Penal Code of the State, including, but not limited to, Sections 320, 320a, 330, and 337a thereof.  
3504 - Curfew restrictions for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. For purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
"Curfew hours" means the time between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
"Establishment" means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
"Guardian" means: 
(A)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(B)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
"Minor"  means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
"Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
"Parent" means a person who is: 
(A)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person; or 
(B)  At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
"Public place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. 
"Remain" means to: 
(A)  Linger or stay; or 
(B)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
"Serious bodily injury" means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. An offense as described below is a violation of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(1) of this section that the minor was: 
(A)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(B)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(C)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(D)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(E)  Involved in an emergency; 
(F)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the Police Department about the minor's presence; 
(G)  Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Port Hueneme, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Port Hueneme, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(H)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
(I)  Emancipated pursuant to law. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) of this section that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place or establishment. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c)(1)(C) of this section is present. 
(e)  Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. 686 § 2, 2008; Ord. 615 § 2, 1997)  
3506 - Injuring public property. 
No person shall injure, destroy or remove any ornament, improvement, building or structure in any public park or street of the City.  
3507 - False reports. 
No person shall make to the Police Department or Fire Department of the City any false, misleading or unfounded report for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the Police or Fire Department or with the intention of misleading any member of either of said departments.  
3508 - Discharging guns. 
No person shall shoot, fire or discharge any pistol, rifle, gun or other firearm, or any pistol, rifle or gun operated by compressed air, or a spring device, including, but not limited to, B.B. or pellet guns, not necessary in self-defense, or in performance of an official duty within the City.  
3509 - Exposure by waiters, waitresses, and entertainers. 
(a)  Prohibitions—Waiters, Waitresses, Entertainers. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while acting as a waiter, waitress or entertainer in an establishment which serves food, beverages, or food and beverages, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises of such establishment: 
(1)  Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(2)  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(3)  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(b)  Employment or Payment Not Necessary for Offense. A person shall be deemed to be a waiter, waitress or entertainer if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether such person is paid any compensation by the management of the establishment in which the activity is performed. 
(c)  Prohibitions—Public Performance. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view: 
(1)  Exposes his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(2)  Exposes any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or 
(3)  Exposes any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof. 
(d)  Counseling or Assisting. Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who causes, permits, procures, counsels or assists any person to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited in this Chapter. 
(e)  Exemption of Theatrical Establishments. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to a theatre, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances.  
3510 - Blow guns. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or sell, within the City, any blow guns. For purposes of this section, "Blow-Gun" means any rigid tubular material, whether lined or unlined, designed to propel a missile or projectile through and out of the tube with a force likely to produce bodily injury when air pressure is exerted into the tube.  
3511 - General noise prohibition. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause, or permit any loud or unusual noise to emanate from any activity taking place on real property owned or occupied by such person, which has the effect of disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood, or which directly causes an unreasonable interference with the use, enjoyment and/or possession of any real property owned or occupied by any other person. This section may be enforced under the provisions of Section 3445 of this Code at the enforcement officer's discretion.  
3512 - Noise, radios, television sets. 
No person shall play, use, or operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, receiving set, T.V. set, musical instrument, phonograph, jukebox or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound in a manner which disturbs the peace and quiet of any residentially zoned neighborhood. 
No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, receiving set, T.V. set, musical instrument, phonograph, jukebox or other machine or device for producing or reproducing sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on property located in any residential zone and when clearly the same is audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet or more from the building, structure, property or vehicle where the sound is produced. This section may be enforced under the provisions of Section 3445 of this Code at the enforcement officer's discretion.  
3513 - Discharging firearms prohibited. 
Every person, other than a police or peace officer in the performance of his duty, who discharges any gun or pistol, however powered, in the City, including without limitation thereby firearms, air rifles, BB guns, and pneumatic arms of all types, but excluding toy weapons incapable of harming either persons or property, such as water pistols and pop guns, is guilty of a misdemeanor.  
3514 - Replica of a deadly weapon. 
Every person who displays, exhibits or points a replica of a deadly weapon in a rude, angry or threatening manner or who displays, exhibits or points a replica of a deadly weapon in a fight or quarrel or who displays, exhibits or points a replica of a deadly weapon at another person to coerce or frighten said person or to compel or attempt to compel said person to adopt a particular course of conduct or who in any manner unlawfully uses a replica of a deadly weapon in the course of any violation of law is guilty of an infraction. A replica of a deadly weapon shall include, but not be limited to, a toy weapon that appears to be a deadly weapon.  
3515 - Consuming intoxicating solvents. 
No person shall inhale, breathe, drink or use in any manner any product or substance which contains on organic solvent, or inorganic solvent with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed or irrational, or of distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, balance or coordinating, or of affecting the central nervous system.  
3516 - Selling intoxicating solvents. 
No person shall sell, furnish, give or cause to be sold, furnished or given any product or substance containing an organic solvent or inorganic solvent to any person for the purpose of inducing or aiding the latter to inhale, breathe, drink or use such product or substance in violation of this Chapter.  
3517 - Organic or inorganic solvent defined. 
The term "organic solvent" or "inorganic solvent" includes, but shall not be limited to, amyl acetate, trichloroethylene, acetone or other chemically related compounds used to manufacture products commonly referred to as "glue," "adhesive cement," "mucilage," or "dope."  
3518 - Application. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise uses an organic solvent or inorganic solvent product or substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist or other person authorized by law to so direct and prescribe the use of an organic solvent or inorganic solvent product or substance.  
3519 - Fees for the use of police personnel at loud or unruly assemblages. 
When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held, and the City's police officers are required to respond to the scene in response to citizen complaints and the senior police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, then that senior police officer shall notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where the assemblage exists, and/or the person responsible for the said assemblage, that such person or persons, or in the case of a minor, the parents and/or guardians of such minor, will be held personally liable for the cost of providing additional police personnel on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided by the Police Department in response to such assemblage. Such person or persons shall be given a first warning, in the form of notification by the said senior police officer as above described, that the first police response as above described, shall be deemed to be the normal police services provided. The police personnel necessarily utilized after such first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided and the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where such assemblage occurs, and/or the person responsible for such assemblage, shall be personally responsible for the cost of such special security assignment in an amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the City. The cost of such special security assignment shall include damage to City property and/or injuries to City personnel.  
3520 - Skateboarding, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling and similar activities prohibited in certain designated areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and subject to punishment in accordance with subsection (h) of this section, for any person utilizing or riding on any skateboard, roller skates, bicycle, roller blades or any similar device to ride or move about in or on a public or private property when the same property has been designated and posted as a no skateboard, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling or similar activity area, provided, however, nothing in this chapter shall be construed or deemed to negate any right granted to bicycle riders by the California Vehicle Code. 
(b)  No person shall use a skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, bicycle or similar device in a manner which creates a nuisance as defined in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  No person shall place a ramp or foreign matter, including but not limited to wax, grease or other lubricant, friction reducing agent or other physical aid which enhances or enables skate-boarding, bicycling or roller skating performance, on any sidewalk, step, handrail, bench, wall or other improvement on public property, other than their own property, without the consent of the owner. 
(d)  For the purposes of this chapter the following words shall have the meanings ascribed: 
"Business district" shall be defined as designated in Section 235 of the California State Vehicle Code. 
"Private property" shall mean any property held by private interests which is used primarily for business, commercial, office space, business park, religious, multifamily or recreational purposes. This shall also include a parking facility for these private property areas. 
"Public property" shall mean any property owned or maintained by the city of Port Hueneme, any public agency or public school district, and any public utility within the geographic boundaries of the City of Port Hueneme. 
"Roller skates" or "roller blades" shall mean any footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached, including wheels that are "in-line" and where such wheels may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion. 
"Skateboard" shall mean a board of any material, which has wheels attached to it and which is propelled or moved by human, gravitational or mechanical power, and to which there is not fixed any device or mechanism to turn or control the wheels. 
"Nuisance" is defined as any activity which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or the obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner of any public park, square, street or highway. 
"Bicycle" is defined in the California Vehicle Code under Section 231 as a device upon which any person may ride, propelled exclusively by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having one or more wheels. 
(e)  Owners of private property may designate their property as a no skateboarding, roller blading, roller skating or bicycling area. The owner may then post his or her property in conformance with subsection (g) of this section. 
(f)  City Council or its designee may designate any public roadway, sidewalk, parking lot or other public property as a no skateboarding, roller blading, roller skating or bicycling area by the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with subsection (g) of this section. 
(g)  Prior to the enforcement of prohibition on skateboard, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling or similar activity as listed in this section the area so designated shall be posted with signs which provide substantially as follows: 
Skateboarding, roller skating, roller blading, bicycling or similar activity is prohibited by Port Hueneme Municipal Code Section 3520. Any violation is punishable by a fine of $50.00 for the first offense. Port Hueneme Police Department 986-6530. 
The sign may contain only those items which the agency or property owner wishes to prohibit. For example, if there is no desire to limit bicycling, the posting would not contain the word "bicycling." 
Such prohibition shall apply to the property or areas so designated once the property or area has been posted with signs in plain view at all entrances to the property or area. Signs so posted at the entrances to the property or area, shall comply with California Vehicle Section 22658a(1). These signs will be a minimum of seventeen (17) inches by twenty-two (22) inches with lettering not less than one inch in height. Public sidewalks or other surfaced areas may be painted with this warning in lieu of the forgoing signage requirement. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or tenant(s) to post and maintain all signs prohibiting skateboarding, roller blading, roller skating or bicycling. 
(h)  Any violation of this chapter is deemed an infraction, punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(i)  Any device designated, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants, handicapped or incapacitated persons, devices designed, intended and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes shall be exempted from this section. Police officers who are performing duties in their official capacity are exempt from this section. Furthermore, the City Council may, by resolution, suspend the enforcement provisions of this section to accommodate special events when so requested by the organizer. 
(j)  If any subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, this decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this section, and each subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, sentences, clauses, phrases or portions thereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional. 
(k)  The Mayor is authorized to execute this section on behalf of the City and the City Clerk shall attest to his signature and shall certify to the passage and adoption of this section and shall cause the same or summary thereof to be published and posted in the manner required by law. 
(Ord. 612, 1997)  
Chapter 7 - SMOKING REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
3601 - Findings and purpose. 
The Council does hereby find that: 
(a)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and 
(b)  Reliable studies have shown that breathing secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard for several population groups, including elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; and 
(c)  Health hazards induced by breathing second-hand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory function, bronchoconstriction, and bronchospasm; and 
(d)  Nonsmokers who suffer allergies, respiratory diseases and other ill-effects of breathing second-hand smoke may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of such reactions; and 
(e)  Numerous studies have shown that a majority of both nonsmokers and smokers desire to have restrictions on smoking in public places and places of employment; and 
(f)  Smoking is a potential cause of fires, and cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures cause losses to the businesses. 
(g)  Accordingly, the Council finds and declares that the purposes of this ordinance are (1) to protect the public health and welfare prohibiting smoking in public places except in designated smoking areas, and by regulating smoking in places of employment; and (2) to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of persons who smoke and the need of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that, where these needs conflict, the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority.  
3602 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in the Section: 
(a)  "Bar" means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
(b)  "Bingo Game Establishments" means the facilities used by organizations operating bingo games pursuant to Sec. 326.5 of the California Penal Code. 
(c)  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
(d)  "Dining Area" means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
(e)  "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
(f)  "Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, including a public agency or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of five (5) or more individual persons, exclusive of owners, partners, corporate officers, or persons averaging fewer than twenty (20) work hours per week. 
(g)  "Enclosed Area" means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or not solid, "office landscaping" or similar structures. 
(h)  "Motion Picture Theatre" means any theatre engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures. 
(i)  "Non-Profit Entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created from charitable, philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a "non-profit entity" within the meaning of this section. 
(j)  "Place of Employment" means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. 
(1)  A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care or health facility. 
(2)  The dining area of a restaurant is not a "place of employment." 
(k)  "Public Place" means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theatres and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place." 
(l)  "Restaurant" means any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail lounge, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private and public school cafeteria or eating establishment, and any other eating establishment, organization, club, including veterans' club, boardinghouse, or guesthouse, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, patrons or employees as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a "bar" as defined in Section 3402(a). 
(m)  "Retail Tobacco Store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
(n)  "Service Line" means any indoor line at which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
(o)  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(p)  "Sports Arena" means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events.  
3603 - Application of article to city-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities owned, leased or controlled by the City of Port Hueneme shall be subject to the provisions of this article.  
3604 - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City, including, but not limited to, the following places, and with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Elevators. 
(2)  Buses, taxicabs, and other means of public transit under the authority of the City of Port Hueneme, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent (a) the establishment of separate waiting areas for smokers and nonsmokers of equal size, or (b) the establishment of a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of a given waiting room as a smoking area. 
(3)  Restrooms. 
(4)  Service lines. 
(5)  Retail stores, except areas in said stores not open to the public and all areas within retail tobacco stores. 
(6)  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices and other offices, banks, hotels and motels. 
(7)  Restaurants; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent (a) the designation of a contiguous area within a restaurant that contains a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of the seating capacity of the restaurant as a smoking area, or (b) the providing of separate rooms for smokers and nonsmokers so long as the rooms designated for smoking do not contain more than fifty percent (50%) of the seating capacity of the restaurant. 
(8)  Public areas of aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums when open to the public; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent the designation of a separate room for smoking in such areas. 
(9)  Any building not open to the sky which is primarily used for, or designed for the primary purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of a stage production; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent the designation of a continuous area containing a maximum of fifty percent (50%) of any area commonly called a lobby as a smoking area. 
(10)  Sports arenas and convention halls, except in designated smoking areas. 
(11)  Bingo establishments, except in designated smoking areas. 
(12)  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies or the City or any political subdivision of the State during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City. 
(13)  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semi-private rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices, dentists' offices. In bed space areas of health facilities used for two or more patients, smoking shall be prohibited unless all patients within the room are smokers and request in writing upon the health care facility' admission forms to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted. 
(14)  Polling Places. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility described in this section may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment.  
3605 - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke-free areas for nonsmoking employees within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas. 
(b)  Within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date of this article, each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the City shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain at a minimum the following requirements: 
(1)  Implement and carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Prohibition of smoking in auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, elevators, hallways, medical facilities and restrooms. 
(3)  Provision and maintenance of separate and contiguous nonsmoking areas of not less than fifty percent. 
(4)  Allow any smoking employee to smoke at his/her work station if, in the employer's sole judgment, other employees will not be adversely affected thereby. 
(c)  The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three (3) weeks of its adoption. 
(d)  All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employee. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment, or any portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area.  
3606 - Where smoking not regulated. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this article: 
(1)  Bars. 
(2)  Private residences, except when used as a child care or health care facility. 
(3)  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guest. 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores. 
(5)  Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions, except when the persons or entities in charge of such private functions declare the meeting room or designated part thereof to be a nonsmoking area for the duration of the meeting. 
(6)  A private enclosed office workplace occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such an office workplace may be visited by nonsmokers. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire area or parts thereof as a nonsmoking area.  
3607 - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "Smoking" or "No Smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this article, by the owner, operator-manager or other person having control of such building or other places. Such signs shall have letters of not less than one inch (1") in height or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). 
(b)  Every theatre owner, manager or operator shall conspicuously post signs in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited within the theatre or auditorium, and in the case of motion picture theatres, such information shall be shown upon the screen for at least five (5) seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture. 
(c)  Every restaurant shall have posted at every public entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that a nonsmoking section is available, and every patron shall be asked as to his or her preference.  
3608 - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be implemented by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  The Fire Department shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a "self certification" from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this article have been complied with. 
(c)  Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof.  
3609 - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this article to fail to comply with any of its provisions. The owner, manager or operator of a restaurant shall not be deemed in violation of Section 3404(a) if the host or hostess of the restaurant fails to ask the seating preference of patrons, but shall be deemed in violation thereof if the restaurant has no stated policy requiring that patrons be asked their preference. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be dealt with as follows: 
(1)  Upon the first violation shall receive an official notice of warning from the City Manager or his designee; 
(2)  Upon the second violation within one (1) year shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50); 
(3)  Upon the third and additional violations within one (1) year shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) per conviction.  
3610 - Exemptions 
(a)  Any owner, operator or manager of a business or other establishment subject to this article may apply to the city for an exemption or modification to any provisions of this article due to unusual circumstances or conditions. Exemptions may be granted on a showing of financial impracticability or physical infeasibility. 
(b)  Such exemption shall be granted only if the City Manager finds from the evidence presented by the applicant for exemption at a public hearing that it is financially impracticable for the applicant to comply with this article. 
(c)  The applicant for an exemption shall be required to pay a reasonable fee to cover the costs of the hearing.  
3611 - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.  
Chapter 8 - MISCELLANEOUS 
Sections:  
Part A. - Wells 
 
3901 - Capping of wells. 
Every person who owns or controls any water well or oil well which has been abandoned, and every person owning or having possession of any premises on which any such abandoned well exists, shall cap or otherwise close the mouth of or entrance to such well in such a manner as to prevent persons from falling therein, and in such a manner that such capping or covering cannot be removed by accident or inadvertence. Capping of water wells shall be performed in accordance with standards and regulations set forth in the Public Health Code of the County of Ventura.  
Part B. - Police Access to Gated Communities 
 
3905 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Chapter. 
"Area" means gated communities. 
"Secured openings" means locked gates. 
"Chief" means the Chief of Police serving the jurisdiction or the Chief of Police's authorized representative. 
(Ord. 630 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3906 - Key boxes—Access to secured areas. 
When access to an area is unduly difficult because of secured openings and where immediate access is necessary for lifesaving purposes, or to investigate public offenses which have been committed, or to prevent and suppress any affrays, breaches of the peace, riots or insurrections, the Chief of Police is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an accessible location. 
(Ord. 630 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3907 - Key boxes—Type of box and key. 
The Chief of Police shall designate the type of box and key that meets the Police Department's access needs. 
(Ord. 630 § 1 (part), 1999)  
3908 - Key boxes—Maintenance responsibility. 
The residents of the area that requires a key box for Police Department access shall be responsible for installing the key box and maintaining the key box. 
(Ord. 630 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Part C. - Limitation on Continuous and Cumulative Occupancy of Transient Hotels and Motels 
 
3910 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure the continued use of transient hotels and motels in the manner intended by the City of Port Hueneme and to provide for enforcement of those provisions. 
(Ord. 663 § 1 (part), 2006)  
3911 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words, phrases, and the derivations and variants thereof, shall have the meanings given herein and shall govern the construction of this Chapter: 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit or party. 
"Transient hotel" means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public with access to guest rooms provided by interior corridors. All of the accommodations in a hotel shall be for the use of transients. For the purpose of this Chapter, transients shall be defined as any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, renting accommodations or by other agreement of whatever nature, for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, or if for a period of over thirty (30) inconsecutive calendar days, for a total of no more than sixty (60) calendar days within a one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar day period. Up to a maximum of five (5) percent of the total number of units can be occupied by guests that exceed these occupancy limits at any given time. If the number of allowable rooms under this maximum limit results in a fraction of a room, the next highest whole number of rooms shall be allowed. The limitations on occupancy shall not apply during a City proclaimed existence of a public emergency or natural disaster requiring the provision of emergency public shelter. Hospitals, sanitariums or orphanages, asylums, detention homes, jails, prisons, transitional shelters/housing, bed and breakfast, group housing or similar buildings where human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint or part of a treatment or other regulated program are specifically not included. 
"Transient motel" means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public with access to guest rooms provided by exterior walkways. All of the accommodations in a motel shall be for the use of transients. For the purpose of this Chapter, transients shall be defined as any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, renting accommodations of by other agreement of whatever nature, for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, or if for a period of over thirty (30) inconsecutive calendar days, for a total of no more than sixty (60) calendar days within a one hundred eighty (180) consecutive calendar day period. Up to a maximum of five (5) percent of the total number of rooms can be occupied by guests that exceed these occupancy limits at any given time. If the number of allowable rooms under this maximum limit results in a fraction of a room, the next highest whole number of rooms shall be allowed. The limitations on occupancy shall not apply during the existence of a City proclaimed public emergency or natural disaster requiring the provision of emergency public shelter. Hospitals, sanitariums or orphanages, asylums, detention homes, jails, prisons, transitional shelters/housing, group housing or similar buildings where human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint or part of a treatment or other regulated program are specifically not included. 
"To rent" means to rent or let, or otherwise provide lodging accommodations to a person at a transient hotel or motel whether or not for compensation. 
"Hotel/motel, long-term stay" means hotel or motel designed and operated to accommodate travelers whose guest stays may exceed thirty (30) consecutive calendar days, or sixty (60) inconsecutive days within a one hundred eighty (180) day consecutive period. Any hotel/motel that allows guests to stay more than thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or sixty (60) inconsecutive days within a one hundred eighty (180) day consecutive day period is considered a long-term stay hotel/motel. No long-term stay hotel/motel may operate or be established in the City of Port Hueneme after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme. 
"Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the transient hotel or transient motel whether in the capacity of the owner, or as the owner by any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, joint stock company, corporation, estate trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group who owns or has control of the operations of a transient hotel or transient motel. 
(Ord. 663 § 1 (part), 2006)  
3912 - Limitation on duration of occupancy. 
This section limits the continuous and cumulative occupancy of transient hotels and motels. It is unlawful for any transient hotel or transient motel to rent any room or rooms, in excess of five (5) percent of the total number of its rooms, to any person for any period of time greater than that duration specified in the definitions in Section 3911 of this Code. It is the intent of this section that if a specific room or rooms is rented to or occupied by any person for either of the maximum time periods allowed by Section 3911, then that room shall not again be rented to or occupied by that same person until such time as so doing does not constitute a violation of this section. 
(a)  Each transient hotel or motel shall maintain daily written records reflecting the renting of any of its rooms including, but not limited to, check-in and check-out dates of each person who rents a room and the occupants thereof. These records shall include the name and home or business address and telephone number of the person renting the room. These records shall also indicate which rooms have been rented for long-term stays as permitted under the five (5) percent allowance provisions of this section. The required records shall be maintained for not less than twelve (12) consecutive months, or for such longer period of time as may be prescribed by law, and shall be available for review by any City representative during normal business hours. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by law, each transient hotel and motel shall post a legible copy of the text of Port Hueneme Municipal Code Article III, Chapter 8, Part C, in an open and conspicuous place within the public lobby area, and in an open and conspicuous place where other postings are required by law, in each room available for rent. 
(c)  Any property left in a room by a person or party who has checked out shall be removed by the operator of the transient hotel or motel and stored or otherwise disposed in accordance with applicable laws. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by law, any local, State, federal, or foreign government officer, employee, or contractor when on official business is exempt from this section's limits on continuous and cumulative occupancy of transient hotels and motels. 
(Ord. 663 § 1 (part), 2006)  
3913 - Penalties. 
It is unlawful for any person or operator to violate Section 3912 of this Chapter. Any person or operator who violates Section 3912 may be charged with a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 663 § 1 (part), 2006)  
3914 - Civil remedies. 
Notwithstanding Section 3913 of this Chapter, any violation of Section 3912 shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the City through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. 663 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Part D. - Lost or Stolen Firearms 
 
3914.10 - Reporting lost or stolen firearms. 
Any person residing or doing business in Port Hueneme who owns, or possesses a firearm, as defined in the Penal Code, shall report the theft or loss of the firearm, if it is lost or stolen on or after September 8, 2007 to the Port Hueneme Police Department within forty-eight (48) hours after his or her discovery or knowledge of the theft or loss. Any person residing or doing business in Port Hueneme who has experienced the loss or theft of a firearm, as defined in the Penal Code, in Port Hueneme within the five (5) years prior to September 8, 2007 without the firearm having been recovered during such time, shall report the theft or loss to the Port Hueneme Police Department within ninety (90) days of September 8, 2007. 
(Ord. 678 § 1 (part), 2007)  
3914.20 - Penalty—Misdemeanor. 
Any person who fails to report a lost or stolen firearm pursuant to Section 3914.10, when the person knew or should have known of the theft or loss, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in Section 1100 of this Code. 
(Ord. 678 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 9 - ESCORTS AND ESCORT SERVICES 
Sections: 
 
3915 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the words, terms and phrases in this Chapter shall have the meaning set forth below, unless the context clearly requires a different meaning: 
"Chief of Police" means the Chief of Police of the City of Port Hueneme, or his or her designee. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of Port Hueneme, or his or her designee. 
"Completed application" means all of the requested information required by this Chapter has been submitted, including the completed investigation and verification of the "State Summary Criminal History" report. 
"Disqualifying conduct" means the conduct of a person who: 
(1)  Within five (5) years immediately preceding the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five (5) years of the date of notice of hearing, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of: 
(A)  Any misdemeanor or felony offense which relates directly to the operation of an escort service, whether as an escort service owner or operator, or as an escort; or 
(B)  Any felony, the commission of which occurred on the premises of an escort service; or 
(2)  Within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five (5) years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension hearings, whichever is applicable, has had any escort service or escort license or permit, which was issued by the State or any County or City revoked; or 
(3)  Within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five (5) years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension hearings, whichever is applicable, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of: 
(A)  Any violation of Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 290, 311.2 through 311.7, 314 through 318, subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), or (h), of Section 647 and 647b; or 
(B)  Conspiracy of attempt to commit any such offense; or 
(C)  Any offense in a jurisdiction outside the State of California which includes all of the elements of the offenses enumerated in this subsection (3)(A); or 
(D)  Any offense which requires registration as a sex offender pursuant to Penal Code Section 290; or 
(E)  Any violation which involves the use of force and violence on the person of another; or 
Within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application in question, or, in the case of revocation or suspension proceedings, within five (5) years of the date of notice of revocation or suspension hearings, whichever is applicable, has been subject to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the State of California. 
"Escort" means any person who, for hire, reward, or other pecuniary compensation, accompanies or consorts with another person to, from or about social affairs, entertainments, places of amusement, places of public assembly, or within any public or private resort, or within any private quarters, or any business or commercial establishment; 
"Escort license" means the license required to work as an escort. 
"Escort service" means any business, agency or self-employed or independent escort who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, introduction services or dating services. For purposes of this Chapter, the definition of "escort service" does not include any business, agency or person who provides escort services for senior citizens when such services are provided as part of a bona fide social, welfare and health program for such senior citizens. The definition of "escort services" also does not include any kind of guaranteed return trip program authorized pursuant to state law. In addition, this Chapter shall not apply to any person who accompanies another within the confines of a personal relationship, or accompanies others as an incident to their trade or profession, such as attorneys, nurses, bodyguards, or tour guides, nor to any person, business, firm, or company lawfully conducting any employment agency. 
"Escort service license" means the license to operate an escort service within the City. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, LLP, corporation, LLC, joint venture, or combination of individuals. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3916 - Escort service license required. 
(a)  No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on the business of an escort service without having an escort license issued under the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferred in any manner, whether by operation of law or otherwise, from location to location, or from person to person. Every escort service licensee shall report immediately in writing to the Chief of Police any change or transfer of employment as an escort licensee. 
(c)  Every person advertising by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine, or other publication, or by any other means whatsoever, who for money, or reward, or any consideration offers to do personally or to furnish the "escort service" of others to do the following things shall pay the license fee required and shall also procure an escort service license in the manner described in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3917 - Escort service license application. 
Every person desiring to provide escort services as provided in Section 3915 shall make application for a license to the City of Port Hueneme. The application shall provide the following: 
(a)  Licenses shall be issued only to individual persons and no license shall be issued to or in the name of any organization, group, corporation, partnership or entity other than an individual person; provided however the escort service may be advertised and carried on by the licensee under a fictitious name as permitted by law provided that the proposed name is designated in the application for the license; 
(b)  Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(c)  Name and address of the applicant and the name under which the proposed business is to be conducted; 
(d)  Address of the proposed location for the conduct of the proposed business; 
(e)  Record of conviction for violations of the law involving "disqualifying conduct"; 
(f)  The applicant shall also be photographed and fingerprinted by the police department. One (1) photograph shall be attached to the original application, one (1) to the duplicate and one (1) to the license; 
(g)  Address, City, State and dates when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others; 
(h)  In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the escort service is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease; 
(i)  The true names and residential addresses of all persons employed or intended to be employed by the applicant; 
(j)  The licensee of an escort service shall notify the police department in writing within twenty-four (24) hours of any change in personnel employed by such escort business; 
(k)  The availability of the escort service license application as a public record shall be governed by Government Code Section 6250, et seq. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3918 - Escort service license—Application fee. 
Any application for a license to operate an escort service shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee. The application fee shall be determined by Resolution of the City Council and shall be used to defray the cost of the investigation and report. A license to operate an escort service shall be renewed annually. The licensee shall pay a renewal fee for such renewal and this fee shall be determined by Resolution of the City Council. The application fees shall be subject to quarterly proration. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3919 - Maintenance of transaction records. 
An escort service shall maintain in duplicate a record of every transaction whereby any escort is employed, engaged or arranged for on behalf of any patron, customer, or person; and a duplicate shall be provided to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours if requested by the City Manager to ensure the public health, safety and welfare. The availability of this record shall be governed by the Public Records Act, Government Code Section 6250, et seq. and shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Date and hour of the transaction; 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of the patron, customer or person requesting or employing the escort; and 
(c)  The name of the escort furnished. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3920 - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and the application fee, the Chief of Police shall refer same to interested departments of the City including, but not limited to, the Chief of Police, City Manager, City Attorney, Planning Department, Building and Safety Department, and the Finance Department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies to the extent it qualifies as property from which escort services may lawfully be conducted. Each department to which a completed application is referred shall complete its investigation and file the report with the Chief of Police within sixty (60) days of the date of the completed application. Any department to which an application is referred that does not file its report with the Chief of Police as provided herein shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the application. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3921 - License issuance. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall approve the issuance of the license if he or she finds: 
(1)  All the information contained in the applicant's reported data is true; 
(2)  Neither the applicant nor any natural person employed by or contracted with to be an escort, or to provide escort services, has been convicted or pled nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime involving "disqualifying conduct"; 
(3)  The applicant has not had an escort service, introductory service or escort license or other similar license denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the City or any other city or county located in or out of the State of California. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall thereafter issue the license when the required fee has been paid. 
(c)  The City's decision to grant or deny the license shall not be based upon information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 through 900. 
(d)  Any appeal from a denial of an escort service license shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 3942 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3922 - Inspection by officials. 
Any and all investigating officers of the City, or their designees, shall have the right to enter the escort service from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3923 - Display of licenses. 
The owner or operator of an escort service shall display the escort service license, and the escort licenses, in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises. Passport-size photographs of the licensee shall be affixed to the license on display pursuant to this section, and passport-size photographs of the escort licensees shall be displayed in the same location as the escort service license. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3924 - Issuance of notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, makes an inspection of an escort service and finds that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, the Chief of Police shall give notice of such violation by means of an inspection report or other written notice. In any such notification, the Chief of Police shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific violation or violations found; 
(2)  Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations. If the Chief of Police determines that the violation or violations are minor in nature, the Chief of Police may issue a warning to the licensee that any further violation of this Chapter may result in the filing of a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license; and 
(3)  The failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may result in the Chief of Police filing a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license. 
(b)  Issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to this section is not the City's exclusive enforcement remedy if the provisions of this Chapter have been violated by an escort service licensee or escort licensee. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3925 - Age of escorts and patrons. 
(a)  No holder of an escort service license shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age as an escort. Though an escort may be eighteen (18) years of age, nothing in this Chapter is to be construed to contravene any state law requiring an individual to be at least twenty-one (21) years of age to enter certain establishments. 
(b)  No holder of an escort service license shall furnish any escort to or accept employment from any patron, customer or person to be escorted who is under the age of eighteen (18) years of age, except at the special instance and request of the parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person upon whose behalf the escort service is engaged. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3926 - Term of escort service license. 
The term of an escort service license, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3927 - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Any person lawfully possessing an escort service license under this Chapter shall have thirty (30) days from the date of expiration to renew his/her license. 
(b)  License renewal shall be contingent upon satisfactory compliance with all sections of this Chapter including submission to a "State Summary Criminal History" investigation and verification, subsequent to a fingerprint examination. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3928 - Escort identification card. 
The licensee and any escorts employed by the licensee shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of this Chapter and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times while engaged in the activity regulated by this Chapter. The license holder shall carry such card with him/her when acting as an escort and produce the same for inspection upon request. Each license holder shall immediately surrender to the Chief of Police any escort license issued by the City upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such license, or upon leaving employment as an escort. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3929 - Nuisance. 
Any escort service operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the City Attorney or State Prosecutor may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an escort service contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3930 - Escort license required. 
No person shall for hire, reward, or other pecuniary compensation, accompany or consort with another, to or about social affairs, entertainments, places of amusement, places of pubic assembly, or within any public or private resort, or within any private quarters, or any business or commercial establishment, without first obtaining an escort license. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3931 - Escort license application. 
Every person desiring to be an escort as provided in Section 3915 shall make application for a license to the City of Port Hueneme. The application shall provide the following: 
(a)  Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(b)  Address of the proposed escort service location out of which the escort shall be employed; 
(c)  Record of conviction for violations of the law of "disqualifying conduct"; 
(d)  The applicant shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the Police Department, and subject to investigation and verification of a "State Summary Criminal History." One (1) photograph shall be attached to the original application, one (1) to the duplicate and one (1) to the license; 
(e)  Address, City, State and dates when this applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others; 
(f)  The availability of the escort license application as a public record shall be governed by Government Code Section 6250, et seq. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3932 - Escort license—Application fee. 
Any application for a license to perform as an escort shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee. The application fee shall be determined by Resolution of the City Council and shall be used to defray the cost of the investigation and report. A license to perform as an escort shall be renewed annually. The licensee shall pay a renewal fee for such renewal and this fee shall be determined by Resolution of the City Council. The application fees shall be subject to quarterly proration. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3933 - License—Non-transferable. 
No license issued under this Chapter shall be transferred in any manner, whether by operation of law or otherwise, from person to person. Every escort shall report immediately in writing to the Chief of Police any change or transfer of employment to another escort service. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3934 - Investigation. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and the application fee, the Chief of Police shall refer the same to interested departments of the City including, but not limited to, the City Manager, and City Attorney. Each department to which a completed application is referred shall complete its investigation and file the report with the Chief of Police within sixty (60) days of the date of the completed application. Any department to which an application is referred that does not file its report with the Chief of Police as provided herein shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the application. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3935 - License issuance. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall approve the issuance of the license if he or she finds: 
(1)  All the information contained in the applicant's reported data is true; 
(2)  The applicant has not been convicted or pled nolo contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime involving "disqualifying conduct." If the applicant has suffered any of the aforementioned, the application shall be denied; 
(3)  The applicant has not had an escort service, introductory service or escort license or other similar license denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the City or any other city or county located in or out of the State of California. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall thereafter issue the license when the required fee has been paid. 
(c)  The City's decision to grant or deny the license shall not be based upon information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 through 900. 
(d)  Any appeal from a denial of an escort license shall be made in accordance with the provisions of Section 3942 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3936 - Issuance of notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, discovers that any provision of this Chapter has been violated, the Chief of Police shall give notice of such violation by means of a citation or other written notice. In any such notification, the Chief of Police shall: 
(1)  Set forth the specific violation of violations found; 
(2)  Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation or violations, if feasible. If the Chief of Police determines that the violation or violations are minor in nature; the Chief of Police may issue a warning to the licensee, that any further violation of this Chapter may result in the filing of a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license; and 
(3)  The failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter may result in the Chief of Police filing a complaint for revocation or suspension of the license. 
(b)  Issuance of a notice of violation pursuant to this section is not the City's exclusive enforcement remedy if the provisions of this Chapter have been violated by an escort licensee. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3937 - Term of escort license. 
The term of an escort license, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3938 - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Any person licensed as an escort under this Chapter shall have thirty (30) days from the date of expiration of his/her license to renew the same. 
(b)  License renewal shall be contingent upon satisfactory compliance with all sections of this Chapter including submission to a "State Summary Criminal History" investigation and verification. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3939 - Escort identification card. 
The escort licensee shall obtain an identification card issued under the provisions of this Chapter and shall have such identification card in their possession at all times while engaged in the activity regulated by this Article. The license holder shall carry such card with him/her when acting as an escort and produce the same for inspection upon request. Each license holder shall immediately surrender to the Chief of Police any escort license and/or identification card issued by the City upon the suspension, revocation or expiration of such license, or upon leaving employment as an escort. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3940 - Escort service license—Suspension or revocation. 
After an investigation, notice and hearing, any license issued for an escort service may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police where any of the following is found: 
(a)  The licensee has violated any provisions of this Chapter; or 
(b)  The licensee is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or 
(c)  The licensee has failed to comply with one or more of the facilities and operations requirements of this Chapter; or 
(d)  The licensee has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation or false statements in conducting the escort service; or 
(e)  The licensee has continued to operate the escort service after the license has been suspended; or 
(f)  The licensee has allowed a person to work as an escort who: 
(1)  Does not have a valid escort license, or 
(2)  Within the past five (5) years, has been convicted of a disqualifying offense where the licensee has actual or constructive knowledge of such conviction. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3941 - Escort license—Suspension or revocation. 
After an investigation, notice and hearing, any escort license may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police where it is found that: 
(a)  The licensee has violated any provision of this Chapter; or 
(b)  The licensee is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or 
(c)  The licensee has continued to function as an escort after the license has been suspended; or 
(d)  The licensee has failed to comply with the requirements of either Section 3917 or Section 3931, whichever is applicable; or 
(e)  The licensee has made a material misstatement in the application for a license. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3942 - Hearing on revocation, suspension or denial of escort service license or escort license. 
(a)  Upon determining that grounds for denial exist, as set forth in Chapter 9, the Chief of Police shall provide written notice to the applicant that their application has been denied. 
(1)  Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the denial and shall state that the applicant may request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the postmarked date on the notice. The notice shall be mailed via regular first-class mail. 
(2)  Upon receipt of written request for a hearing, the City Clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, that the City Manager shall act as the hearing officer and conduct a hearing. The applicant may object to the City Manager as the hearing officer by notifying the City Clerk of said objection, in writing, within ten (10) days of the written request for a hearing. In the event an applicant objects, the City Council would choose a neutral third party and the applicant would choose a neutral third party, and these two (2) third parties would choose a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing, within forty-five (45) calendar days of the filing of such request by the applicant. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the applicant by personal service or via regular first-class mail and certified mail, postage prepaid, at least fifteen (15) calendar days in advance of the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant and the City shall be entitled to present relevant evidence, testify under oath and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The hearing officer shall not be bound by the statutory rules of evidence in the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the determination of the hearing officer. 
(3)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall decide whether grounds for denial exist. If the hearing officer decides that no grounds for denial exist, the license shall be issued. If the hearing officer decides that grounds for denial exist, the applicant's license is denied. 
(b)  Upon determining the grounds for revocation or suspension exist, as set forth in Sections 3940 and/or 3941, the Chief of Police shall furnish written notice of the proposed revocation or suspension to the licensee. For purposes of this section only, "licensee" shall include a person holding an escort service license or escort license. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension; shall state that the licensee may request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the postmarked date on the notice; and shall be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the escort service and by sending the notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee as that name and address appear on the license. Within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the mailing or posting of the notice, the licensee may file a request for hearing with the Chief of Police. If the request for a hearing is filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of the mailing or posting of the notice referred to herein, the Chief of Police shall transmit the request to the City Manager, and the hearing shall be provided. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a written request for a hearing, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing within forty-five (45) calendar days of the filing of such request by the licensee. The licensee may object to the City Manager as the hearing officer. In the event a licensee objects, the City Council would choose an arbitrator and the licensee would choose an arbitrator, and these two (2) arbitrators would choose a hearing officer. Notice of time and place of the hearing shall be given to the licensee by personal service or via certified mail, postage prepaid, at least fifteen (15) calendar days in advance of the date set for the public hearing. At the hearing, the licensee and the City shall be entitled to present relevant evidence, testify under oath and call witnesses who shall testify under oath. The hearing officer shall not be bound to the statutory rules of evidence in the hearing, except that hearsay evidence may not be the sole basis for the determination of the hearing officer. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall decide whether the grounds for revocation or suspension exist and shall submit a written report to the Chief of Police. Such written report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and shall state findings, conclusions and directives to the Chief of Police regarding whether the license is to be revoked or suspended. All such reports shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the licensee within one (1) day after it is filed with the City Clerk. 
(e)  If the hearing officer determines that any grounds for revocation or suspension exist, as provided in Sections 3940 and/or 3941 of this Chapter, the Chief of Police, based upon the report of the hearing officer or, if no hearing was requested by the licensee, based upon the report of the City staff and/or the Chief of Police, shall immediately revoke or suspend the appropriate license(s). The decision of the hearing officer shall be appealable to the City Council by the filing of a written appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of mailing of such decision. A timely filed appeal shall vacate the decision of the hearing officer. Any such appeal shall be a de novo public hearing to determine if there was a substantial evidence to support the hearing officer's findings. The decision of the City Council upon appeal, or the decision of the hearing officer in the absence of a timely appeal, shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3943 - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1100, et seq. of this Code for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 633 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 10 - ALARM REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
3950 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the disciplined and proper use of alarm systems by the alarm users and to encourage alarm users and alarm businesses to maintain their alarm system's operational reliability in order to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests. This Chapter governs systems intended to summon police response, establishes a Municipal Alarm Administrator, requires permits, establishes fees, and sets conditions for suspension or loss of permit. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3951 - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
"Alarm" means a sound, signal, or message generated by an alarm system and to which police are expected to respond. 
"Alarm administrator" means the city employee designated by the Police Chief, City Manager or City Council to administer and determine alarm system permit applications, permits, and alarm dispatch requests. 
"Alarm agent" means a person employed by an alarm business, whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, or servicing alarm systems. 
"Alarm business" means a business that sells, leases, installs, moves, maintains, alters, services, or monitors alarm systems, not including a business that only sells alarm systems from a fixed location or that only manufactures alarm systems sold to retailers and not to the public. 
"Alarm dispatch" means a visit by a Police Officer to an alarm site in response to an alarm dispatch request. 
"Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the Police that an alarm has been activated at an alarm site. 
"Alarm site" means the structure or portion thereof served by an alarm system. In a multi-tenant structure, each alarm system shall be considered to serve a separate alarm site. 
"Alarm system" means any mechanical or electrical device, not including a smoke detector, designed or used for the detection of unauthorized entry into a structure, the commission of an unlawful act within a structure, or the existence of a fire or medical emergency within a structure, that when activated emits a sound or transmits a signal or message to which police are expected to respond, whether or not monitored by an alarm business. An alarm system does not include: 
(1)  An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at a site. 
(2)  An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does not have a sounding device that can be heard on the exterior of the alarm site. 
"Alarm user" means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity, including a permittee owning, leasing or controlling an alarm site. 
"Audible alarm" means an alarm system device that when activated emits an audible sound at or about the alarm site. 
"Automatic dialing device" means a device that automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of some type of emergency to which police are expected to respond. 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme. 
"Conversion" means the transaction or process by which one (1) alarm business begins monitoring an alarm system previously monitored by another alarm business or the site owner or inhabitants. 
"False alarm dispatch" means an alarm dispatch in which the responding Police Officer, having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site, finds no evidence of a situation requiring a response by a Police Officer or, except for an alarm based on fire or medical emergency, finds that the alarm site contains one or more unsecured exterior doors or windows, including an alarm dispatch caused by a power outage, but not including an alarm dispatch caused by an act of God or an extraordinary condition not reasonably with the control of the alarm business or alarm user. 
"Hearing Officer" means a person appointed by the City Manager or City Council to hear and decide matters arising under this Article. 
"Holdup alarm" means a silent or audible signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
"Keypad" means a device that allows control of an alarm system by the manual entering of a coded sequence of numbers or letters. 
"Monitoring" means the process by which an alarm business receives signals from alarm systems and relays an alarm dispatch request to the police. 
"One Plus Code" means an alarm system code that adds one (1) to the last digit to the normal arm/disarm code. 
"Permit" means an alarm permit issued by the City. 
"Permittee" means a person holding a valid alarm system permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
"Person" means any natural person, and any legal entity, except the City. 
"Police Chief" means the duly appointed and acting Police Chief of the City or his or her authorized representative. 
"Silent alarm" means an alarm system device that is connected to a telephone line and that when activated automatically transmits a message or signal to an alarm business, indicating the need for an emergency response to the alarm site. 
"Unsecured" means not equipped with a lock, bar or other device that is attached to or in contact with the door or window, that is in the fixed or locked position, and that prevents the door or window from being opened from the exterior of the alarm site without breaking the door or window. 
"Verify" means an attempt by an alarm business to contact the alarm site by telephone or other electronic means, whether or not contact is made with a person at the alarm site, before making an alarm dispatch request. 
"211 Alarm" or "Takeover Alarm" means a silent alarm dispatch request generated by the manual activation of an alarm system device intended to signal that a robbery is in progress or that the alarm site is being taken over by intruders. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3952 - Permit required—Application—Fee—Transferability—False statements. 
(a)  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit issued by the City or its representative. 
(b)  The initial annual permit must be submitted to the City within fifteen (15) days after the alarm installation or alarm site conversion occurs. Renewals must be made on an annual basis (on a July 1 fiscal year). Initial permits as well as renewals are without cost to the applicant. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application form, the City shall issue a permit to an applicant unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Failed to pay fine assessed under Section 3922; 
(2)  Had a permit for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(d)  Each permit application must include the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone numbers of the person who will be the permit holder and will be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and for payment of any fines assessed under this Chapter; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial or apartment; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the purpose of the alarm system, i.e., burglary, robbery, duress or other; 
(4)  Signed certification from the alarm user and the alarm business stating: 
(A)  The date of installation, conversion, or takeover of the alarm system, whichever is applicable, 
(B)  The name, address, and phone number of the alarm business performing the alarm system installation, conversion or alarm system takeover and who is responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system, 
(C)  The name, address and phone number of the alarm business monitoring the alarm system if different from the installing alarm business, 
(D)  That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms, has been left with the applicant, 
(E)  That the alarm business has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material matter made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining a permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit. 
(f)  A permit cannot be transferred to another person. An alarm user shall inform the City of any change that alters any information listed on the permit application within five (5) business days. 
(g)  All fines owned by the applicant must be paid before a permit may be issued or renewed. 
(h)  Subject to applicable law, information contained in permit applications shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the City with access to such information. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3953 - Alarm systems in apartment complexes contracted for by individual tenant. 
(a)  If an alarm system installed by an individual tenant in an apartment complex unit is monitored, the tenant must provide the name of a representative of the apartment owner or property manager who can grant access to the apartment to the alarm business that is providing monitoring service. 
(b)  A tenant of an apartment complex shall also obtain a permit from the City in accordance with Section 3912 before operating or causing the operation of the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. 
(c)  For purpose of enforcing this chapter against an individual residential unit, the tenant is responsible for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm system in the tenant's residential unit. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3954 - Alarm systems in apartment complexes furnished by the apartment complex as an amenity. 
(a)  If the owner or property manager of an apartment complex provides alarm systems in each residential unit as an amenity, then the owner or property manager of the apartment complex shall obtain a permit from the City covering such residential units. 
(b)  For purposes of assessing fines and enforcing this Chapter, the permit holder for the apartment complex is responsible for payment of fines for false alarm dispatches emitted from the alarm system in residential units. 
(c)  The owner or property manager of an apartment complex shall obtain a separate permit for an alarm system operated in a nonresidential area of the apartment complex, including, but not limited to, common tenant areas and office, storage and equipment areas. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3955 - Permit duration and renewal. 
A permit shall be renewed effective July 1 each year by submitting an updated application to the City. The City shall notify each alarm user of the need to renew at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of their permit. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a non-permitted alarm system and citations and penalties shall be assessed. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3956 - Proper alarm systems operation and maintenance. 
An alarm user shall: 
(a)  Maintain the premises and alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarm dispatches; 
(b)  Make every reasonable effort to respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within one (1) hour when notified by the City to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises; 
(c)  Not cause a manual activation of an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated. Alarm systems shall include an automatic resetting device causing the alarm system to rearm. The sound cut-off shall not apply to fire alarms that sound indicating the functioning of an automatic fire sprinkler system. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3957 - Monitoring procedures. 
(a)  An alarm business performing monitoring services to subscribers shall: 
(1)  Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by the City; 
(2)  Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress or robbery alarm activation, before requesting a police response to an alarm signal; 
(3)  Communicate alarm dispatch requests in a manner and form determined by the City; 
(4)  Communicate verified cancellations of the alarm dispatch requests in a manner and form as determined by the City. 
(b)  The City shall: 
(1)  Designate a manner, form, and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; 
(2)  Develop a procedure to accept verified cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3958 - Duties of alarm business. 
After August 1, 2000, alarm businesses shall not program alarm systems so they are capable of sending One Plus Code duress alarms. Alarm businesses may continue to report One Plus Code Alarms received from alarm systems programmed with this feature prior to August 1, 2000. However, after August 1, 2000, when performing a takeover or conversion, an alarm business must remove the One Plus Code duress alarm capability. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3959 - Alarm system operating instructions. 
An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3960 - Alarm dispatch request records. 
(a)  The officer responding to an alarm dispatch request or the Police Communications Officer shall record such information as necessary to permit a representative of the City to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Identification of the permit number for the alarm site; 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site; 
(3)  Arrival time at the alarm site and dispatch received time; 
(4)  Date and time assignment completed; 
(5)  Weather conditions; 
(6)  Area and sub-area of premises involved; 
(7)  Name of alarm user's representative on premises, if any; 
(8)  Identification of the responsible alarm business; 
(9)  If the business is still in operation. 
(b)  The responding police officer shall indicate to police communications whether the dispatch was caused by a criminal offense, an attempted criminal offense, or was a false alarm dispatch. 
(c)  In the case of an assumed false alarm dispatch, the responding Police Officer shall leave notification at the alarm site that the Police Department has responded to a false alarm dispatch. The notice shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of police response to the false alarm dispatch; 
(2)  The name and identification number of the responding Police Officer or Officers; 
(3)  A statement urging the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated, inspected and serviced in order to avoid fines. 
(d)  Alarm businesses that perform monitoring services must maintain for a period of at least one (1) year following request for police dispatch to an alarm site, records relating to the dispatch. The City may request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. The records must include: 
(1)  Name, address, and phone number of the alarm user; 
(2)  The alarm system zones or points activated; 
(3)  The time that alarm dispatch request was made; 
(4)  Evidence that an attempt to verify was made to the alarm site prior to the alarm dispatch request. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3961 - System performance reviews. 
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false alarms, the City may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm business responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm dispatch. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3962 - Fines. 
(a)  An alarm user or the master permit holder for an apartment complex shall be subject to fines, warnings and suspension or revocation of permit depending on the number of false alarm dispatches emitted from an alarm system within a twelve (12) month period based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  False alarm dispatches: 
(A) First false alarm dispatch 	On-site written notice 
(B) Second false alarm dispatch 	Warning letter 
(C) Third false alarm dispatch 	$75.00 
(D) Fourth false alarm dispatch 	$100.00 
(E) Fifth false alarm dispatch 	$150.00 
(F) All subsequent false alarm dispatches 	$250.00 each incident and loss of permit 
 
(b)  In addition, a person operating a non-permitted alarm system (whether revoked, suspended or never acquired) will be subject to a citation and assessment of a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fine for each false alarm dispatch, in addition to any other fines. The City may waive this additional fine for a non-permitted alarm system if the alarm user completed a permit application within ten (10) days after such violation. 
(c)  Alarm dispatch requests caused by actual criminal offense or with evidence of a criminal attempt shall not be counted as a false alarm dispatch. 
(d)  A person, alarm user, or alarm business commits an offense if he or she violates, by commission or omission, any provision of this Chapter that imposes upon him, her or it a duty or responsibility and is subject to a fine as provided in this Chapter. 
(e)  Fines may be dismissed or revoked at the discretion of the Police Chief upon satisfactory attendance at a false alarm school either conducted or approved by the City. 
(f)  The City may reinstate a suspended permit upon receipt of acceptable evidence that the cause has been addressed and appropriate corrective action has been taken. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3963 - Appeal from fines. 
(a)  An alarm user may appeal assessment of a fine to the Hearing Officer by filing a written request for a hearing setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after receipt of the fine. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the City stays the assessment of the fine until the Hearing Officer makes a final decision. 
(b)  The City shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person or persons. The Hearing Officer shall make a decision on the basis of the preponderance of evidence presented at the hearing including, but not limited to, evidence that a false alarm dispatch was caused by a defective part that has been repaired or replaced or that an alarm dispatch was caused by a criminal offense. The Hearing Officer must render a decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The Hearing Officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment of the fine. The decision of the Hearing Officer is final as to administrative remedies within the City. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3964 - Revocation, suspension or loss of alarm permit. 
The Alarm Administrator may suspend or revoke an alarm permit if it is determined that: 
(a)  There is a false statement of material matter in the application for a permit; 
(b)  The permittee has failed to make timely payment of a fine assessed under Section 3922; 
(c)  The permittee has failed to repair the alarm system to the reasonable satisfaction of the Police Chief or his designee within fifteen (15) days after notice from the City. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3965 - Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(a)  If the Alarm Administrator denies the issuance or renewal of a permit, or suspends or revokes a permit, he or she shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to both the applicant or alarm user and the alarm business. 
(b)  The applicant or alarm user may appeal the decision of the Alarm Administrator to the Hearing Officer by filing a written request for a review setting forth the reasons for the appeal within twenty (20) days after receipt of the notice from the Alarm Administrator. An alarm business may submit the request for review on behalf of an alarm user. 
(c)  Filing a request for appeal shall stay the action of the Alarm Administrator suspending or revoking a permit until the Hearing Officer has completed his or her review. If a request for appeal is not made within the twenty (20) day period, the action of the Alarm Administrator is final. 
(d)  The Hearing Officer shall conduct a formal hearing and consider the evidence by any interested person or persons. The Hearing Officer shall make his or her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing including, but not limited to, certification that the alarm user has been retained, and/or that a defective part has been otherwise determined and corrected. The Hearing Officer must render a written decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The Hearing Officer shall affirm, reverse, or modify the action of the Alarm Administrator. The decision of the Hearing Officer is final as to administrative remedies with the City. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3966 - Reinstatement of permit. 
A person whose alarm permit has been revoked may be issued a new permit if the alarm user or alarm business does the following: 
(a)  Submits an updated application and pays a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) permit fee for a residential alarm or for a business alarm and a seventy-five dollar ($75.00) fine; 
(b)  Pays or otherwise resolves all citations and fines; 
(c)  Submits a certification from an alarm business that complies with the requirements of this Chapter, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired, as necessary, by the alarm business. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
3967 - Enforcement/collection of fines or fees. 
The fees, fines and penalties imposed by this Chapter shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the City by the alarm user or alarm business. If legal action is brought by the City or its assignee against the alarm user or alarm business to enforce collection of such fees, fines or penalties, any judgment rendered in favor of the City shall include costs of suit incurred by the City or its assignee, including reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. 634 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 11 - CAMPING PROHIBITIONS 
 
3970 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted in accordance with California Constitution Article XI, § 7 and Article I, § 1.1 of the City Charter for the purpose of regulating camping in certain areas. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor does it, restrict recreational activities at the times and places available for such use. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3971 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Camp" means to erect, maintain, or occupy a camp facility for the purpose of human habitation. 
"Camper" means a structure designed to be mounted on a motor vehicle and to provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. 
"Camp facilities" includes one or more of the following items: tents, huts, other temporary physical shelters, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or bedrolls. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager or designee including, without limitation, the Police Chief. 
"Encampment" means a location consisting of camp facilities, cooking facilities, and other evidence of human habitation. 
"Entrance" means the entire area between the outer edge of an entrance to a building and the exterior door and includes the entry way, doorway or vestibule. 
"House car" means a motor vehicle originally designed or permanently or temporarily altered and equipped for human habitation, or to which a camper is permanently or temporarily attached. 
"Personal effects" means personal property consisting of the following items: 
(1)  Medication, eye glasses, or other medical devices; 
(2)  Sleeping bag or bed roll which is sanitary and non-verminous; 
(3)  Tents in usable and good condition; 
(4)  Clothes stored in a manner protecting them from the elements, which are not unsanitary, soiled, or verminous; and 
(5)  Personal property with an individual value of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
"Public right-of-way" means any city street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path or any other "public way," as defined by Streets and Highways Code § 18609. 
"Restricted public property" means any public right-of-way and public property including, without limitation, parks and parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3972 - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for persons to use, occupy, or allow the use or occupancy of any house car for human habitation within the city. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to sleep, camp, or store personal property, including camp facilities and paraphernalia, in or on restricted public property. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3973 - Exceptions. 
(a)  This chapter does not apply to registered guests, campers, or residents at mobile home or recreational vehicle parks validly existing in accordance with this code. Further, sleeping in a parked vehicle for a limited time, not to exceed four (4) hours, under bona fide conditions of emergency, or in the interest of public safety, does not constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  This chapter does not apply to persons sleeping, camping, or storing personal property in areas designated for such purposes that are permitted by a governmental entity or in a caretaker's residence. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3974 - Signs. 
The City Manager is authorized to construct, maintain, and post such markings and signs as are determined necessary or desirable to give public notice of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3975 - Camp facilities. 
(a)  Unless otherwise authorized in this chapter, any personal property, including camp facilities and paraphernalia, stored or found in restricted public places or as part of an encampment is deemed abandoned property. 
(b)  The City Manager is authorized to remove personal property on restricted public places or in encampments in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3976 - Property removal. 
The City Manager may remove personal property from restricted public places or from an encampment as follows: 
(a)  The location of any personal property including camp facilities and paraphernalia, must be tagged and dated with a notice stating the following: 
"It is illegal to store personal property in this area. If this personal property is not removed by (specify date at least 3 days from posting) , THIS PERSONAL PROPERTY WILL BE DEEMED INTENTIONALLY ABANDONED AND SUBJECT TO REMOVAL AND POSSIBLE DESTRUCTION." 
(b)  The City Manager may remove any personal property still stored or remaining in restricted public places or from an encampment three (3) or more days after posting notice. 
(c)  Except for personal effects, the City Manager may dispose of such abandoned personal property in any reasonable manner including, without limitation, destruction. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3977 - Personal effects. 
(a)  The City Manager must conspicuously post and date a notice either at the exact location from which the personal effects were removed or at another nearby location giving the following information: 
(1)  A list of personal effects removed; 
(2)  A telephone number for information on retrieving personal effects; and 
(3)  The length of time during which the personal effects may be claimed. 
(b)  The City Manager must maintain an inventory identifying personal effects as follows: 
(1)  The approximate location of the property; 
(2)  The nature of items removed; and 
(3)  The reasonable value of each item. 
(c)  Removed personal effects must be placed in containers labeled in a manner facilitating identification by the City Manager and owner and which reasonably protects such property from damage or theft. 
(d)  Removed personal effects must be stored in an area designated by the City Manager for a period of ninety (90) days. 
(e)  If personal effects are claimed within ninety (90) days from removal, unless the property is connected to a crime or is illegal to possess, the City Manager must release the stored property to the owner upon the person claiming ownership identifying the property and approximate location where the property was left. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
3978 - Disposition of property. 
(a)  Personal effects remaining unclaimed at the end of ninety (90) days from removal may be dedicated public use and may be given for charitable use to a local nonprofit agency or placed for sale pursuant to this code. 
(b)  All other personal property is deemed intentionally abandoned and may be summarily abated and destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 2, 6-2-14)  
Chapter 12 - CANNABIS ACTIVITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 734, § 4, adopted December 18, 2017, amended Chapter 12, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 12, §§ 3980—3999.5, pertained to medicinal cannabis activity, and derived from Ord. No. 722, adopted January 19, 2016 and Ord. No. 727, adopted June 5, 2017. 
 
Part A. - In General 
 
3980 - Purpose. 
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the city's police powers and municipal affairs provision of the City Charter for the purpose of permitting commercial cannabis activity for medical and nonmedical purposes in compliance with state and local laws. Nothing in this Chapter is intended to, nor does, duplicate or conflict with applicable local, state, or, beyond the extent constitutionally permissible, federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3981 - General prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in commercial cannabis activity without a valid certificate of approval issued pursuant to this Chapter for each location at which the activity is proposed to occur. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by this Chapter, it is unlawful for any person to engage in commercial cannabis activity from other than a fixed location within the city's jurisdiction for which a certificate of approval has been obtained and remains in effect. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to cause, permit, aid, abet, or conceal a violation of any provision of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3982 - Permitted cannabis activity. 
Subject to applicable State law and this Chapter, commercial cannabis activity is permitted when approved by the City in accordance with this Chapter. Specifically, the following commercial cannabis activity may be allowed pursuant to a certificate of approval: 
(a)  Sale; 
(b)  Indoor cultivation; 
(c)  Delivery; 
(d)  Manufacturing; 
(e)  Testing services; and 
(f)  Distribution. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3983 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this Chapter. Words and phrases undefined in this Chapter have the same meaning as set forth in the Adult Use of Marijuana Act; the Compassionate Use Act; the Medical Marijuana Program Act; the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act; or the "Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act." 
"Cannabis" means all parts of the plant cannabis sativa linnaeus, cannabis indica, or cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from marijuana. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 11018. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this Chapter, "cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by Food and Agricultural Code Section 81000 of the or Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5. For purposes of this code, "marijuana" has the same meaning as cannabis and the two terms are used interchangeably. 
"Certificate of approval" or "certificate" means final approval granted for commencement of a commercial cannabis activity under this Chapter. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" includes cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, or sale of medical cannabis or a medical cannabis product, or of nonmedical cannabis or nonmedical cannabis products, except as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19319, related to qualifying patients and primary caregivers. 
"Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. 
"Delivery" means the commercial transfer of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products from a facility, up to an amount determined by the bureau, to a primary caregiver or qualified patient as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, or a testing laboratory. "Delivery" also includes the use by a facility of any technology platform owned and controlled by the facility, or independently licensed under California law, which enables qualified patients or primary caregivers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed facility of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products. 
"Director" means the city manager, or designee. 
"Distribution" shall have the meaning as provided in Section 26001(r) of the California Business and Professions Code, as amended from time to time. 
"Distributor" shall mean a licensee engaged in distribution. 
"Distributor" is one holding a valid certificate of approval and license as for distribution activities. 
"Employee" at a facility means any person who performs work at the facility, including but not limited to any owner, supervisor, worker or volunteer, whether paid or unpaid, full time or part-time. "Employ" means to hire or otherwise retain or allow a person to act as an employee. Incidental contractors and enforcement officials (as defined in this Chapter) shall not be considered employees. 
"Enforcement official" means an employee of or contractor for the City, County, or State who is enters onto the premises of a facility for the purpose of implementing this Chapter or enforcing applicable laws. 
"Facility" means a facility at which commercial cannabis activity occurs as authorized by this Chapter including, without limitation, a medical marijuana collective, a medical or nonmedical marijuana dispensary, a commercial cannabis cultivation facility, a testing service, or a manufacturing site for cannabis products. 
"Identification card" means a document issued either by a governmental agency, e.g., the California Department of Health Services, or other valid documentation that identifies a person as someone authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana, and that identifies the person's designated primary caregiver, if any. 
"Implementing resolution" means a resolution or resolutions adopted by the City Council which prescribes the application process, eligibility requirements and/or operational parameters governing commercial cannabis activity and/or cultivation of cannabis, as such resolutions may be revised, replaced or amended from time to time. 
"Incidental contractors" means independent contractors who are brought in to a facility only occasionally and solely to perform specialized services generally applicable to non-cannabis businesses (e.g. pest control specialist, plumber, electrician, copier repair tech). 
"Medical marijuana collective" means a collective, cooperative, association, dispensary or other entity, whether for profit or nonprofit in nature, that cultivates, distributes, dispenses, stores, exchanges, processes, delivers, makes available or gives away cannabis in the city for medical purposes to qualified patients, or primary caregivers of qualified patients pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5 or any State regulations promulgated to implement the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. Medical Marijuana Collective does not include the following uses, so long as such uses comply with this Code and other applicable law: 
(1)  A clinic licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1200, et seq. 
(2)  A health care facility licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1250, et seq. 
(3)  A residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1568.01, et seq. 
(4)  A residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1569, et seq. 
(5)  A hospice or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1725, et seq. 
"Medical cannabis," medical cannabis product," or "cannabis product" has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code § 19300.5(ag), as the same may be amended from time to time. 
"Operations plan" means an operating plan approved by the police chief, that implements the standard requirements of this Chapter along with such additional, reasonable, criteria needed to protect public health and safety as determined by the police chief, based upon the size and location of the proposed facility. 
"Person with an identification card" means an individual who is a qualified patient who has applied for and received a valid identification card. 
"Personal cultivation," "cultivation for personal use" and similar terms mean cultivation of cannabis for personal use, whether medical or nonmedical, by (i) the cultivator, and/or (ii) if for medical use, by the cultivator's qualified patient, if the cultivator is the primary caregiver of the qualified patient. 
"Police Chief" means the police chief, or designee. 
"Primary caregiver" means the individual, designated by a qualified patient or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person, and may include any of the following: 
(1)  In any case in which a qualified patient or person with an identification card receives medical care or supportive services, or both, from a clinic licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1200, et seq., a health care facility licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1250, et seq., a residential care facility for persons with chronic life-threatening illness licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1568.01, et seq., a residential care facility for the elderly licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1569, et seq., a hospice, or a home health agency licensed pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1725, et seq., the owner or operator, or no more than three (3) employees who are designated by the owner or operator, of the clinic, facility, hospice, or home health agency, if designated as a primary caregiver by that qualified patient or person with an identification card. 
(2)  An individual who has been designated as a primary caregiver by more than one qualified patient or person with an identification card, if every qualified patient or person with an identification card who has designated that individual as a primary caregiver resides in the same city or county as the primary caregiver. 
(3)  An individual who has been designated as a primary caregiver by a qualified patient or person with an identification card who resides in a city or county other than that of the primary caregiver, if the individual has not been designated as a primary caregiver by any other qualified patient or person with an identification card. 
(4)  A primary caregiver must be at least twenty-one (21) years old, unless the primary caregiver is the parent of a minor child who is a qualified patient or a person with an identification card or the primary caregiver is a person otherwise entitled to make medical decisions under state law pursuant to Family Code Sections 6922, 7002, 7050, or 7120. 
"Proof of identity" is defined as a means of proving the person seeking medical marijuana is the person's name in the doctor's recommendation or as the primary caregiver, and may include, by way of example, photograph identity materials, such as a valid California driver's license, California DMV identity card, or a US passport. 
"Qualified patient" means a person who is entitled to the protections of Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
"School" means any public or private school providing instruction in kindergarten any grades 1 through 12. A school does not include any private school in which education is primarily conducted in private homes. 
"Testing service" or "testing services" has the same meaning as "testing service" set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 26001. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3984 - State license required; timing. 
To engage in commercial cannabis activity allowed by this Chapter, a person must obtain all of the following: 
(a)  First, a certificate of approval as required by this Chapter. 
(b)  After obtaining a certificate of approval issued by this Chapter, a person must thereafter obtain and maintain all required State of California commercial cannabis activity licenses required for the facility, e.g. a Type 6 (Manufacturer 1) license issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs and/or a Type 10 or 10A (Dispensary) license issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs, etc. as enumerated in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code section 19300.7 or other applicable state law, once such licenses become available. Operation of the facility without a state license or licenses is permissible during the time such licenses are not available. 
(c)  Background check approval from the City for each employee at the facility, pursuant to Section 3985 of this Chapter. 
(d)  After obtaining a certificate of approval, a person must thereafter, before commencing a commercial cannabis activity, obtain a development permit and any other permits and approvals required for the facility under Article X or other provision of this Code. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of applicable law, unless extended or renewed, a certificate of approval will be rendered void should a person fail to obtain, within six (6) months following issuance of the certificate of approval, or thereafter maintain, the state license and other permits and approvals required by this section. The six (6) month period shall be extended by a reasonable amount of time to reflect delays due to state backlog if the applicant has filed for such a license or licenses, provided all information and fees required by the state have been provided to the state within the initial six (6) month period following issuance of the certificate of approval. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3985 - Certificate of approval qualifications; background check for applicants and employees. 
(a)  To protect public health and safety, and to further ensure that commercial cannabis activity permitted by this Chapter is in the public interest, the City may establish by implementing resolution and/or by administrative policies and procedures promulgated by the City Manager the procedures for determining the qualifications of persons allowed to apply for a certificate of approval or allowed to be employed at a facility. Any such resolution, policy or procedures may also: (i) establish the application fees and method, including timing, for objectively evaluating and reaching a decision on applications for a certificate of approval pursuant to this Chapter, and (ii) establish operating standards and restrictions as the City may require from time to time. 
(b)  Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which authorize city authorities to access state and local summary criminal history information for employment, licensing, or certification purposes, and authorize access to federal level criminal history information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the Department of Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, every applicant for a certificate of approval (including owners and other representatives of the applicant) and every person to be employed at the facility must submit fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s) for a background check by the Port Hueneme Police Department. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual cost to the City of Port Hueneme to conduct the background investigation as it deems necessary and appropriate, including City staff time and costs, shall be paid at the time the person submits for the background check. 
(c)  In addition to any other qualifications, methods and procedures established for applicants pursuant to subsection (a) above in this section, and except as permitted by the police chief on good cause shown, an applicant for a certificate of approval or for employment at a commercial cannabis activity shall be denied a certificate of approval and disqualified from employment at a facility if the background check or other information shows that the applicant: 
(1)  Is dishonest or untrustworthy; 
(2)  Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit or embezzlement; 
(3)  Was convicted of a violent felony or crime of moral turpitude; or 
(4)  Was convicted of unlawful activity under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, except for California medical cannabis-related offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, and where the conviction related solely to lack of legal authority to engage in the business. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3985.5 - Term of certificate. 
Unless otherwise provided in the certificate, a certificate of approval shall expire one year following its issuance. All commercial cannabis activity at the facility shall cease upon expiration of the certificate unless and until the certificate is renewed or a new certificate of approval is issued pursuant to the implementing resolution. The renewal of the certificate of approval shall not be unreasonably withheld based upon the City's review of the applicant's compliance with conditions of approval, any regulations adopted by resolution or City requirement, changes in circumstances, operations or ownership or staffing, observing all relevant laws, ordinances and regulations, and such other factors as are reasonable. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3986 - Limitations on City's liability. 
(a)  To the fullest extent permitted by law, the city does not assume any liability whatsoever, with respect to approving any certificate of approval pursuant to this code or the operation of any facility approved pursuant to this code. 
(b)  As a prerequisite to issuance of a certificate of approval, the applicant must: 
(1)  Execute an agreement indemnifying the city from any claims, judgments, awards, damages, injuries, or liabilities of any kind arising out of or related to issuance of a certificate of approval and/or approval of a development permit or ministerial permit, or operation of the facility or the prosecution of the facility or its owners, managers, directors, officers, employees, or its qualified patients or primary caregivers for violation of federal or state laws; 
(2)  Maintain insurance in the amounts and of the types that are reasonably acceptable to the city manager or designee; 
(3)  Name the city as an additionally insured on all city required insurance policies; 
(4)  Agree to pay the reasonable fees and costs of legal counsel selected by the city to defend the city, its agents, officers, and/or employees against any claim described in subsection 3986(b)(1) above; and 
(5)  Agree to reimburse the city for any court costs and reasonable attorney fees the city may be required to pay as a result of any claim described in subsection 3986(b)(1) above. 
(6)  The agreements required by this subsection 3986(B) must be secured with sufficient insurance, as determined by the City Attorney, and a surety, as approved by the City Attorney, to adequately protect the city from any and all liability. The surety requirement may be waived in the discretion of the director if the applicant demonstrates sufficient net worth to adequately cover the liability exposure. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
Part B. - Facilities 
 
3987 - Location criteria. 
(a)  Facilities may only be allowed within the zone districts designated by implementing resolution. Each physical location of a facility requires a separate certificate of approval. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any portion of the parcel on which a facility is located to be within six hundred (600) feet of any parcel that contains a school. 
(c)  If a facility is located above the ground floor, it must be accessible to persons with disabilities in conformance with applicable law including, without limitation, the California Building Code as adopted by this code. 
(d)  A certificate of approval may be renewed for a facility located on a parcel that is within six hundred (600) feet of a school if: (1) the school located to the area after the certificate of approval was first issued; (2) the certificate of approval has not lapsed for any period of time; and (3) the facility was in continuous operation. For purposes of this section, a temporary interruption of business activity due to fire, natural disaster or other force majeure is excused provided reasonable steps are taken by the certificate holder to resume business operations expeditiously. The prior, temporary suspension of a certificate of approval does not render a certificate of approval ineligible for renewal under this section provided the applicant otherwise qualifies for renewal. 
(e)  Unless otherwise prohibited by state law, other provisions of this Chapter, or regulations or requirements adopted by the City, holders of more than one (1) certificate of approval and related state license to operate different types of cannabis facilities may operate the facilities from the same location. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3988 - Operations plan and standards. 
A certificate of approval issued for a facility must include, as conditions of approval, the operating standards set forth below. In addition, the certificate of approval must incorporate by reference an operations plan approved by the police chief, that implements not only the operating standards set forth in this section, but such additional conditions that the police chief finds reasonably necessary to implement the purpose of this Chapter when considering the location, size and other characteristics of the proposed facility. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3989 - Community relations. 
(a)  Each facility must provide the city manager or designee with the name, telephone number, and email address of an on-site community relations or staff person or other representative to whom the city can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the facility or refer members of the public who may have any concerns or complaints regarding the operation of the facility. Each facility must also provide the above information to all businesses and residences located within one hundred (100) feet of the facility. 
(b)  During the first year of operation of a facility authorized under this Chapter, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from each such facility must attend a monthly meeting with the city manager and/or designee to discuss costs, benefits and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of the certificate of approval authorized by this Chapter. After the first year of operation, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from each such facility must meet with the city manager and/or designee when and as requested by the city manager or designee, with reasonable notice. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
Part C. - Dispensaries 
 
3989.5 - Operational standards for dispensaries. 
In addition to all other requirements of an operations plan required by this Chapter, dispensary facilities must include the following in an operations plan approved by the police chief: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, a facility can only be open for access to the public between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(b)  It is unlawful for alcohol or tobacco to be sold within the facility. Further, it is unlawful for smoking, vaporization, ingestion or consumption of alcohol, tobacco or marijuana in any form, to occur on the premises of a facility, elsewhere on the same parcel, or in outdoor areas adjacent to the parcel (e.g., parking lots, walkways, sidewalks, streets, parks, etc.). 
(c)  It is unlawful for cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products to be publicly visible from the exterior of the property. It is unlawful to store cannabis or cannabis products outside of the facility at any time. 
(d)  All cannabis and cannabis products allowed to be sold or otherwise made available at a facility must be cultivated, manufactured, distributed and transported by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full conformance with State and local regulations including, without limitation, certification by a testing service as required by applicable law; provided, however, that this requirement may be waived for some designated period of time at the director's sole discretion if, due to timing issues and coordination with state requirements, it would be difficult or impossible to meet this requirement. 
(e)  It is unlawful for a physician to be located in, or on the same parcel as, a facility at any time for the purpose of evaluating patients to issue a medical marijuana prescription or recommendation. A physician is neither required nor prohibited from being located in or on the same parcel as a facility operating solely as a nonmedical facility. 
(f)  Before dispensing cannabis or cannabis products to any person, the facility must verify that the person possesses proof of identity, proving their identity as the patient specified in the recommendation or as the primary caregiver. 
(g)  Each facility must provide the police chief, with the name and telephone number of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided. The telephone number provided must be capable of accepting recorded voice messages in the event the contact person does not answer. 
(h)  Except for employees of the facility, enforcement officials and incidental contractors, it is unlawful for any person to be allowed into any area of a facility where medical cannabis products are displayed and/or being offered for sale unless that person is a qualified patient or has a valid identification card (as defined in Section 3983), or is named as a designated primary caregiver on a valid identification card, together with proof of identity. It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be present in any area of a facility where nonmedicinal cannabis products are displayed and/or being offered for sale. A sign must be posted at each entrance to a sales/display area of the facility informing patrons of these restrictions. Proof of identity as a qualified patient is not required at a facility that is operated solely as a nonmedical commercial cannabis facility. 
(i)  It is unlawful for any person under age twenty-one (21) to be present in any lobby or reception area of a facility unless the facility is being operated solely as a medical cannabis facility and that person is a qualified patient or primary caregiver and is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(j)  It is unlawful for any person to employ any other person at a facility unless: (i) the person is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; and (ii) the person has passed any background check and employee registration process specified by implementing resolution. 
(k)  Each entrance to a facility must be posted with a conspicuous notice stating that smoking, vaping, ingesting, or otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises or in the areas adjacent to the facility is prohibited. 
(l)  Medical cannabis dispensaries can only dispense medical cannabis or cannabis products to a "person with a physician's recommendation," as defined in Section 3983, or a qualified patient, either of whom possesses proof of identity. 
(m)  Cannabis and cannabis products for personal nonmedical use may not be displayed, dispensed or sold separately or in combination with a medicinal commercial cannabis activity at the same facility unless a separate certificate of approval is acquired for each such use. 
(n)  Entrances into any area of a facility where cannabis products are displayed and/or being offered for sale must be locked at all times with entry strictly controlled. A "buzz-in" electronic/mechanical entry system must be utilized to limit access to such areas and to separate them from the outside and/or any adjacent reception/lobby area. The specifics of such entry system must be set forth in the operations plan. 
(o)  Uniformed security personnel must be employed to monitor all entrances and exits of the facility and to serve as a visual deterrent to unlawful activities during all hours of operation. Every security guard employed by or provided by the facility must be currently licensed by the California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services and in possession of a valid "guard card." The number of such security personnel must be set forth in the operations plan. 
(p)  All restroom facilities serving a facility must remain locked and under the control of management. 
(q)  Odor control devices and techniques must be incorporated as needed in a facility to ensure that odors from marijuana are not detectable outside of the facility or in any tenant space or area adjacent to the facility. 
(r)  It is unlawful for any person within a facility to provide cannabis or cannabis products to any individual in a quantity not consistent with personal use. 
(s)  A facility cannot store more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) in cash reserves overnight on the premises except as may be otherwise provided in the operations plan incorporated as a condition of approval in the certificate of approval. 
(t)  All law enforcement and code enforcement personnel seeking admission to the facility for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the standards and regulations of this code must be given unrestricted access to all areas of the premises at all times during hours of operation. Consent to such unrestricted access must be acknowledged by the certificate of approval holder and included within the operations plan. 
(u)  All interior spaces of the facility which are open and accessible to the public (except restrooms), and all entrances and exits to and from the premises, must be monitored by twenty-four (24) hour video security surveillance of at least HD quality with night vision capability. The video security system must be compatible with software and hardware utilized by the city as determined by the Police Chief and set forth in the operations plan. Surveillance video must be recorded to a device that is securely located on the premises and all footage must be maintained for a minimum of forty-five (45) days. The video surveillance system specifications must be set forth in the operations plan before the city issues a certificate of occupancy for the facility. 
(v)  A facility must have a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system as approved through the operations plan. 
(w)  A facility must maintain a valid business license as required by this code. 
(x)  All food products, food storage facilities, food-related utensils, equipment and materials must be approved, used, managed and handled in accordance with the provisions of the California Retail Food Code (Health and Safety Code Section 113700 et seq.). All food products must be protected from contamination at all times, and all food handlers must be clean, in good health, and free from communicable diseases. The Ventura County Department of Environmental Health may inspect the facility at any time during business hours to ensure compliance with this section. 
(y)  Except as otherwise provided by state law, state or city regulation or condition of approval, baked cannabis products (e.g., brownies, bars, cookies, cakes), tinctures, and other non-refrigerated items may be sold at a facility. 
(z)  A certificate of approval for a facility is subject to all of the regulations and operational standards set forth in this section in addition to the conditions stated in the certificate of approval itself. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 734, § 4, adopted December 18, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as § 3988.5. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 3989.5.  
Part. D. - Cultivation 
 
3990 - Outdoor cultivation prohibited; exception. 
Except for personal medicinal use as provided in Section 3993 below, outdoor cultivation of commercial cannabis is prohibited in all areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3991 - Operational standards for cultivation. 
In addition to all other requirements of an operations plan required by this Chapter, facilities engaged in indoor cultivation of medical or nonmedical marijuana must include the following in an operations plan approved by the police chief: 
(a)  The facility can have only one (1) contiguous cultivation area, except that segregated areas within the facility are permitted with the police chief's approval and the approval of the fire chief regarding fire code issues. 
(b)  It is unlawful to use flammable or explosive substances in the cultivation of cannabis. 
(c)  Facilities engaged in cultivation must follow all pesticide use requirements of local, state and federal law. 
(d)  The operations plan must include a detailed electrical and plumbing plan, along with projections for water usage. 
(e)  All law enforcement personnel seeking admission to the cultivation site for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the standards and regulations of this code must be given unrestricted access to all areas of the premises at all times during hours of operation. Consent to such unrestricted access must be acknowledged by the applicant and included within the operations plan. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be present within the area where the cultivation of cannabis is occurring. A sign must be posted at each entrance to a cultivation facility informing visitors of these restrictions. 
(g)  All cultivation activity must be conducted in compliance with all applicable state and local water conservation laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
(h)  Each cannabis cultivation facility must provide the police chief with the name and telephone number of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided. The telephone number provided must be capable of accepting recorded voice messages in the event the contact person does not answer. 
(i)  Entrances into any area of a cannabis cultivation facility where cannabis is grown or kept must be locked at all times with entry strictly controlled. The specifics of such entry system must be set forth in the operations plan. 
(j)  Odor control devices and techniques must be incorporated in a cannabis cultivation facility to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable outside of the facility or in any tenant space or area adjacent to the facility. 
(k)  A cannabis cultivation facility must have a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system as approved through the operations plan. 
(l)  Cannabis cultivation facilities cannot be open to the public, though the facility may dispense cannabis in accordance with a certificate of approval. 
(m)  A cannabis cultivation facility must be equipped with an automated fire suppression system to the satisfaction of the Building Official. 
(n)  Except as expressly approved as part of the operations plan and incorporated in a certificate of approval, it is unlawful for any cannabis cultivation facility to use, employ, or maintain any equipment, system, material or apparatus for the purpose of increasing the ambient carbon dioxide levels within any grow area. 
(o)  It is unlawful to cultivate cannabis within six hundred (600) feet of any other parcel containing a school. 
(p)  It is unlawful for cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products to be publicly visible from the exterior of the property. It is unlawful to store cannabis or cannabis products outside of the facility at any time. 
(q)  All interior spaces of the facility which are open and accessible to the public (except restrooms), and all entrances and exits to and from the premises, must be monitored by twenty-four (24) hour video security surveillance of at least HD quality with night vision capability. The video security system must be compatible with software and hardware utilized by the city as determined by the Police Chief and set forth in the operations plan. Surveillance video must be recorded to a device that is securely located on the premises and all footage must be maintained for a minimum of forty-five (45) days. The video surveillance system specifications must be set forth in the operations plan before the city issues a certificate of occupancy for the facility. 
(r)  A facility must maintain a valid business license as required by this code. 
(s)  A certificate of approval for a facility is subject to all of the regulations and operational standards set forth in this section in addition to the conditions stated in the certificate of approval itself. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3992 - Personal indoor cultivation; standards and regulations. 
Outdoor cultivation of cannabis for personal use in accordance with State law may only be permitted as regulated under the provisions of Section 3993 of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3993 - Personal cultivation for medicinal use; development and operational standards. 
(a)  Not more than six (6) cannabis plants of any size may be cultivated on any parcel regardless of the number of qualified patients or caregivers residing on the property. 
(b)  Cultivation cannot exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in cumulative area. 
(c)  All outdoor cannabis cultivation must be fully enclosed by an opaque fence six (6) feet in height. The fence must be at least ten (10) feet from any structure on the property and be adequately secure to prevent unauthorized entry and theft. Alternatively, outdoor cannabis cultivation may be conducted in a secure opaque greenhouse structure, subject to the approval of the police chief. The police chief will determine the level of security necessary. Indoor cultivation for personal medical marijuana is permissible, subject to the pertinent provisions hereof. 
(d)  It is unlawful to cultivate cannabis within six hundred (600) feet of any other parcel containing a school. 
(e)  No lighting, heaters, fans, generators or other mechanical equipment that may cause a nuisance to neighbors may be used in connection with the cultivation of cannabis. 
(f)  It is unlawful to cultivate cannabis in the front yard area of any parcel. 
(g)  It is unlawful to cultivate cannabis within the required rear or side yard setbacks of any parcel. 
(h)  It is unlawful for there to be any audible or olfactory evidence of cannabis cultivation from any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or adjacent property, or any visual evidence of cannabis cultivation when viewed from five (5) feet above ground level from any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or adjacent property. 
(i)  The cultivation of medicinal cannabis is permitted for non-commercial purposes only. It is unlawful to sell, trade, barter, or engage in any other commercial exchange of cannabis or cannabis products cultivated pursuant to this section. 
(j)  The address of any dwelling on a parcel where cannabis is cultivated must be posted and plainly visible from the public right-of-way. 
(k)  Cultivation of cannabis cannot occur on any property where a parolee or probationer resides unless the parolee or probationer has received confirmation from a court of competent jurisdiction that he or she is allowed to use medical cannabis while on parole or probation pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 11362.795. Such confirmation must be provided to city staff or law enforcement upon request. 
(l)  Any law enforcement personnel may, after providing twenty-four (24) hours' notice, enter onto the property where cultivation of medical cannabis is occurring pursuant to this section for the purpose of inspecting the cultivation site and perimeter fencing. This section does not purport to authorize any law enforcement personnel to enter any dwelling located on the property. For purposes of this section, notice is sufficient if posted at the entrance to the dwelling on the property or if hand delivered to any person over the age of eighteen (18) residing on the property. 
(m)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be present within the fenced area where the cultivation of medical cannabis is occurring unless such person is a qualified patient or a primary caregiver and he or she is in the presence of his or her parent or guardian. 
(n)  All cultivation activities must be conducted in compliance with all applicable state and local water conservation laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
(o)  Nothing in this section is intended to authorize the cultivation, possession, or use of cannabis in violation of state or federal law. 
(p)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, or applicable law, no variances are permitted from any of the regulations in this section. 
(q)  Prior to commencing cultivation under this section, the cultivator shall obtain a ministerial permit from the City as provided by implementing resolution. A valid ministerial permit must be maintained in effect by the cultivator throughout the period of cultivation. The cultivator shall remove all cannabis plants and plant materials from the property within twenty-four (24) hours following termination or expiration of the ministerial permit. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
Part E. - Delivery 
 
3994 - Delivery. 
(a)  A certificate of approval for a facility may authorize the delivery of medical cannabis as part of and in conjunction with the operation of the facility. Deliveries by dispensaries other than those which are located in the City of Port Hueneme and hold a valid certificate of approval under this Chapter are unlawful. 
(b)  Delivery of cannabis from a facility that has obtained a certificate of approval pursuant to this Chapter can only be made in a city or county that does not expressly prohibit such deliveries by ordinance. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be allowed to serve as a delivery driver and no person can employ a person under the age of twenty-one (21) for the purpose of making deliveries of any medical cannabis product. 
(d)  A facility which has obtained a certificate of approval pursuant to this Chapter may have its delivery privileges suspended or terminated by the city manager if the facility is found to have violated this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
Part. F. - Manufacturing and Testing Facilities 
 
3995 - Operations plan; additional requirements. 
In addition to any other requirements of an Operations Plan, a Testing Service or a facility engaged in manufacturing cannabis products must include, as conditions precedent to issuance of a Certificate of Approval, an Operations Plan encompassing the elements set forth in Section 3996. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3996 - Operational standards. 
(a)  The manufacture of cannabis products and the operations of a testing service must be undertaken in a manner that ensures the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the employees of the cannabis business, visitors, and neighboring properties, and must be in full compliance with state law. 
(b)  All law enforcement and code enforcement personnel seeking admission to the manufacturing or testing site for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the standards and regulations of this code must be given unrestricted access to all areas of the premises at all times during hours of operation. Consent to such unrestricted access must be acknowledged by the applicant and included within the operations plan. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) to be present within the area where the manufacture or testing of cannabis products is occurring. A sign must be posted at each entrance to a manufacturing or testing facility informing visitors of these restrictions. 
(d)  All manufacturing and testing activity must be conducted in compliance with all applicable state and local water conservation laws, ordinances, and regulations. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to employ another person under the age of twenty-one (21) at a cannabis manufacturing or testing facility. 
(f)  Entrances into any area of a cannabis manufacturing or testing facility where cannabis products are made, tested or kept must be locked at all times with entry strictly controlled. The specifics of such entry system must be set forth in the operations plan. 
(g)  Odor control devices and techniques must be incorporated in a cannabis manufacturing or testing facility as needed to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable outside of the facility or in any tenant space or area adjacent to the facility. 
(h)  A cannabis manufacturing or testing facility must have a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored alarm system as approved through the operations plan. 
(i)  It is unlawful for cannabis manufacturing or testing facilities to be open to the public. 
(j)  Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing or testing process shall not be stored in containers that exceed one hundred fifty (150) pound tanks in size. Each facility shall be limited to a total of eight (8) tanks on the property at any time. 
(k)  Cannabis manufacturing and testing facilities are limited to the following methods, equipment, solvents, gases and mediums when creating cannabis extracts: 
(1)  Cannabis manufacturing and testing facilities may use the hydrocarbons N-butane, isobutane, propane, or heptane or other solvents or gases exhibiting low to minimal potential human-related toxicity approved by the director. These solvents must be of at least ninety-nine (99) percent purity and any extraction process must use them in a professional grade closed loop extraction system designed to recover the solvents, work in an environment with proper ventilation, controlling all sources of ignition where a flammable atmosphere is or may be present. 
(2)  Any extraction processes must use a professional grade closed loop CO 2 gas extraction system where every vessel is rated to a minimum of six hundred (600) pounds per square inch. The CO 2 must be of at least ninety-nine (99) percent purity. 
(3)  Closed loop systems for hydrocarbon or CO 2 extraction systems must be commercially manufactured and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial number. 
(4)  Certification from a licensed engineer must be provided to the Community Development Department for professional grade closed loop systems used by any cannabis manufacturing or mechanized testing system to certify that the system was commercially manufactured, safe for its intended use, and built to codes of recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices, such as: (i) the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME); (ii) the American National Standards Institute (ANSI); (iii) Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or (iv) the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 
(5)  The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of a professional engineer and serial number of the extraction unit being certified. 
(6)  Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction operation, and facilities must be approved for their use by the Fire Department and meet any required fire, safety, and building code requirements specified in the California Building Reference Codes. 
(l)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice water, and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create kief, hashish, bubble hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from natural sources, and other extracts. 
(m)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol, and propylene glycol solvents to create extracts. All ethanol must be removed from the extract in a manner to recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not vented into the atmosphere. 
(n)  Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating marijuana extracts must develop standard operating procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a training plan prior to producing extracts for the marketplace. Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create marijuana extracts or otherwise in a testing or manufacturing facility must be fully trained on how to use the system, have direct access to applicable material safety data sheets and handle and store the solvents and gases safely. 
(o)  Parts per million for one (1) gram of finished extract produced in a manufacturing facility cannot exceed five hundred (500) parts per million of residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested. 
(p)  It is unlawful for cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or cannabis products to be publicly visible from the exterior of the property. It is unlawful to store cannabis or cannabis products outside of the facility at any time. 
(q)  Each facility must provide the police chief, with the name and telephone number of an on-site employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided. The telephone number provided must be capable of accepting recorded voice messages in the event the contact person does not answer. 
(r)  All entrances and exits to and from the premises, must be monitored by twenty-four (24) hour video security surveillance of at least HD quality with night vision capability. The video security system must be compatible with software and hardware utilized by the city as determined by the Police Chief and set forth in the operations plan. Surveillance video must be recorded to a device that is securely located on the premises and all footage must be maintained for a minimum of forty-five (45) days. The video surveillance system specifications must be set forth in the operations plan before the city issues a certificate of occupancy for the facility. 
(s)  A facility must maintain a valid business license as required by this code. 
(t)  A certificate of approval for a facility is subject to all of the regulations and operational standards set forth in this section in addition to the conditions stated in the certificate of approval itself. 
(u)  The following requirements shall apply to all testing facilities: 
(1)  Testing laboratories shall be required to conduct all testing in a manner pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 26100 and shall be subject to state and local law. Each testing laboratory shall be subject to additional regulations as they are developed or modified by the State of California. 
(2)  Testing laboratories shall conduct all testing in a manner consistent with general requirements for the competence of the testing and calibration activities, including a sampling using verified methods, pursuant to Section 26100(f). 
(3)  All cannabis testing laboratories performing testing shall obtain and maintain ISO/IEC 17025 accreditation as required by the state, pursuant to Section 26100(g). 
(4)  Testing laboratories shall destroy the remains of the sample cannabis or cannabis products upon the completion of the analysis as determined by the state through regulations, pursuant to Section 26100(i). 
(5)  Testing laboratories shall dispose of any waste byproduct resulting from their operations in the manner required by state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3996.1 - Distribution. 
(a)  Distribution is the procurement, sales and transport of cannabis and cannabis products between dispensaries. 
(b)  The transportation of cannabis or cannabis products shall only be conducted by persons holding a distribution certificate or employee of those persons. 
(c)  Transportation safety standard, in addition to those imposed by the State of California, shall approved by the Chief of Police including without limitations, the type of vehicles in which cannabis or cannabis product may be distributed, and minimal qualification for persons eligible to operate such vehicles. 
(d)  A person holding a distribution certificate shall observe all security manifest, and notice requirements of Section 26070 (sections e through n, inclusive). 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
Part. G. - Enforcement 
 
3997 - Enforcement of certificates of approval; generally. 
In addition to other remedies set forth in this code, violations of this Chapter may be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors at the City Attorney's discretion and may be abated as public nuisances. The remedies provided by Sections 3997 through 3999.5 are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies. For purposes of Sections 3997 through 3999.5, violations of this Chapter include: (i) violation of the provisions of this Chapter; (ii) violation of any implementing resolution; (iii) violation of any administrative policy or procedure promulgated by the City Manager; (iv) violation of the terms and conditions of a certificate of approval, development agreement, indemnification agreement, operations plan, development permit, or other permit or agreement associated with a facility; and (v) violation of terms and conditions of a ministerial permit issued for cannabis cultivation for personal use. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3998 - City Attorney enforcement authority. 
In addition to any other general functions, powers, and duties given to the City Attorney by this code or California law, the City Attorney is authorized to: 
(a)  Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for violations of this Chapter including, without limitation, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement and suits for injunctive relief; 
(b)  Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties, forfeitures, and other money accruing to the city under this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3999 - Administrative suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Suspension or Revocation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the director may suspend or revoke a certificate of approval for the following reasons: 
(1)  Upon learning that an applicant provided false, misleading or materially incomplete information in connection with its application for a certificate of approval or discovering facts that require denial of an application for a certificate of approval under this Chapter that were not previously disclosed by the applicant; or 
(2)  Upon occurrence of a violation under this Chapter. 
(b)  Notice of Suspension or Revocation. If the director elects to suspend or revoke a certificate of approval, the director shall provide written notice of suspension or revocation to the holder of the certificate at the address of the facility. The notice shall state the basis for the suspension or revocation and provide information regarding the right to appeal. Unless the director determines there is an imminent threat to public health, safety and welfare and makes the suspension or revocation effective immediately, suspension or revocation of the certificate of approval shall not become effective until the time for filing an appeal has passed or, if an appeal is timely filed, until the city manager has rendered a final decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3999.1 - Appeal of notice of suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A notice of suspension or revocation of a certificate of approval may be appealed to the City Council, provided that a request for review (appeal) is filed with the office of the city manager within ten (10) calendar days from the date on which the written notice of suspension of revocation was mailed to the holder of the certificate. If a request for review is untimely, the City Council may, but is not required to, extend the time for commencing such review for good cause shown. 
(b)  A request for review must be on a form provided by the community development department and contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person making the request; 
(2)  A description of the decision, determination or order which is the subject of the review and the date such decision, determination or order was made or issued; 
(3)  A complete description of all grounds for making the request, together with any evidence in support of the request; and 
(4)  Such other information as may be required by the director. 
(c)  Upon receiving a timely request for review, the City Council, will schedule and conduct a de novo appeal review of the decision of the director, which shall be heard as soon as the schedule of the City Council permits, but in any event not later than twenty one (21) business days of receiving the request. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may conclude any of the following: 
(1)  The director's decision is affirmed; 
(2)  The director's decision is modified; or 
(3)  The director's decision is reversed. 
(d)  The City Council's decision may include such terms and conditions as the City Council may determine to be in the interest of public health and safety, including revocation, suspension, or continuation of a certificate of approval (with or without modification to conditions of approval). 
(e)  The City Council's decision is final. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any decision or act which is subject to appeal under the sections pertaining to cannabis businesses and/or facilities shall be appealable to the City Council after all other intervening appeals have been exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3999.2 - Right to judicial review. 
A final decision of the City Council may be judicially reviewed pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3999.3 - No new certificate after revocation. 
Should a cannabis certificate of approval be revoked, the former holder of the certificate is presumptively disqualified to apply for a new certificate of approval in accordance with this Chapter. This presumption may be overcome upon a showing of good cause as to why a certificate of approval should be issued following a revocation. Any such showing must be made to the director's satisfaction. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3999.4 - Attorney's fees in nuisance abatement action. 
If the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the abatement of the public nuisance, the city is entitled to recover its actual costs of abatement, including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in such judicial proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
3999.5 - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies provided by this Chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies including, without limitation, those set forth elsewhere in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 734, § 4, 12-18-17)  
Chapter 13 - EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY PROGRAM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 745, § 2, adopted September 17, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 4000—4003. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 3999.10—3999.13. 
 
3999.10 - Purpose. 
City of Port Hueneme desires to encourage careful and responsible conduct by operators of motor vehicle and to discourage the operation of motor vehicles by operators under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or any combination thereof; discourage the filing of false police reports that result in appropriate emergency responses; and discourage intentional wrongful operation of a motor vehicle. Negligent operation of a motor vehicle and filing of false police reports are intentional, wrongful conduct, which imposes a unique burden on City services for which those responsible should incur a share of that burden. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2, 9-17-18)  
3999.11 - Liability for costs of emergency response. 
Pursuant to the authority vested in the City by California Government Code Sections 53150—53159, any person: 
(a)  Who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, or the combined influence thereof, whose negligent operation of any motor vehicle, boat, vessel, or civil aircraft caused by that influence proximately causes any incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response, is liable for and shall pay to the City the expense of such an emergency response. 
(b)  Eighteen (18) years of age or older who is convicted of making a false police report, in violation of California Penal Code Section 148.3, and that false police report proximately causes an appropriate emergency response, is liable for and shall pay to the City the expense of such an emergency response. 
(c)  Who intentionally, knowingly, and willfully enters into any area, by any means of travel, that is closed or has been closed by competent authority for any reason, or an area that a reasonable person under the circumstances should have known was closed to the public, is liable and shall pay to the City for search and/or rescue of that person, any passengers, plus the expenses for the removal of any inoperable vehicle. 
(d)  Who drives a vehicle on a public street or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including groundwater or overflow of water, and that is barricaded by means of posting a sign, placing a barricade, a restraining or retaining wall, roping off an area, or other device, is liable and shall pay to the City for search and/or rescue of that person, any passengers, plus the expenses for the removal of any inoperable vehicle. 
(e)  Who is liable under this Section shall not incur liability for costs and expenses exceeding the maximum allowable under State statute. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2, 9-17-18)  
3999.12 - Collection of enforcement costs. 
The expense or cost of an emergency response shall be charged against the person liable for the expense or cost under this Chapter. The charge for the emergency response shall constitute a debt of the liable person, which shall be established by resolution of the City Council and is collectible in the same manner as an obligation arising out of a contract, express or implied. The parent or parents of a minor liable under Section 4001 of this Chapter shall be responsible for the debt of the minor. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2, 9-17-18)  
3999.13 - Implementation of chapter. 
The procedures for the implementation of this Chapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 2, 9-17-18)  
Article IV - PARKS, BEACHES AND COMMUNITY RECREATION FACILITIES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
4001 - Definitions. 
The following words, phrases and terms as used in this Article, shall have the meanings as indicated: 
(a)  "Beach" means all that portion of land adjacent to the Pacific Ocean within the City limits including the bicycle path and all public improvements thereon. 
(b)  "Director" as used in this Article means the Director of Recreation and Community Services of the City or other person authorized by him pursuant to law to act in his stead. 
(c)  "Vessel" means every type of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and includes a raft, but does not include a surfboard, paddle board or a standard surf mat. 
(d)  "Pier" means that certain pier owned by the City which extends into the Pacific Ocean from the Port Hueneme Beach. 
(e)  "Wharf" means all wharves owned and managed by the Port Hueneme Harbor District. 
(f)  "City parks" means all of the following: Bolker Park, Bubbling Springs Park, Beach Park, Moranda Park, Recreation Greenbelt improvements, Seaview Apartments Playground. 
(g)  "City Recreation Buildings" means all of the following: Athletic Center Facility, Community Center Facility, Dorill B. Wright Cultural Center, Ray Prueter Library, Port Hueneme Museum, Moranda Park Community Center. 
(h)  "Public Facilities" means the Pier, wharf, city parks and city recreation buildings.  
4002 - Compliance. 
No person shall enter, be or remain on any public facility unless he or she complies with all of the regulations set forth in this Chapter applicable to such and with all other applicable provisions of this Code.  
4003 - Enforcement. 
The Director and the Police Chief shall enforce the provisions of this Article. To so enforce the provisions of this Article the Director, Police Chief and their designees may issue citations in accordance with the procedures specified in Article I of this Code.  
4004 - At own risk. 
Any person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this Article does so at his or her own risk without liability on the part of the City for any injury to persons or property resulting therefrom.  
4005 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Article are not applicable to acts performed: 
(a)  In an emergency, for the purpose of protecting life or property; or 
(b)  By City, County, State or Federal employees or other public body maintaining a public facility in the course of their assigned duties; or 
(c)  When a permit has been granted by the Director or by the Council permitting the otherwise proscribed acts.  
4006 - Permit procedure. 
Any person or organization desiring a permit to conduct an activity otherwise prohibited by this Article shall file a request for a permit on a form proscribed by the Director. The Director shall respond in writing within a reasonable time if the permit request is denied. Appeals from decisions of the Director shall follow the procedures defined in Article I Chapter 4 of this Code.  
4007 - Alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall enter, be or remain on any public facility while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away or consuming any alcoholic beverages.  
4008 - Animals. 
No person shall bring, maintain, ride or lead any animal as defined in Chapter 1 of Article III of this Code, except a guide dog used by the physically handicapped, onto any sandy beach area of the City or on the seaward side of the shorefront paved pathways of Hueneme Beach Park or into the waters of the ocean. 
(Ord. 607 § C, 1996: Ord. 570, 1991)  
4009 - Disturbance. 
No person shall disturb the peace and quiet of any public facility by: 
(a)  Any unduly loud or unusual noise, or; 
(b)  By tooting, blowing, or sounding any automobile siren, horn, signal or noise-making device, or 
(c)  By any tumultuous conduct; or 
(d)  By the use of any vulgar, profane or indecent language, therein; or 
(e)  Lewd, indecent conduct.  
4010 - Fires. 
No person shall build or maintain any campfires or other fires for any purpose on any public facility, or against or adjacent thereto, or against or adjacent to any public property in the City, excepting however, that the making or kindling of fires in said public facilities shall be permitted in such places as may be designated and set apart therefor by the Council for such purposes.  
4011 - Flora and turf, etc. 
No person shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom, flower, or any portion thereof growing on or about any public facility, waterway or body of water. No person shall remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel from any public facility, waterway or body of water.  
4012 - Glass, etc. 
No person shall place, throw, leave, keep, or maintain any bottle, glass, ceramic, sharp or pointed article or thing in such a manner that any person on or about a public facility is or may be cut, pricked or in any way injured thereby.  
4013 - Littering. 
No person shall throw, place or dispose of any garbage, refuse, or can in any place on or about a public facility other than into a can or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. No person shall throw, place or dispose of any waste paper or combustible refuse in any place on a beach other than into an incinerator or into some box, can, trench or receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. 
(Amended during Supp. No. 3, 8/04)  
4014 - Solicitation or peddling. 
No person shall solicit, peddle, sell, or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in any portion of the City lying westerly of Surfside Drive except such activity occurring in the city sanctioned concession stand existing at the foot of the Pier.  
4015 - Throwing missiles. 
No person shall throw or otherwise propel any missile, mud, sand, or dirt anywhere on a public facility.  
4016 - Loitering. 
No person shall loiter on any public facility between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and dawn of the following day in a manner that is not usual for law abiding individuals under the circumstances and warrants alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity.  
4017 - Nudity on or about public facilities. 
No person shall appear, bathe, sunbathe, walk or be on any public facility or the waters adjacent thereto in such a manner that the genitals, vulva, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person, is exposed to public view or is not covered by an opaque covering. 
This section shall not apply to: 
(a)  Children under the age of five (5) years; and, 
(b)  Live theatrical performances performed in a theater, concert hall, or other similar establishment located on public land; and, 
(c)  The interior of any public restrooms or clothes changing facilities.  
4018 - Tampering with lighting system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, destroy or otherwise tamper with any electric light poles, globes, lights or other material belonging or connected with the electric lighting system of any public facility.  
4019 - Prohibited acts designated.* 
Except as specified and conditioned by Resolution of the Council, it shall be unlawful for any person within the limits or upon any portion of the public facilities or buildings of the City to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)  Cutting, breaking, injuring, defacing or disturbing any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, monument, fence, bench or other structure, apparatus, or property, or making or writing upon any building, monument, fence bench or other structure. 
(b)  Cutting or removing any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand or gravel. 
(c)  Distributing any handbills or circulars, or posting, placing or erecting any bills, notices, papers, or advertising device or matter of any kind. 
(d)  Hitching or fastening any horse or other animal, except at a place especially designated for such purpose. 
(e)  Riding or driving any horse or other animal or propelling any vehicle, cycle or automobile elsewhere than on the roads or drives provided for such purpose. 
(f)  Indulging in riotous, boisterous, threatening or profane and indecent language. 
(g)  Practicing, carrying on, conducting or soliciting for any trade, occupation, business or profession. 
(h)  Permitting or allowing any livestock to run at large within the boundaries of said public facilities and City buildings, including all such pets, animals and fowls. 
(i)  Operating of model airplanes powered by internal combustion motors between the hours of 8:00 p.m. of one day and 10:00 a.m. of the following day. Such operation is also prohibited in any place on the public facilities or City buildings or at any other place therein where it creates or may create a physical hazard to the then users of the public facilities or City buildings. 
(j)  The entering of any male person over eight years of age into any restroom for women. 
(k)  Stabling, keeping, pasturing any horse, stud, stallion, mare, gelding, colt, jack, jenny, mule, cow, bull, steer, calf, oxen, sow, boar, pig, shoat, ram, sheep, lamb, goat, kid or other animal or animals. 
(l)  Discharging any firearms, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, or other fireworks or air guns or slingshots. 
(m)  Park any vehicle in other than a designated parking space within the time and hours posted for such parking. 
(n)  Abandon or store an inoperative vehicle, of any type, at any time. 
(o)  Any person driving a vehicle within the limits of the public facilities or City buildings shall drive the same at a careful and prudent speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface and width of the roads, and in no event shall a person drive any vehicle within the limits thereof at a speed greater than the posted limits, and if not posted, 15 MPH. 
(p)  Use of bows and arrows, or pointed darts except in a program specifically sponsored by the Department of Recreation and Community Services. 
(q)  Hitting of golf balls except in a program specifically sponsored by the Department of Recreation and Community Services. 
(r)  Playing baseball with a hardball except in areas designated for such purposes or in a program specifically sponsored by the Department of Recreation and Community Services. For the purposes of this section, a hardball shall be defined as a ball similar to or as used in professional baseball as conducted by major league baseball teams. 
(s)  Playing of tackle football. 
* Section 4019 added by Ord. 570—6/19/91.  
Chapter 3 - BEACH, PARK AND OCEAN 
Sections: 
 
4201 - Scope. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply solely to the Beach Park and the Pacific Ocean adjacent thereto.  
4202 - Bathing and swimming. 
No person shall swim, bathe, or immerse himself or herself in the water of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter more than two hundred (200) yards from the shore except: 
(a)  A person who is the owner of a vessel or who acts at the request of such owner while engaged in servicing or repairing such vessel, and then only in the immediate area of such vessel. 
(b)  A person engaged in the sport commonly known as aquaplaning, water skiing, or any derivations thereof, provided that such person is at all times wearing a safety belt or jacket approved by the United States Coast Guard. 
(c)  A skin diver equipped with swim fins and a face plate if at all times he maintains within fifty (50) yards of himself a boat or a surf mat, paddle board or surf board upon which there is a rectangular flag twelve by fifteen inches wide running from one corner to the diagonally opposite corner. The flag shall be flown high enough so as not to touch the water. 
(d)  No person shall surf more than fifty (50) yards beyond the farthest breaking wave when such farthest breaking wave is more than one hundred fifty (150) yards from shore.  
4203 - Boating. 
No person shall operate any Vessel within two hundred (200) yards of the shoreline of any beach regulated by this chapter except when necessary in the case of emergency or upon special permit issued by the Council.  
4204 - Hazardous areas. 
Whenever any City lifeguard finds that because of extra high surf, riptide, or other hazardous conditions, it is unsafe for the average person to swim or bathe within a certain area of the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter, during the time such hazardous conditions exist such lifeguard may instruct all persons not to swim or bathe in such area. Every person shall comply with such instructions.  
4205 - Inflated equipment. 
No person shall use in the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter, any inflated equipment of any kind except a standard surf mat which is: 
(a)  Constructed of a durable material with a non-slippery surface. 
(b)  So constructed that, when inflated for use it will not fold in any direction. 
(c)  No smaller than twenty-four (24?) inches by forty (40?) inches. 
(d)  Not larger than thirty (30?) inches by sixty (60?) inches. 
(e)  Equipped with a safety rope.  
4206 - Motor vehicles. 
If the Director or Police Chief find that at certain times or under specified restrictions, or at designated places a person can so operate a motor vehicle so as to not interfere in any way with the use of the beach, he may grant a permit to such person so to operate such motor vehicle upon payment of a fee established by the Council under separate resolution. No person shall bring to, or operate on, the beach any motor vehicle except as permitted by the Director or the Police Chief and subject to all the conditions which are a part of such permit. If permission to operate a motor vehicle is granted, a person shall park such motor vehicle only in those areas designated by the Director or the Police Chief for parking.  
4207 - Surfboards, surfmats and paddle boards. 
(a)  No person shall use, possess or operate in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter an object commonly known as a surfboard, paddle board or similar device (but not including surfmats and belly boards) at such times when said waters are restricted for swimming and bathing only. 
Such restriction shall be effective when a yellow flag having dimensions of not less than two feet by two feet and having a solid black circle in the center (commonly known as a "blackball flag") is prominently displayed from a lifeguard tower, lifeguard station, pier or similar structure under the control of the city lifeguards. At such times as the blackball flag is displayed, swimming and bathing only shall be permitted in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite those areas of the beach within two hundred (200) yards of the point of display of said blackball flag, provided, however, that where said blackball flag is displayed from consecutive operational lifeguard towers, lifeguard stations and similar structures under the control of the city lifeguards along beach regulated by this Chapter then all waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite said beach shall be restricted to swimming and bathing only. 
Such restrictions shall also be shown by pairs of red flags put in place by any city lifeguard. At such times as such red flags are displayed, swimming and bathing only shall be permitted in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite those areas of the beach lying between a given pair of such red flags. 
(b)  No person shall use, possess or operate in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this chapter any object commonly known as a surfmat, paddle board, belly board, surfboard or similar device except within two hundred (200) yards from shore or seventy-five (75) yards seaward of the point at which the average wave is breaking, whichever distance is greater or when used by a skin diver to hold a flag required by section 4202(c). 
(c)  No person shall bring or permit or allow in the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter any object commonly known as, or used as, a paddle board or surfboard, within one hundred (100) feet of any person in the waters thereof who was not at the time using or possessing a similar object. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section, the Director may from time to time designate certain areas to be used exclusively by persons using surfboards and paddle boards. Such designation may be evoked at any time and the area covered by such designation may be enlarged or reduced at any time. No person shall swim or bathe in the waters of the Pacific Ocean included in an area so designated except while using a surfboard or paddle board or as is necessary in order to use a surfboard. 
(e)  A person in violation of the restrictions set forth in this section shall not fail, refuse or neglect to leave the waters of the Pacific Ocean opposite any beach regulated by this Chapter when such restrictions are in force.  
4208 - Surf fishing. 
A person fishing with any fishing tackle, line, hook or other equipment from the shore, strand or beach or from or in the surf within the City shall at all times, while he is so doing, have due regard for the safety of other persons near or in the vicinity of such person so fishing.  
4209 - Jet ski and other water vehicles. 
Within the limits of the public beach of the City, it shall be unlawful for any persons or person to use, operate, or launch any jet ski, jet boat, or self propelled water ski or any similar motor-driven water vehicle within two hundred yards from shore.  
Chapter 4 - PIER AND WHARF 
Sections: 
 
4301 - Wheeled vehicles. 
No person shall ride, push or pull any wheeled vehicle on the Pier except for wheeled vehicles designed and used to assist handicapped or disabled persons.  
4302 - Dropping refuse from pier or wharf. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drop, sweep, brush, cast or throw any paper, litter, garbage or debris of any kind or nature whatsoever from the pier or any part thereof, into the waters of the Pacific Ocean or onto the beach under or adjacent to the pier or wharf.  
4303 - Refuse on pier or wharf. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any paper, fish, fish bait, clam shells or the remnants from cleaning any fish or any other debris of any kind or character upon the wharf or pier. Every person bringing the same or any luncheon, or any fish bait or tackle upon the pier or wharf shall keep the same in a receptacle or package, and when leaving the pier or wharf, shall remove the same from the pier or wharf and leave thereon no litter or debris of any kind.  
4304 - Defacing pier or wharf. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to write, cut, mark, stain, remove or otherwise deface any portion of the pier or wharf or any building or attachment thereon.  
4305 - Tampering with life saving equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to unwind, remove or in any way tamper with any lifeguard tower, storage facility, buoy, life line, rope, reel, or other paraphernalia connected with any life saving apparatus on the pier unless it is to use the same for the purposes for which they are intended and only for the purpose of attempting to rescue or save any person in actual or apparent danger.  
4306 - Fishing on the pier. 
The following rules apply to fishing from the pier: 
(a)  No person shall cut any bait or fish upon any bench upon the pier. 
(b)  No person shall cast a line with any weight, and/or hook, and/or bait attached thereto by swinging the same above the railing on the pier or by swinging or casting a line overhead or sidearmed from a pole or from the hands. 
(c)  No person shall set, draw or use any fishing net or seine in the Pacific Ocean for purpose of catching fish at a point or place within five hundred (500) feet of the pier.  
4307 - Mooring at pier. 
No person shall attach any boat or line to the pier except by permit of the Director.  
4308 - Meddling with pier. 
No person except those authorized by the Director shall remove mussels or in any way meddle with the pilings or any other portion of the pier.  
4309 - Surfing and scuba diving. 
No person shall swim, operate or otherwise use a surfboard, skin dive or use self-contained breathing apparatus within an area of one hundred (100) feet of the pier without first obtaining permission from the Director.  
4310 - Jumping from pier. 
No person shall jump, dive, or throw himself or herself from the City of Port Hueneme pier into the Pacific Ocean unless required by an emergency to do so.  
Article V - TAXES—BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - BUSINESS LICENSES 
Sections:  
Part A. - General 
 
5001 - Short title. 
This Chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Business License Code" of the City.  
5002 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to prescribe a schedule of Business License Taxes, for revenue purposes only, for all businesses located within the City, in the amounts and manner as set forth hereinafter.  
5003 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter certain words and phrases shall be defined as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
(a)  "Amusement Device" means any self-service device or machine available for public use which, upon insertion of coins or tokens, will operate such machine or device which is designed and used for sport, fun, contest or entertainment; 
(b)  "Business" means the conduct of any enterprise, trade, calling, vocation, profession or occupation located within the City, or any other means of livelihood carried on within the City, whether or not the same has a fixed place of business in the City; 
(c)  "Business License" means a business license required hereunder for conducting a Business in the City; 
(d)  "Business by Vehicle" means the business of operating any motor vehicle, wagon, or any other vehicle for the purpose of transporting, selling or repairing of goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of any kind, from such vehicle, or the purpose of soliciting for work, labor or services, to be performed at a residence or place of business of the consumer, or to be performed upon goods, wares, merchandise or other personal property of such consumer, which are to be taken for such purpose to a plant or establishment inside or outside of the City. Business by Vehicle shall not be deemed to include the delivery or pickup of goods, wares or merchandise as an incident to the conduct of another Business; 
(e)  "Business License Tax" means a business license tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter by reason of the conduct of business within the City; 
(f)  "Chief" means the Police Chief of City, or his or her authorized deputy; 
(g)  "Coin" means any coin of the United States, or a slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other similar device; 
(h)  "Conduct" means, and includes, the conducting, managing or carrying on of a business in any capacity; 
(i)  "Contractor" means any person licensed, or required to be licensed, as such, by virtue of the provisions of the Business and Professions Code of the State; 
(j)  "Gross Receipts" means, and includes, 
(1)  The total amount received as and for the sale price of all goods, wares and merchandise sold and/or the total amount charged and received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such act, service or employment is done as part of or in connection with the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise or the rendition of personal services. Included in Gross Receipts shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the property sold, the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses whatsoever attributable to sale activities or personal services; 
(2)  A Business established outside the City but maintaining a branch office within the City, or doing business within the City through an agent, broker or employee, gross receipts means its total sales or receipts attributable to the local branch office, local agent, broker or employee; 
(3)  In the event separate sales or receipts records are not maintained for said branch office, local agent, broker or employee or that the business of said branch office agent, broker or employee within the City is that of performing essentially administrative functions in connection with sales or services performed or rendered elsewhere, Gross Receipts means an amount equivalent to a volume of business computed as the total cost of maintaining said local branch office, agent, broker or employee. The amount so computed shall include but not be limited to wages, salaries, commissions, bonuses, office rent, telephone, postage, utilities, janitorial and other expenses allocated for maintenance of said branch office, agent, broker or employee; 
(4)  Whenever there are no Gross Receipts because the manufacturing or distribution process conducted within the City does not generate sales, Gross Receipts shall be the total of all operating expenses incurred in the local business, including but not limited to payroll, utilities, rent, depreciation, etc. 
(k)  "Itinerant Vendor" means the same as Peddler; 
(l)  "License" means a Business License issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter; 
(m)  "Licensee" means a person holding a valid business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter; 
(n)  "License Officer" means the Finance Director of the City or, his or her designee, whose duty is to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and who acts as the enforcement officer for purposes of Article I, Chapter 4; 
(o)  "Mechanical Amusement Device" means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug or token in any slot or receptacle attached to said machine or connected therewith, operates or which may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement, or for the dispensing of music, or which may be used for any such game, contest, amusement or music, and which does not contain a payoff device for the return of slugs, money, coins, checks, tokens, or merchandise; mechanical amusement device shall also mean the use of any microscope, phonograph or any kinetoscope, giograph, projectoscope or other instrument or machine of like character, lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, weighing machine, ball, knife or ring throwing, and all devices or contraptions of a similar nature. Each such device or contraption shall be considered and licensed as a separate business; 
(p)  "Peddler" means any person who goes from house to house, place to place, or in or along the streets within the City selling or making immediate delivery, or offering for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, or merchandise or anything of value, in possession of the peddler, or, offering to perform, personal services, to persons other than manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers or retailers in such commodities; 
(q)  "Premises" means all land, buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances connected with, or used in, conducting any business; 
(r)  "Solicitor" means any person who engages in the business of going from house to house, place to place in or along the streets within the City, selling or taking orders for goods, wares or merchandise, other things of value for future delivery, or for services to be performed in the future; 
(s)  "Vending Machine" shall include any self-service device or machine available for public use which, upon insertion of coins or tokens, will dispense a service, food, drink or other type of merchandise.  
5004 - Substitute for other revenue ordinances. 
Persons required to pay a tax pursuant hereto shall not be relieved from the payment of any tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other applicable law. Such persons shall remain subject to all other applicable regulatory provisions of other applicable laws and provisions of this Code, except as hereinafter expressly provided.  
5005 - Effect of chapter on past actions. 
Neither the adoption of this Chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other law of the City, shall, in any manner, be construed to affect the pending prosecution for the violation of any other such law committed prior to the effective date hereof; nor shall the same be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation; nor shall the same be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit or tax imposed, whether or not paid, required by any other such law.  
5006 - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exemption. Licenses shall be issued, but no tax shall be required, for, of or from, the following: 
(1)  Those persons engaged in a business exempted from the payment of a tax imposed by the provisions hereof, by virtue of the Constitution and the laws of this State or of the United States; nor 
(2)  Any institution or organization which conducts a business wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious, educational or benevolent purposes and from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person; nor 
(3)  Any employee or direct agent of a Licensee conducting the Business of such Licensee; nor 
(4)  To conduct a sale at public auction of articles of personal property which is conducted pursuant to a judicial order therefor; nor 
(5)  A disabled war veteran engaged in business as a Peddler; nor 
(6)  Farmers, poultrymen and horticulturists in the business of selling exclusively their own produce. This exemption shall not apply to nurseries or other commercial establishments who buy goods for resale as well as selling their own produce; nor 
(7)  Home occupations when accumulated gross receipts are less than five hundred dollars ($500) per year. 
(b)  Procedure. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the License Officer stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed. The License Officer, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, shall issue a License to such person claiming exemption under the relevant subdivision of this section, without payment to City of the tax required by this Chapter. 
(c)  Burden of Proof. The burden of proof in all cases, shall be upon the applicant to establish, pursuant to the provisions hereof, a valid basis for the exemption for the payment of a tax imposed by this Chapter. 
A party may appeal an adverse decision of the License Officer under the provisions of this Chapter in the manner provided for in Article I, Chapter 4. 
Nothing in this section, or any subsection hereof, shall exempt any person from complying with any other provision of this code or resolution enacted under authority of this Code.  
5007 - Business violating law. 
The issuance of a License pursuant to this Chapter shall not entitle the Licensee or permittee to engage in any business or other activity in violation of any applicable law.  
5008 - License non-transferable. 
No License issued hereunder shall be transferred or assigned, nor shall such be construed as authorizing any person other than the licensee to engage in the licensed business, except as herein expressly provided.  
5009 - Mistake in amount. 
In no event shall any mistake made by the License Officer in stating the amount of the tax or in receiving such tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the City of the amount of tax actually due, together with any penalty applicable thereto, and all costs of collection, from any person for conducting any business activity without a License or for refusing to pay the taxes specified herein. Persons who make overpayments, erroneous or duplicate payments shall be reimbursed upon approval of the City Manager.  
5010 - Penalties for failure to pay tax when due. 
For failure to pay a tax when due, the License Officer shall add a penalty of ten percent (10%) or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is greater, of the amount of such tax on the last calendar day of each month after the due date thereof. In no event, shall any penalty imposed hereunder exceed an amount equal to one hundred percent (100%) of such tax.  
5011 - License tax considered debt. 
The amount of any tax, penalty, and/or any other fees imposed hereunder shall be deemed to be a civil debt to the City. Any person carrying on Business without first having obtained a Business License from the City, shall be liable to City for an amount equal to the amount of such tax, penalty and filing and processing fee, if any, together with all appropriate costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, if litigation is reasonably required to collect the same.  
5012 - Civil action authorized for failure to pay license tax. 
All amounts due and unpaid, as and for business license taxes and/or penalties, and all reasonable costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, shall be collectable in civil actions filed in the name of the City. All remedies prescribed or permitted by law shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof.  
5013 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the penalty therefor, as set forth in Article I hereof. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which a portion of which a violation of the provisions of this Chapter is committed, continued, or permitted to be continued, by such person.  
5014 - Enforcement authority. 
The License Officer and any City police officer shall have, and may exercise, the authority to enter, free of charge, at any time, any place of business for which a License is required hereunder, and to demand the exhibition of a current License by any person engaged or employed in the transaction of such business. Failure to exhibit such License upon demand shall be deemed to be a violation of the provisions of this Chapter.  
5015 - Conviction, effect on debt. 
The conviction and punishment of any person having engaged in Business without a License, as required by this Chapter, shall not excuse or exempt such person from compliance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
Part B. - License Procedure 
 
5016 - License required. 
No person shall engage in, or conduct, any Business in the City without first paying the Business License Tax for such Business, in the amounts hereinafter set forth, and obtaining the License therefor, except that no person who is an employee or who is the direct representative of a licensee shall be required to obtain such License or pay such tax for the doing of any work in the Business of such licensee.  
5017 - Separate business. 
Separate Business Licenses shall be obtained, and the required fees paid therefor, for each branch or separate place of business which is a part of any business licensed, or required to be licensed hereunder.  
5018 - Transfer of licenses. 
No License issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be transferable except as herein provided: 
(a)  Change in Location. Where a License is issued to a person at a particular place, such License may, upon application therefor, and upon payment of a filing and processing fee in the sum of five dollars ($5.00), be amended so as to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such Business under said License at a different location. 
(b)  Sale of Business. Where a Business is sold, the License for such Business may be amended upon the payment of a five dollar ($5.00) filing and processing fee by the new owner, and such new owner or transferee shall be entitled to credit for any License taxes paid by his predecessor.  
5019 - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate License shall be issued by the License Officer to replace any License previously issued thereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the Licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and the payment of a filing and processing fee in the sum of five dollars ($5.00).  
5020 - Posting and keeping licenses. 
All Licenses shall be kept by the Licensee conspicuously posted and located on the premises utilized by the Licensee. Any Licensee transacting and carrying on Business, but not operating at a fixed place of business in the City, shall keep the License upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such Business. Any Licensee to whom a License has been issued for the operation of a wheeled vehicle shall be issued, at the option of the License Officer, in addition to the License certificate, a paper or metal license device, as prescribed by the City Manager. Said device shall at all times during the effective dates thereof be affixed to the vehicle in a location open to public view.  
5021 - Application—Contents of license. 
Every person required to have a License under the provisions of this Chapter shall make an application therefor, in a form prescribed by the City Manager, to the License Officer of the City. Upon the payment of the prescribed tax therefor, the License Officer shall issue to such person a License which shall contain: 
(a)  The name of the person to whom the License is issued; 
(b)  The Business licensed; 
(c)  The place where such Business is to be transacted and carried on; 
(d)  The date of the expiration of such License; and 
(e)  Such other information as may be deemed necessary.  
5022 - Statement of gross receipts. 
In all cases where the amount of Business License Tax to be paid by any person is based upon the amount of Gross Receipts, such person shall, before obtaining a License, render to the License Officer for his guidance, a written statement showing the total amount of Gross Receipts, or facts upon which the License Officer may determine the License tax, based upon Gross Receipts. Such statement shall be filed within ten (10) days of the commencement of such Business, or within five (5) days after written notice so to do given to such person by the License Officer. 
All statements filed pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection. It shall be the duty of the License Officer to preserve and keep such statements so that the contents thereof may not become known to any unauthorized person. The filing of a false statement hereunder shall be deemed to be a violation of this Code. 
Such statements shall not be conclusive upon the City or upon any officer thereof as to the matters set forth therein, and the same shall not prejudice the rights of the City to recover any amount that might be ascertained to be actually due from such person. The correctness of all such statements shall be subject to verification by the License Officer of the City who is hereby authorized and empowered to inspect and audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed to carry on any business in this City for which a tax based upon gross receipts is imposed. 
If any person fails to file any required statement or application within the prescribed time, the License Officer shall assess an estimated tax, the minimum amount of which shall be in the sum of $100.00. Thereafter, the License Officer shall take the steps necessary to ascertain the correct amount of the tax actually due, which, in any event, shall not be less than $100.00, plus any applicable penalties. The License Officer shall give the person conducting such Business written notice of the determination made pursuant hereto, which determination shall be final and conclusive, unless within ten (10) days after the mailing of such notice, such person files with the License Officer a written statement showing good cause. "Good cause" for the purpose of this section, means mistake, inadvertence, surprise or excusable neglect resulting in a failure to timely file such statement. If good cause is shown, the License Officer shall permit the late filing of such statement.  
5023 - License taxes based on gross receipts—How and when payable. 
(a)  Those Businesses which begin business for the first time shall pay a minimum tax of $100.00 during the first tax year of their business operations or portion thereof. 
(b)  During the second tax year the Businesses mentioned above shall pay a Business License Tax based upon Gross Receipts. The Gross Receipts shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The total Gross Receipts earned during the first tax year of its Business operations shall be divided by the months of Business operation to obtain an average monthly Gross Receipts. 
(2)  The average monthly Gross Receipts shall be multiplied by twelve (12) to obtain the yearly Gross Receipts that shall be reported on the Gross Receipts statement. 
(3)  The tax shall be paid on that computed yearly Gross Receipts. 
(c)  During the third and following years the tax will be based upon the total Gross Receipts earned during the previous year.  
5024 - Annual licenses—term. 
Annual Licenses shall be valid for one (1) year beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30 of the next succeeding calendar year.  
5025 - Annual license taxes—When payable. 
All annual License taxes, other than such taxes based upon Gross Receipts imposed hereunder, shall be due and payable in lawful money of the United States, in advance, on the first day of July of each year. Any person doing business for less than the full year, and for which Business an annual License tax is required, shall pay the amount of the License tax for a full year except that the tax for any such License for a new Business issued on or after the first of July of any year for the remainder of such License year for the conduct of such Business shall be prorated from the date of issue.  
5026 - Other license fees—How and when payable. 
Except as otherwise herein provided, License tax fees, other than annual, and other than those based upon Gross Receipts imposed hereunder, shall not be prorated and shall be due and payable in advance in lawful money of the United States, as follows: 
(a)  Quarterly License taxes on the first day of October, January, April, and July of each year; such taxes shall be delinquent on the tenth (10th) day after the same are due; 
(b)  Monthly License taxes on the first day of each and every calendar month; such taxes shall be delinquent on the fifth (5th) day after the same date due; 
(c)  Weekly License taxes on Monday of each week; such taxes shall be delinquent the day following the due date thereof; 
(d)  Daily License taxes each day in advance; such taxes shall be delinquent the day following the due date thereof. 
No License shall be issued or authorized for any period of time other than those provided in this Chapter.  
5027 - Identification of machines required. 
The owner and/or the operator of a mechanical, amusement or vending machine which dispenses a product or renders a service must affix in a conspicuous place on the same a permanent identification plate stating the name of the owner and/or operator, his address and his telephone number. 
(a)  Concurrently with the issuance of a Business License for a mechanical amusement device and/or vending machine, the License Officer may issue at his option and furnish an identification card or device, as prescribed by the City Manager, for each such machine so licensed, which shall not be transferable. Such identification card or device shall be and remain attached to said device or machine at all times. Such identification cards or devices shall be issued by the License Officer for new or replacement machines upon the payment of a filing and processing fee of two dollars ($2.00) each. Such identification devices shall be valid so long as a License allowing such Business is in full force and effect. 
(b)  Each person owning or operating either mechanical amusement devices or vending machines, shall file with the License Officer a complete list of all such machines or devices owned by him or under his control and operated within the City, including the kind of machine or device, its serial number, the location where each machine or device is to be operated, and such other information as the License Officer deems necessary upon a form provided by the License Officer. The owner, or person in control of the Business establishment, wherein the machine or device is located, shall be responsible for the full amount of the Business License Tax, together with penalties and other fees, required hereunder if the owner of the machine or device has not paid the same. 
(c)  Licenses shall be issued for each machine but only for one specific location within the City. If a machine is to be moved, a new License must be obtained and a transfer fee of two dollars ($2.00) must be paid.  
5028 - Sealing machines. 
The License Officer shall seal the coin opening or slots in a manner which will render inoperative the coin operating device upon any vending machine or any mechanical amusement device which is available to the public for operation, and to which no City identification card or device is attached, as required by this Code. 
A filing and processing fee in the amount of five dollars ($5.00) shall be paid to the License Officer by the owner or operator of any such vending machine or mechanical amusement device so sealed for the removal of any such seal. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any machine so sealed without first submitting evidence to the License Officer that a valid Business License is in effect and that the filing and processing fee has been paid. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the License Officer to break or remove any such seal or remove the machine from the premises while the seal is on the machine.  
5029 - Administrative regulations. 
The City Manager shall promulgate administrative regulations for Business License procedures and definitions not specifically provided for in this Chapter.  
5030 - The hours during which certain business activities may be conducted. 
Any person holding a Business License issued by the City pursuant to subsections (e) or (j) or (w), of Section 5031 of this Code, which License or Licenses authorize the conduct of a Business by Vehicle, a Peddler, a Solicitor or a Itinerant Vendor, or the distribution pursuant to said License shall only conduct such Business between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 6 P.M. of any calendar day. The purpose of the regulation imposed by this section is to secure the security and safety of the residents of the City and the integrity of residential areas of the City.  
Part C. - Business License Tax Administration Fee Schedules  
Division 1. - Fixed Taxes and Fees 
 
5031 - Fixed fees—Business license taxes. 
The following businesses shall be required to pay, as and for Business License Taxes, the amounts hereinafter set forth in this section. 
(a) Retail, Wholesale, Service Without Fixed Place of Business 	
1 Vehicle 	70.00 
Fleet Permit 	350.00 
(b) Professions, Occupations and Services 	
(1) Professional Person 	75.00 
(2) Professional Employee 	15.00 
(3) Non-Professional Employee 	3.00 
(c) Contractors 	
(1) General Classification 	100.00 
(2) Sub-Contractors Classification 	75.00 
(d) Licensed Real Estate Broker and Salesman 	
(1) Broker 	75.00 
(2) Salesman 	20.00 
(e) Hawkers, Peddlers, Street Vendors 	
(1) $22.50/Daily; $52.50/Weekly; $112.50/Monthly; $150.00/Quarterly; $225.00/Annually 	(1) 
(2) Investigation and Permit 	current fee as set by Council resolution 
(3) Peddlers in Interstate Business 
$7.50/Daily; $15.00/Weekly; $22.50/Monthly; $45.00/Quarterly; $112.50/Annually 	(3) 
(4) Investigation and Permit 	current fee, as set by Council resolution 
(f) Itinerant Merchant 	
(1) $15.00/Daily; $30.00/Weekly; $45.00/Monthly; $60.00/Quarterly; $75.00/180 days 	(1) 
(g) Telephone Solicitation 	
(1) Schedule 3.04.320 	(1) 
(2) $22.50/Daily; $52.50/weekly; $112.50/monthly; 	(1) 
(3) Investigation and permit 	15.00 
(h) Circuses, Carnivals, Animal Exhibits, Shows, etc. 
(1) Daily License 	200.00 
(i) Dances 	
(1) Annual Rate 	450.00 
(2) Investigation 	current fee as set by Council resolution 
(j) Fortune Tellers 	
(1) Annual Rate 	450.00 
(2) Investigation 	current fee as set by Council resolution 
(k) Pool Halls 	
(1) Annual Rate 	100.00 
(2) Plus per table 	10.00 
(l) Theaters 	
(1) Annual to 500 seats 	100.00 
(2) Excess of 500 seats 	150.00 
(m) Auctioneers 	
(1) Annual Rate 	200.00 
(2) Daily Rate 	40.00 
(n) Rental Business 	
(1) First 4 units 	105.00 
(2) Each additional unit excess of 4 	6.00 
(o) Money Lenders and Pawn Shops 
(1) Annual License 	105.00 
(p) Coin Operated Amusement Devices 	
(1) Annual/each device 	30.00 
(2) Hospital radios or televisions 	3.00 
(3) Devices used with other business license, each machine 	15.00 
(q) Arcade 	
(1) Annual/each machine 	75.00 
(r) Mechanical Amusement Rides 	
(1) Annual License Tax 	35.00 
(2) Each ride 	8.00 
(s) Outdoor Advertising 	
(1) Annual License 	105.00 
(t) Home Occupations/Garage Sales 	
(1) Annual Home Occupation License Garage Sales 	45.00 
(2) Garage Sales/2 day permit 	10.00 
(u) Public Utilities 	
(1) Annual Flat Rate Fee with Fixed Place of Business 	50.00 
Plus Employee Tax 	
1-10 Employees each 	3.00 
11-20 	2.00 
Excess of 20 	1.00 
(2) Annual Vehicle Fee if no Fixed Place of Business 	
Each Vehicle, Annually 	50.00 
Fleet Permit, Annually 	375.00 
(v) Bus Lines 	
(1) Annual License 	100.00 
  
Division 2. - Variable Taxes 
 
5032 - Business license taxes—Gross receipts. 
Each person engaged in a Business which is not taxed pursuant to Section 5031 et seq. hereof shall pay a Business License Tax based upon the Gross Receipts of such Business in accordance with the following schedule. 
ANNUAL GROSS 
RECEIPTS 	LICENSE FEE 
$ 000 to $ 200,000 	$ 15.00 or 1.50/1,000 whichever is greater 
200,001 to 300,000 	300.00 plus 1.40/1,000 over 200,000 
300,001 to 400,000 	440.00 plus 1.00/1,000 over 300,000 
400,001 to 500,000 	540.00 plus .95/1,000 over 400,000 
500,001 to 750,000 	635.00 plus .90/1,000 over 500,000 
750,001 to 1,000,000 	860.00 plus .88/1,000 over 750,000 
1,000,001 to 2,000,000 	1,080.00 plus .86/1,000 over 1,000,000 
2,000,001 to 3,000,000 	1,940.00 plus .84/1,000 over 2,000,000 
3,000,001 to 5,000,000 	2,780.00 plus .71/1,000 over 3,000,000 
5,000,000 Plus 	4,200.00 plus .60/1,000 over 5,000,000 
  
Chapter 2 - BUSINESS PERMITS 
Sections:  
Part A. - Procedure 
 
5100 - Permit required. 
The businesses and activities designated in this Chapter are of such unique character as to require that each of the same be specifically regulated in the manner provided in this Chapter. No person shall operate or conduct, or allow the operation or conducting of, any of the said businesses or activities without first obtaining a permit therefor, in the manner prescribed in this Chapter.  
5101 - Applications. 
Any person required to obtain a permit pursuant to this Chapter shall file a written application therefor with the License Officer. Written application forms for such permits shall be prepared by the License Officer which shall require thereon such information as is deemed necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
5102 - Application investigation. 
The License Officer, upon receipt of a written application for a permit, shall conduct an appropriate investigation to determine whether said permit or the business involved in said permit should be issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter as hereinafter set forth. The License Officer may consider any relevant factual material, including, but not limited to, the character and reputation of the applicant and/or other persons who will be involved in the conduct of the operation allowed by such permit, if issued.  
5103 - Issuance of permit. 
The License Officer shall issue a permit required by this Chapter only if: 
(a)  A written application therefor has been filed; and 
(b)  The required filing and processing fee therefor has been paid; and 
(c)  The License Officer finds, as a result of an investigation, that all applicable provisions of this Code with regard to such permit application have, or will be, met. 
The License Officer may condition any permit issued so as to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. The action of the License Officer with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance or denial of a permit shall be final and conclusive in the absence of the perfecting of an appeal from such decision in the manner hereinafter set forth.  
5104 - Notice of decision. 
Within ten (10) days after reaching a determination with reference to a permit application, or suspension of a permit, the License Officer shall give written notice of his decision to the applicant and to any other person requesting such notice.  
5105 - Appeal. 
Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the License Officer may appeal such decision by following the procedures set forth in Article I, Chapter 4. There shall be a filing and processing fee of $50.00 for appeals taken under this section.  
5106 - Suspension. 
The License Officer shall suspend any permit issued hereunder if he finds that the permittee or such permittee's agents and/or employees, have been, or are violating any condition of approval imposed upon such permit; violating any provision of this Part, or other applicable law; or that the continued operations under the permit would endanger, jeopardize or disrupt the public peace, safety, health or general welfare; or any other cause, as set forth in this Chapter. 
The determination of the License Officer with regard to matters of suspension shall be appealable in the manner set forth in Section 5105 hereof. 
The License Officer, in the case of such suspension, shall serve the permittee with a written Order of Suspension which shall state the reasons for such suspension. The said order shall be effective immediately upon the same having been personally served, or forty-eight (48) hours after the same has been deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Mail. 
Immediately upon such an order becoming effective, the permittee shall cease all operations under such permit. 
The order of suspension shall be deemed a revocation of a permit unless the permittee, within fifteen (15) days after personal service of such Order, or fifteen (15) days after the said order is deposited in the course of transmission in the United States Mail, perfects an appeal from said order, in the manner prescribed in Article I, Chapter 4.  
5107 - Posting and exhibiting permits. 
Permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be posted on the premises where the business or enterprise for which the permit is issued is conducted and shall remain so posted during the period the permit shall be in force. 
Any permit issued to a person who goes from place to place within the City for the purpose of carrying on the business or activity as so permitted shall be carried by him at all times, and he shall exhibit the same upon request therefor.  
5108 - Duration. 
Permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid until revoked or abandoned.  
5109 - Transfer. 
No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter.  
Part B. - Fortune-telling 
 
5110 - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in the business or art of fortune-telling without first having obtained a permit therefor, pursuant to the provisions of this Part.  
5111 - Background investigation. 
Upon receipt of a written application for a permit, the Police Chief shall conduct a background identification investigation. The Chief shall issue such permits as requested, unless, as a result of such investigation, it is determined that the applicant or any person, including, but not limited to, any employee, who will be directly engaged or employed in the fortune-telling business, has suffered a final conviction, within the past five (5) years, of a crime involving moral turpitude.  
5112 - Fee. 
The applicant shall pay to the City a one hundred dollar ($100.00) filing and processing fee contemporaneously with the filing of each application for a new permit and for a renewal of a permit.  
5113 - Duration of permits. 
The permit issued pursuant to Section 5110 shall be valid for one (1) year following the date of issuance. The Chief shall conduct annual background investigations in the manner provided in Section 5111 and Section 5112. Permits shall be issued unless the applicant has suffered a final conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.  
5114 - Permits nontransferable. 
Permits issued for the operation of a fortune-telling business shall be nontransferable.  
5115 - Location of business. 
No person shall operate a fortune-telling business within three hundred (300) feet from a lot upon which another fortune-telling business, or an advertisement, defined as such in the Zoning Regulations, is located.  
5116 - Minors. 
No person shall offer, sell or give, or assist in the offering, selling, or giving, of any fortune-telling service to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless the parent or guardian of such minor person has consented thereto in writing.  
5117 - Posting of fees. 
Each person engaged in fortune-telling shall post on his or her business permit a sign containing the following information: 
(a)  That true name of the fortune-telling practitioner; 
(b)  Each service provided by the fortune-telling practitioner; 
(c)  The fees charged for each service provided by the fortune-telling practitioner; 
(d)  The statement, "By law, this business is prohibited from charging or soliciting any fee, payment or remuneration in excess of the rates set forth herein." 
The sign required by this section shall be prominently posted in the interior of the business premises at a location conspicuously visible to every person entering the premises. The sign lettering shall be of uniform size with each letter and number at least one-half (½) inch in height. 
No person shall charge any fee, payment, remuneration or item of value for fortune-telling services in excess of the rates or fees set forth on the sign required by this section.  
Part C. - Patio, Garage and Yard Sales 
 
5118 - License—Required. 
(a)  No person shall conduct a patio, garage or yard sale unless they first obtain a license therefor. 
(b)  A "patio, garage and/or yard sale" for the purpose of this chapter means a sale of personal property held at a private residence by the owner, owners, tenants or occupants thereof, and is limited to the sale of property owned exclusively by those conducting such sale.  
5119 - License—Application. 
No license to conduct a patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be granted except upon written application to the License Officer made at least one day prior to the date of the sale. Each application shall set forth and contain the following: 
(a)  The name of the licensee and address of the licensee; 
(b)  The date of the sale and hours of the sale; and 
(c)  The general description of the type of merchandise to be sold and the prices.  
5120 - License—Fee. 
All license fees specified in Section 5031 shall be paid prior to the issuance of a license under this part.  
5121 - Sales—Frequency and duration. 
No person shall conduct a garage and/or yard sale at any location more frequently than twice per calendar year, nor shall any such sale be conducted for a period in excess of two consecutive days.  
5122 - Inspection by police department. 
All goods, products and merchandise offered for sale at a patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be made available for inspection by any representative of the Police Chief at the place where the sale is to be conducted, and, if requested by the representative, the person conducting the sale shall establish evidence of title to the goods, products and merchandise offered for sale.  
5123 - Advertising. 
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, no sign, placard or other form of advertisement of patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be placed upon any property within the City. No sign, placard or other form of advertisement shall be placed upon the premises where the sale is to be conducted more than two days prior to the day the sale is to commence, and shall be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the day the sale terminated. No more than two signs, placards or other form of advertisement shall be placed upon the premises used for such sale, and shall not exceed three square feet in size.  
5124 - Hours of sale. 
No patio, garage and/or yard sale shall be commenced prior to 8:00 a.m. and conclude each day no later than 6:00 p.m.  
Part D. - Charitable—Religious Solicitation Permits 
 
5125 - Charitable—Religious solicitations—Permit required. 
No person, without having first obtained a permit therefor, as provided in this Part, shall make any appeal to members of the public for a charitable or religious purpose, either by soliciting or collecting tithes, contributions, donations or subscriptions, or by promoting or conducting any sale, bazaar or exhibition or by any other means, at any place or to any person within the City. No filing or processing fee shall be required pursuant to this Part.  
5126 - Tickets. 
No person, without having first obtained a permit therefor, as provided in this Part, shall sell or solicit for, or on behalf of, any person for the sale of any ticket or right to admission to any amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise not regularly carried on for private profit or gain by any person at a fixed place of business in the City, or solicit any contribution or gift in connection with such amusement, show, entertainment, lecture or other enterprise, where such sale or solicitation is for other than a charitable purpose and is made to persons other than the bona fide members of the firm, association or corporation, causing such solicitation or sale, or for or on whose behalf such solicitation or same is made and where in connection with any such amusement, show, entertainment, lecture, or other enterprise, it is represented, advertised, held out, implied, or made to appear that such sale, solicitation, contribution or gift or any part of the proceeds therefrom shall belong to or be devoted or used for the benefit of any person, firm, association or corporation.  
5127 - Exemption. 
No permit shall be required for any of the acts or activities described in Sections 5125 and 5126 hereof by the members of any religious or charitable organization which has been in existence and which regularly has maintained a headquarters or a place of worship, in the City for a period of at least one (1) year next preceding the date on which such activity is proposed to be commenced; provided that the License Officer has issued a permit authorizing the acts or activities described in Sections 5125 and 5126 hereof of such organization. Permits issued to organizations as described in this section shall be valid until revoked.  
5128 - Solicitation by mail or telephone. 
No permit shall be required for any solicitation carried on exclusively by the United States Mail or by telephone.  
5129 - Permits—Issuance—Denial—Suspension. 
The License Officer shall consider the application and other relevant information obtained by him as a result of his investigation. If he finds that the applicant has not stated true facts in the application, or that if a permit were to be granted to the applicant, a fraud, in all probability, would be perpetrated upon members of the general public, he shall refuse to issue such permit. If he finds that the application is truthful, that the applicant is acting in good faith, and that, in all probability, a fraud would not be so perpetrated, he shall issue the permit to the applicant for a period of time, as requested by the applicant, not to exceed a period of ninety (90) days from and after the issuance of such permit. 
The License Officer shall suspend any permit issued hereunder if he finds that the permittee in its operation is, in fact, perpetrating a fraud upon members of the general public. The provisions of Article I, Chapter 4 hereof shall apply to actions of the License Officer taken hereunder.  
Part E. - Temporary Use Permits 
 
5130 - Temporary use permits. 
A Temporary Use Permit shall be required for each of the activities enumerated in Section 5131 and all activities which are similar or related thereto, except those activities sponsored by the City or other public agency. Said activities, being temporary in nature, possess characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their operation without specific approval, upon such conditions as may be deemed appropriate, in the manner hereinafter set forth in this Part.  
5131 - Activities included. 
No person shall sponsor, participate or engage in any of the following enumerated activities without first obtaining a Temporary Use Permit therefor issued by the License Officer: 
(a)  Circuses. 
(b)  Carnivals. 
(c)  Fairs. 
(d)  Temporary outdoor exhibits of equipment, goods or merchandise, except for the outdoor sale of Christmas trees conducted as an integral part of a business for which a valid license has been issued. 
(e)  Aircraft and helicopter landings and demonstrations, parachutist demonstrations. 
(f)  Public demonstrations or gatherings of more than twenty-five (25) people for commercial purposes. 
(g)  Motion picture or television production including cinematography, still photography, video taping, and other similar procedures. Newsgathering activities are exempt from the temporary use permit requirements. 
The duration of permits for the activities enumerated in subparagraphs (a) through (g), inclusive, shall be limited to a period not to exceed seven (7) consecutive calendar days; except for the sale of Christmas trees, for which a permit is required hereunder, the duration of such permit shall not exceed sixty (60) days.  
5132 - Fees—Exemptions. 
A filing and investigation fee of twenty-five ($25.00) shall be required with each application for a Temporary Use Permit. No such fee shall be required from an applicant who is exempt from the payment of business license taxes pursuant to this Code.  
5133 - Issuance—Denial—Appeal. 
(a)  Issuance. The License Officer shall, upon proper application, issue a Temporary Use Permit if he determines that the proposed activity can, and will, be conducted in a manner compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, and will not be injurious or detrimental to property located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location of the activity. The License Officer shall consult with any department head designated by the City Manager. 
The License Officer shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of such permits to ensure the preservation of the public peace, safety, health and general welfare, and to ensure that the activity will not be injurious or detrimental to property located in the immediate vicinity of the proposed location for the activity. 
(b)  Denial. The License Officer shall refuse to issue a permit if the activity would not be compatible with the preservation of the public peace, safety or general welfare, or if the same would be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the proposed location of the activity. 
(c)  Suspension. The License Officer shall have the power to suspend, and shall suspend, any Temporary Use Permit if he finds that the permittee: 
(1)  Has violated any condition imposed upon the permit; or 
(2)  Has violated any provision of this Code; or 
(3)  Is, by the actual conduct of the activity, threatening the preservation of the public peace, safety, or general welfare, or unreasonably interfering with the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity of the activity. 
The License Officer shall give the permittee, written notice of such suspension. The suspension shall take effect immediately upon its service upon the permittee. 
(d)  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision, determination or action taken by the License Officer in connection with a Temporary Use Permit shall have the right to appeal in the time and manner set forth in Article I, Chapter 4.  
Part G. - Fireworks[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 739, § 1, adopted May 21, 2018, repealed the former Part G, §§ 5142 and 5143, and § 2 of Ord. No. 739 enacted a new Part G as set out herein. The former Part G pertained to similar subject matter. 
 
5141 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this Part shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  "Dangerous Fireworks" shall be defined as set forth in Section 12503 of the Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(b)  "Fireworks" shall be defined as set forth in Section 12502 of the said Health and Safety Code of the State. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 2, 5-21-18)  
5142 - Fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  Except as authorized by the fire chief in accordance with the currently adopted California Fire Code, no person shall sell, offer to sell, use or have in his or her possession within the city any fireworks or dangerous fireworks. 
(b)  Except as authorized by the fire chief in accordance with the currently adopted California Fire Code, no property owner or tenant shall allow or permit the sale, offer to sell, use or possession of fireworks on their property when the property owner or tenant knows or should know of the sale, offer to sell, use or possession of fireworks at the property. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 2, 5-21-18)  
5143 - Penalties. 
•  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation, if the involved fireworks are classified as "safe and sane." Safe and sane fireworks are defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 12529 as any fireworks that have not been classified as "dangerous" or "exempt." These fireworks typically comply with California's fireworks laws, unless prohibited by local ordinances. 
•  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation. 
•  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent violation within twelve (12) months of the first violation. 
•  One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense related to "dangerous fireworks," as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 12505. In general, dangerous fireworks are those that "explode, skip, fly, travel, or dart." 
(Ord. No. 739, § 2, 5-21-18)  
Part H. - Taxicabs 
 
5144 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Part, certain words and phrases shall be construed as herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
(a)  "Certificate" is a Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity issued pursuant to this Part. 
(b)  "Taxicab" is every automobile or motor propelled vehicle by means of which passengers are transported for hire upon any public street in the City, and not over a regular or defined route, and irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the boundary limits of the City, excepting vehicles of Transportation Companies as herein defined. 
(c)  "Transportation Company" means "Transporting Company" as defined in that certain Act of the Legislature of the State, approved May 10, 1917, providing for the supervision and regulation of the transportation of persons and property for compensation over public highways by automobiles, jitney buses, auto trucks, stages and auto stages, and all amendments to said Act.  
5145 - Certificate necessary. 
No person shall engage in the business of providing taxicab service or of operating a taxicab upon any public street within the City without having obtained a Certificate so to do.  
5146 - Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a Certificate shall pay a filing and processing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus a fee for fingerprinting as set by the applicable government agency contemporaneously with the filing of a verified application for said Certificate. Said application shall set forth: 
(a)  The name and address of the applicant, and if the same be a corporation, the names of its principal officers, or if the same be a partnership, association, or fictitious company, the names of the partners or persons comprising the association or company, with the address of each. 
(b)  A complete schedule of the fares or rates proposed to be charged. 
(c)  A description of every motor vehicle which is proposed for certificated use, giving: 
(1)  Trade name; 
(2)  Motor and serial number; 
(3)  State license number; 
(4)  Seating capacity; and 
(5)  Body style. 
(d)  The street numbers and exact locations of the places where the applicant proposes to establish taxi stands. 
(e)  The name of the legal and registered owner of each such vehicle. 
(f)  The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia which shall be used on such taxicabs. 
(g)  If any proposed stand is in the public street, said application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all the occupants of the ground floor of any building or lot in front of which such taxicab stand is to be located, and for twenty-five (25) feet each way therefrom, or if there is no such occupant, by the written consent thereto of the owner or lessee of such building or lot.  
5147 - Hearing on application. 
Upon receipt of any application referred to in Section 5146, the City Clerk shall set a time, not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days thereafter for the hearing of the said application before the Council and shall give written notice of the time and place of such hearing to the applicant by mail at the address set out in such application.  
5148 - Issuance. 
At the time set for the hearing of such application, the Council shall examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter set forth in said application and shall determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the certificate applied for, and if it be found by the Council that the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the certificate applied for, it shall order the City Clerk to issue a certificate in accordance with said application, subject to the filing and approval of an undertaking as hereinafter provided, and subject to such conditions as may be imposed by said resolution including, but not limited to, rates.  
5149 - Grounds for denial. 
Any of the following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of said certificate: 
(a)  That the application is not in the form and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this Part; or 
(b)  That the vehicles described therein are inadequate or unsafe for the purposes for which they are to be used; or 
(c)  That the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia to be used upon such automobiles would be in conflict with or imitate any other certificate; or 
(d)  That the location of the stand, as requested, would congest or interfere with travel on any public street, or that the proposed stand is within three hundred (300) feet of any other taxi stand theretofore fixed by the Council on the same street; or 
(e)  That if the Council finds that there are a sufficient number of taxicabs and automobiles for hire in the City to fully serve the public, that the granting of more certificates would unduly congest the traffic and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public and that the public interest, convenience and necessity do not require the issuance of such certificate.  
5150 - Insurance required. 
Before a certificate shall be issued by the City Clerk, the applicant to whom a certificate shall have been ordered to be issued shall deliver to the City Clerk a certificate of insurance, executed by a company duly authorized under the laws of the State to do an insurance business, by the provisions of which policy the said company promises and undertakes to pay in full all claims for damages to persons or property resulting from the operation of the automobile referred to in said application, provided that the maximum amount for which liability shall be assumed for injury or death to one (1) person in any one (1) accident shall be in minimum amounts set by the City Attorney.  
5151 - Grounds for revocation. 
Any certificate granted under the provisions of this Part may be revoked by the Council either as a whole or as to any part described therein, or as to the right to use any distinctive color, monogram, or insignia, after five (5) days notice to the certificate holder, requiring him to appear at a certain time and place to show cause why said certificate should not be revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  That the insurance required by Section 5150 has not been given or has been withdrawn or lapsed for any reason. 
(b)  For the nonpayment to the City of any license fee required by this Code. 
(c)  For failure to observe any of the rules and regulations or provisions set out in this Part or in the certificate. 
(d)  For the violation of any applicable law by any certificate holder, operator or driver of any taxicab covered by such certificate. 
(e)  For the failure to maintain satisfactory service to the public. 
(f)  For any cause which in the opinion of the Council makes it contrary to the public interest, convenience and necessity for the certificate or permit to be continued.  
5152 - Application for permission to change. 
In the event that any certificate holder desires to change his schedule of rates and charges or the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on such taxicab, or to substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle described in the application, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him as taxicabs, he shall first make application for permission to do so from the Council, which permission shall be granted if, in the discretion of the Council, it deems the public interest, necessity and convenience will be served by such change, and if the certificate holder has complied with all provisions of this Part.  
5153 - Refusal to pay fare. 
No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare for the hire of any taxicab, after having hired the same, with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired.  
5154 - Rules and regulations. 
The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all persons operating taxicab: 
(a)  Distinctive Hat. Each person driving a taxicab shall wear a distinctive hat or cap with a badge in plain sight inscribed with the name of the person to whom the certificate has been issued. 
(b)  Standing. No taxicab driver shall, when soliciting passengers, remain standing upon any public street except for loading and unloading passengers, and then not for a period of more than five (5) minutes, except at an approved taxi stand. 
(c)  Consent of Passenger. No operator, driver or owner of any taxicab shall solicit or carry any passenger after such taxicab has been engaged or while in use for another passenger without the consent of the passenger first engaging the same having been obtained. A passenger or passengers engaging such taxicab shall have the exclusive right to full and free use of the passenger compartment and the whole thereof if he desires the same. 
(d)  Safe, Direct Carriage. The driver of any taxicab shall carry passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination by the most direct and accessible route. 
(e)  Prepaying License Fee. No person shall operate any taxicab without prepaying a business license fee required by this Code. 
(f)  Mechanical Conditions. All taxicabs shall be kept in good mechanical condition. 
(g)  Driver's License and Permit. No person shall drive a taxicab in the City without first having obtained a California Chauffeur's license and a City taxicab driver's permit, issued in writing by the Police Chief of the City as in this Part provided. 
(h)  Posting Necessary Information. Every taxicab shall have posted in the passenger's compartment a schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said vehicle; a card bearing the driver's name and address; the owner's name, address and telephone number, the cab number, and the City Police Department phone number, all contained in a small container or holder at least three to four inches in size, and placed in a conspicuous place in the passenger compartment. 
(i)  Driver Remain Near Cab. The driver of a taxicab shall remain immediately adjacent to said taxicab while parked at any approved taxi stand. 
(j)  Charge. No charge shall be made by any operator or owner of a taxicab in excess of the approved rates. 
(k)  Clean Compartment. No taxicab shall be operated unless the passenger compartment is kept clean and in sanitary condition. 
(l)  Fire Extinguisher. Every taxicab shall be equipped at all times with a standard type of fire extinguisher in operating condition.  
5155 - Operating without license. 
No person shall operate a taxicab not licensed pursuant hereto.  
5156 - Driver's permit requirements. 
No person shall drive a taxicab in the City without having a valid chauffeur's license issued by the State.  
5157 - Identification. 
Before a driver's permit is granted to any applicant, said applicant shall present himself to the Police Department, furnish an acceptable photograph and be fingerprinted, and such photographs and fingerprints shall be filed with the permanent records of said Police Department.  
5158 - Identification card. 
Upon obtaining said permit, said driver or operator shall at all times while operating a taxicab have in his possession an identification card furnished to him by the Police Chief, which shall have printed thereon the name of said driver or operator, his business address and telephone, his permit number, and which shall bear his fingerprint and photograph.  
5159 - Revocation of permit. 
The Police Chief may revoke any such driver's permit so issued for any violation of the provisions of this Part by the holder of such permit or for the existence of any facts which would have been a good reason for denying such permit when applied for, whether such state of facts existed at the time application was made for such permit or came into existence thereafter.  
5160 - Appeal. 
In the event of a refusal or revocation of any driver's permit by the Police Chief, said applicant or permittee may appeal from said decision to the Council in the time and manner set forth in Article I, Chapter 4.  
5161 - Permit and certificate non-transferable. 
No certificate or permit issued under the terms of this Part shall be transferable either by contract or operation of law without the permission of the City having been first obtained, and any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause for revocation thereof.  
Part I. - Card Rooms 
 
5162 - Definitions. 
(a)  "Card Room" means a room, enclosure or location where tables or other facilities are maintained for playing cards or where cards are played and where for the use of the facilities of playing cards a fee or compensation is charged players. 
(b)  "Person" includes any person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture and corporation, or any agent, servant, employee or clerk thereof.  
5163 - Prohibition of card rooms. 
No person, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or corporation, or any agent, servant, employee or clerk thereof, shall carry on the business of owning, operating, conducting or managing a card room within the City.  
5164 - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this part shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.  
Part J. - Bingo Games 
 
5165 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Part, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  "Bingo game" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers of symbols selected at random. 
(b)  "Eligible organization" means an organization described in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code as being qualified to obtain a permit to conduct bingo games, which has its principal office, its place of worship, or at least 25% of its regular members reside, operate businesses or are employed within the boundaries of the City. 
(c)  "Permittee" means an eligible organization who has received a permit to operate bingo games in the City.  
5166 - Bingo permitted. 
Bingo games for charitable purposes conducted by Permittees are hereby authorized pursuant to Section 19, Article IV of the California Constitution, if conducted in accordance with Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this Part.  
5167 - Permit—Required. 
No person or organization shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the City without first having secured a permit (hereafter "Permit") in accordance with the requirements of this Part.  
5168 - Permit—Filing of application. 
Every organization desiring a Permit shall file an application with the City Manager upon an application form to be provided by him. The application shall include: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant; the nature of the organization, and a full statement of supporting facts demonstrating that the applicant is an eligible organization as defined herein; 
(b)  The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
(c)  A list of the names of all members of the applicant who will operate and staff bingo games, and the date they became members; 
(d)  A detailed proposed schedule of the date, hours and location for such games; 
(e)  The occupancy capacity of such location; 
(f)  A detailed description of the record system to be utilized to account for the receipts, prizes, expenses and profits of each bingo game; 
(g)  The depository and authorized signatures of the special bank accounts required pursuant hereto; 
(h)  A statement of specific charitable purposes to which the bingo proceeds will be devoted of which not less than twenty-five percent (25%) will be devoted to charitable purposes within the City; 
(i)  The maximum number of players to be allowed at any time; 
(j)  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this Part, as they now exist or may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the Permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon violation of any such provisions; 
(k)  The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed, and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the applicant; 
(l)  The application shall be signed by at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the applicant; 
The application shall be verified as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings in judicial actions. 
A filing and processing fee shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of each application for a Permit in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). If an application for a Permit is denied, one-half of such fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant.  
5169 - Permit—Application—Processing. 
Upon receipt of an application for a Permit, with evidence of payment of the required fee, the City Manager shall: 
(a)  Issue a dated receipt showing the location for which the application is made; and 
(b)  Transmit copies of the application to all interested departments of the City, to determine if the requirements of all applicable laws, including but not limited to the Code, have been, or will be, met. 
Every Department Head to whom an application for a Permit is referred shall, in writing, advise the City Manager of all material facts necessary to determine whether the Permit should be granted, granted subject to conditions, or denied. Each report shall contain recommendations relating to approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the application. Any Department Head to whom an application is referred may require from the applicant such additional information as deemed necessary.  
5170 - Permit application—Hearing required. 
The City Clerk shall set an application for a Permit for a hearing not sooner than forty-five (45) days after receipt of such application. 
The City Clerk shall give notice to the applicant, and any other person requesting such notice, of the time and place of such hearing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date set therefor. 
At the time of the hearing, the City Clerk shall allow the applicant and any other interested person to present any relevant evidence relating to the question of whether the application for a Permit should be approved, conditionally approved or denied. The City Manager shall observe the substance of the rules of evidence used in judicial proceedings to the end that the matter will be resolved upon reliable evidentiary material.  
5171 - Action on application. 
Subsequent to the hearing on an application, the City Manager shall determine whether the same shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied. He shall approve an application if he finds (1) that the applicant is an eligible organization as defined herein; (2) that the location proposed for such use is permitted pursuant applicable law, including but not limited to the provisions of this Code; and (3) that the use, if permitted at the location proposed, will not unreasonably interfere with the peaceful use and enjoyment of surrounding and adjacent properties. If the City Manager determines that it is appropriate to condition the issuance of such a Permit to assure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, he may impose reasonable conditions of approval upon his order authorizing the issuance of such Permit. 
If the City Manager finds as a result of the evidence presented that the applicant is not an eligible organization within the meaning of the provisions of this Part or that any officer of such applicant, within the ten (10) years immediately preceding such hearing, has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or that the location is inappropriate due to adverse impacts upon surrounding and adjacent uses, or is not otherwise permitted at the location, he shall deny the application. The action of the City Manager upon any such application shall be final and conclusive, in the absence of an appeal taken in the time and manner hereinafter set forth.  
5172 - Permit—Contents. 
If a Permit is issued, it shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The name and nature of the organization to whom the Permit is issued; 
(b)  The address of the location where bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
(c)  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted; 
(d)  The maximum number of players allowed at the location at any time; 
(e)  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this Part.  
5173 - Permit—Notification of changes in applicant information. 
Every Permittee within five (5) days after any material change in the status of the Permittee, shall notify the City Manager in writing of any such change, including, but not limited to, any changes in the list of members who will operate and staff bingo games. Said notice shall be made in writing and served upon the City Manager; such notice shall be served prior to any newly listed member operating or staffing a bingo game. 
Each Permittee shall retain in its records proof of service of the notification required by this section.  
5174 - Bingo manager. 
(a)  Manager Required. No Permittee shall engage in, conduct, carry on or allow to be conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the City, the operation of a bingo game unless such game is conducted under the personal direction of a Bingo Manager, holding a valid Bingo Manager Permit issued pursuant to this Part (hereafter "Manager-Permit"). A Bingo Manager shall be present on the premises during the operation of each bingo game. 
(b)  Permit Required. To obtain a Manager-Permit, a Permittee shall file with the City Manager a written application, therefor. The application shall set forth, in addition to such information as may be required by the City Manager, the following: 
(i)  A statement that neither the Permittee nor its members will receive any profit, wage, or salary or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game; and 
(ii)  A statement that the applicant for the Manager-Permit has read and understands all of the requirements of this Part and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code with regard to conducting bingo games in the City. 
(c)  Compensation Restriction. No person may hold a Manager-Permit unless he is a nonsalaried, noncompensated member of a Permittee and has been a member of such Permittee for at least six (6) months prior to the filing of the application for a Manager-Permit. 
(d)  Permit—Fee. A filing and processing fee for a Manager-Permit application shall be in the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be paid contemporaneously with the filing of the application. If the Manager-Permit is not issued, one-half (½) of said fee shall be returned. 
(e)  Bond Or Other Security Required. Prior to the granting of a Manager-Permit, the Permittee whose games are to be directed by a Bingo Manager, shall either: 
(i)  File and thereafter maintain with the City a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the aggregate sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for the use and benefit of interested persons and parties, issued by a surety company approved by the City Manager; or 
(ii)  Deposit with the City five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in cash, or a bank or savings and loan certificate in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(f)  Requirements of Bond. The bond shall be conditioned upon the payment to any person found to be entitled thereto of sum equal to any direct pecuniary loss sustained by such person, occasioned by any act of grand or petty theft or other similar wrongful act on the part of the Permittee, its agents or employees. 
(i)  Term of Bond. The bond shall remain in force and effect during the time that each Permit is in effect. Any surety may cancel its bond and be relieved of further liability thereunder by delivering thirty (30) days' written notice thereof to the City Manager. Such cancellation shall not affect any liability accrued thereon prior to the expiration of the said thirty (30) day period. If a bond is canceled, all Permits issued pursuant to this Part to the Permittee on such bond and its Bingo Manager, shall automatically lapse and be void and of no further force or effect, as of the effective date of such cancellation. A substitute bond may be submitted prior to the effective date of such cancellation. 
(ii)  Action on Bond. Any person who sustains any injury covered by a bond, in addition to any other remedy which he or she may have, may bring an action in his or her own name upon the bond for the recovery of any damage sustained. Upon such action being commenced, such bond shall not be void upon first recovery thereon but may be sued upon from time to time until the whole of the amount thereof shall be exhausted. 
The Permittee shall reinstate any bond or replenish a deposit in the amount of any recovery thereunder. Failure of a Permittee to so reinstate a bond or replenish a deposit shall automatically lapse any and all Permits issued to, for or on behalf of a Permittee pursuant to this Part.  
5175 - Permit—Revocation. 
If the City Manager has reason to believe that a Permittee or a Bingo Manager is conducting, or has conducted, bingo games contrary to the provisions of this Part and/or contrary to the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, he shall forthwith set a time and place for a hearing to determine whether such Permit or Permits should be revoked. At such hearing, any interested person may present any material evidence relating to such revocation proceeding. The burden of proof shall be upon the City to establish facts which support the conclusion that the Permittee and/or a Bingo Manager is conducting, or has conducted, bingo games contrary to the provisions of this Part or of the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. The substance of the rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall be observed by the City Manager in the course of the hearing to the end that the matter can be decided upon reliable evidentiary material. 
If as a result of the evidence presented the City Manager concludes that a Permittee or the Bingo Manager, or a Permittee, by and through its authorized agents, officers or employees, has conducted or permitted the conduct of one or more bingo games contrary to the provisions of this Part and/or of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, he shall revoke such Permit or Permits. If he finds that no such violation has occurred, he shall dismiss such revocation proceedings. The determination of the City Manager shall be final and conclusive, in the absence of an appeal taken in the time and manner hereinafter set forth. 
With respect to a Manager-Permit, if any applicant therefor, or if such a permit holder after issuance of such a Permit, is convicted, by a final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, of a crime involving moral turpitude, the City Manager shall either deny such application for Permit, or revoke an existing Permit. Such person shall be ineligible to hold such a Permit for a period of ten (10) years from and after the date of such final conviction, unless by competent evidence, rehabilitation is shown to have occurred, to the reasonable satisfaction of the City Manager.  
5176 - Appeal. 
Any applicant, Permittee or the holder of a Manager-Permit aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager with reference to the issuance, conditional issuance, denial or revocation of a Permit may appeal such decision to the Council under the procedures described in Article I, Chapter 4 of this Code.  
5177 - Games open to public. 
All bingo games shall be open to members of the public.  
5178 - Days—Hours of operation. 
No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and 10:00 a.m. of any day; nor shall any Permittee conduct bingo games on more than two (2) calendar days per calendar week.  
5179 - Admission fees prohibited. 
No admission fee, purchase or donation shall be required for entry onto the bingo premises.  
5180 - Attendance limited to occupancy capacity. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games shall be open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted, as determined by the Director of Community Development in accordance with applicable laws and regulations, or the limit stated in the Permit, whichever is less. No Permittee shall reserve, or permit reserving, seats or space for any person to play bingo.  
5181 - Participant must be present. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place at which the bingo game is being conducted.  
5182 - Posting of permit. 
A Permittee shall not conduct or allow to be conducted a bingo game unless its Permit is posted at the public entrance in a conspicuous place during the conduct of any bingo game. Each Permittee shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by any officer or employee of the City.  
5183 - Prizes and rules—Posting required. 
Each Permittee shall post a notice of the prizes to be awarded and rules of each bingo game to be played. The signs shall be conspicuously posted next to the posted Permit during the conduct of the bingo game.  
5184 - Financial interests. 
No person, individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the Permittee shall have any financial interest in the conduct of the bingo game.  
5185 - Exclusive operation by licensee. 
A bingo game authorized pursuant to this Part shall be promoted, operated, managed and staffed only by members of the Permittee. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration, from any bingo game.  
5186 - Location restrictions. 
A Permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on real property: (1) which is designated for that purpose by the Permit as issued; and (2) which is owned or leased by it; and (3) which shall also be used by it for its principal office and/or for performance of the purposes for which the organization exists. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.  
5187 - Identification of staff. 
All persons who are authorized to operate or staff a bingo game shall wear on their outside clothing an identification insignia or badge not less than two inches by three inches in dimension, indicating the name and title of the staff member.  
5188 - Conduct of games. 
(a)  Members Operating and Staffing Games. Each Permittee shall have available on the premises at all times during the conduct of bingo games a copy of the list of its members authorized to Operate and staff bingo games which has been filed with the City Manager pursuant to this Part. 
(b)  Use of Credit Prohibited. No Permittee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to IOU's and checks to be held) nor shall any Permittee allow any person to play in a bingo game on any form of credit. 
(c)  Proceeds—Counting Procedure. At least two members of each Permittee shall jointly count all bingo proceeds. 
(d)  Proceeds—Use Restrictions. 
(i)  Each Permittee shall use all proceeds derived from the operation of bingo games only for purposes expressly set forth in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code; and 
(ii)  Such proceeds shall be disbursed by each Permittee at least quarterly for a charitable purpose, by a written check drawn on a financial institution; and 
(iii)  At least twenty-five percent (25%) of the proceeds derived from the operation of bingo games shall be used for charitable purposes within the City. 
(e)  Prizes—Maximum. The total value of prizes awarded by a Permittee during the conduct of a bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game. Any cash prize shall be paid in the form of a check drawn by the Permittee on a financial institution. 
(f)  Receipts for Prizes. Each Permittee shall issue a receipt to the winner of any prize, which receipts shall be numbered serially. 
(g)  Prizes—Recordkeeping. A record shall be kept, by the Permittee on forms approved by the City Manager, showing the name and written signature, the address, the telephone number of each prize winner, and the serial number on the receipt for the prize. 
(h)  Funds Proceeds To Be Kept In Separate Fund Or Account. All proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be deposited, within 24 hours, in a special account in a financial institution and shall not be commingled with any other account or funds. 
(i)  Accounting Requirements—Inspection Authorized. 
(i)  Each Permittee shall keep full and accurate records of the income received and expenses disbursed in connection with its operation of bingo games authorized by this Part. The City Manager, by and through his authorized officers, employees or staff, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time; each Permittee shall cooperate fully with the City Manager by making such records available. 
(ii)  The City Manager may demand complete detailed accounting reports to be produced by a Permittee of all of its income and expenses at any time. If any Permittee fails to render such an accounting within the time limit set by the City Manager, its Permit shall be deemed automatically suspended until such accounting is rendered. 
(j)  Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. No alcoholic beverages shall be served or consumed at a location where a bingo game is conducted during the hours of operation of a bingo game. 
(k)  Intoxicated Persons Not To Participate. No Permittee shall allow any person who is intoxicated to participate in a bingo game. 
(l)  Minors Not To Participate. No Permittee shall allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age to participate in any bingo game.  
5189 - Notices. 
Where notice is required to be given pursuant to this Part, such shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1303 of this Code.  
5190 - Enforcement. 
No person shall interfere with, prevent, or refuse to permit a peace officer to make an examination or inspection of: 
(a)  Any premises, upon which bingo is permitted to be played pursuant to this Part, whether that portion of the premises is open to the public or not; and 
(b)  Any record kept by a Permittee, or by any agent or employee thereof.  
5191 - City may enjoin violation. 
The City may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this Chapter.  
Part K. - Resale of Firearms 
 
5192 - Resale of firearms. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this Section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them, as set forth hereinafter: 
(1)  "Secondhand Firearms" means any handgun, rifle, or shotgun which is acquired by a merchant by purchase or trade from a person other than a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of firearms for the purpose of resale. 
(2)  "Merchant" means any person conducting a business in the City. 
(b)  Daily Reports to the Police Chief. Every merchant who acquires secondhand firearms for resale shall report, in writing, the acquisition thereof to the Police Chief, on forms provided by the Police Chief, by 12:00 P.M. of the next business day following the date of acquisition.  
Part L. - Dances 
 
5193 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Part, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this Section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
(a)  "Cabaret dance" means any dance held or engaged in at any place or premises which holds Type 47 license issued by the State to sell, serve or dispense intoxicating liquor for on-sale consumption at such place or premises. 
(b)  "Dance" means a gathering of persons in or upon the premises where social dancing is conducted as permitted by this Part. 
(c)  "Private dance" means any dance which is not advertised publicly, for which no admission is charged or a gratuity accepted for admission, and to which the general public is not invited, which is held or conducted in a dwelling unit, for the purpose of celebrating or marking an occasion of interest to the persons conducting such dance. 
(d)  "Operator" means a person or legal entity which holds an on-sale license of the type referred to in Subdivision (a) hereof, who operates at the licensed location, a cabaret dance. 
(e)  "School dance" means a dance conducted as a part of the curriculum of any public or parochial school, or any dance officially sanctioned by such school, when conducted at school buildings or grounds, or other place when supervised and sponsored by school officials.  
5194 - Dances permitted. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the only dances permitted to be conducted in the City shall be: 
(1)  Cabaret dances, provided a conditional use permit therefor is first obtained pursuant to this Code; and 
(2)  Private dances; and 
(3)  School dances. 
No person shall conduct, allow or participate in any dance in the City except those referred to in this Section. No person shall conduct or permit the conduct of a private dance in the same dwelling unit more than four (4) times in any consecutive twelve (12) month period.  
5195 - Police or security protection. 
Police or other security protection (hereinafter "Security") shall be provided at cabaret dances at the expense of the Operator, as shall be determined by order of the Police Chief. The nature and extent of such Security required by the Police Chief shall be based upon the nature of the dance, its location, expected attendance, and other relevant factors. 
Any applicant may appeal a determination of the Police Chief regarding the nature and extent of the Security required, by a written request to the Council filed with the City Clerk. The applicant shall pay a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by Resolution, contemporaneously with filing of such written request. 
At the option of the applicant, uniformed private patrol personnel who are regularly employed by a private patrol, licensed to do business in the City, may be utilized to provide such required Security.  
5196 - Cabaret dances. 
The following regulations shall be complied with as to all Cabaret Dances: 
(a)  The dance floor area shall be plainly marked and designated exclusively for a dancing area. No dancing shall be permitted except in the marked dancing area. 
(b)  During hours during which dancing is permitted no portion of the dancing area shall be used for any purpose other than dancing. 
(c)  The dance floor area shall be not less than one hundred (100) square feet, and not more than an amount equal to the sum of ten (10) square feet for each person permitted to occupy that area of the building under the building occupancy limits established by this Code; notwithstanding the applicable maximum occupancy limits, no dance floor area shall exceed a total of one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(d)  No portion of the dance floor area shall be situated within five (5) feet of any table, chair, counter, bar or seating area (hereafter collectively referred to as "Area"). 
(e)  No person, other than the Operator and the Operator's bona fide employees acting in the course and scope of such employment, shall possess any intoxicating liquor, unless the same has been lawfully sold, served or dispensed on the premises by a person, entity or an authorized agent, holding an on-sale liquor license of the type referred to in Subdivision (a) of Section 5193 hereof. 
(f)  No Operator or employee or agent of any Operator conducting, or in charge of, such dance, shall engage in dancing with any other person. 
(g)  No Operator or employee of an Operator shall permit any person to enter into, to be in or to remain in any place where such dance is being conducted, who is intoxicated, boisterous, or disorderly. 
(h)  Cabaret dances shall only be permitted to be held and conducted between the hours of 12:00 noon and 1:30 a.m. of any day.  
5197 - Council action on appeals. 
Upon receipt by the City Clerk of a timely filed notice of appeal, appealing a decision of the Police Chief relating to the Security required, the City Clerk shall give at least ten days notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing to be conducted by the Council. At the time of such hearing, the Council shall allow the permittee, and any other interested person, to present relevant evidence relating to the issue of the nature and extent of Security required. The Council hearing shall be a de novo hearing. No appeal shall be accepted, nor shall any appeal hearing be conducted, unless the permittee whose has filed such appeal, pays a filing and processing fee in an amount as set by Council resolution. 
The Council shall determine whether the appropriate level of Security required, utilizing the standards set forth in Section 5195 of this Part, and based upon the evidence presented to it at such public hearing. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.  
5198 - Notice—Administrative regulations. 
(a)  Notices. Notices required to be given pursuant to this Part shall be given by personal service or by deposit of such written notice in the custody of the United States Postal Service, or the successor of such Service, postage prepaid addressed to the party to be notified at his or her last known address. Such notices shall be deemed given as of the date of personal service, or two consecutive calendar days following the deposit of such notice in the custody of the Postal Service. 
(b)  The Police Chief with the approval of the City Manager, is authorized to issue such administrative regulations as he deems appropriate for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this Part. Such regulations shall be deemed to be in full force and effect when the same have been approved by the City Manager.  
Part M. - Motion Picture, Television and Photographic Production 
 
5201 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known as the Motion Picture, Television and Photographic Production Ordinance of the City of Port Hueneme.  
5202 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Chapter "Motion Picture, Television and Photographic Production" means all activity attendant to staging or shooting (video taping or filming) commercial motion pictures, television shows, programs or commercials, and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or use for a commercial purpose where the photographer sets up stationary equipment on public or private property or the public right-of-way in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes.  
5203 - Permit required. 
No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, taking or making any commercial motion picture, television or photographic production as defined in Section 01 without a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.  
5204 - Permit exemptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events. 
B.  Production which are conducted within legally established commercial motion picture/ television/ still photography studios.  
5205 - Permit application. 
Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this Chapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the City Recreation and Community Service Office, The completed application shall be submitted at least five (5) working days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct an activity for which a permit is required.  
5206 - Permit fees. 
Each application shall be accompanied by: 
A.  A use fee in an amount established by Council resolution. The use fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit organizations which qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
B.  A daily administrative reimbursement and property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for the staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval and to monitor the activity, as well as to compensate the City for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity. The administrative reimbursement and property use fee shall be waived for: 
1.  Productions for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly; 
2.  Student filming. 
3.  Productions conducted wholly on private property where no vehicles (including vehicles of crew members and employees) or equipment are parked or stored on public property or rights-of-way, where vehicles and equipment do not displace onto the public right-of-way vehicles ordinarily parked on private property and where no traffic control measures are required.  
5207 - Permit issuance—Conditions. 
The City Manager or his designee shall issue a permit as provided for in this Chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he finds that: 
A.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. 
B.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or City operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the City incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
C.  At the determination of the City Public Works Department, Department of Recreation and Community Services, Police Department, and the Ventura County Fire Department, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all proper safety precaution will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designee. 
The decision of the City Manager to issue, conditionally issue, or not issue a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing of the City Council at the next available meeting.  
5208 - Cost of additional services. 
If deemed necessary by the City Manager, additional police, code enforcement, fire, and other City services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the City by the applicant. Any additional City services will be provided/coordinated through the City Manager or his designee.  
5209 - Insurance. 
The City shall require, as a condition of issuing such a permit, that the applicant furnish insurance in the amount of one million dollars to protect the City against claim of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the City for damage to City property arising out of the permittee's activities. An additional five million dollars of such general liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event aircraft or helicopters are used in the activity. A copy of the policy will remain on file with the application. The City and its officers and employees shall be named as additional insureds under the policy, which shall not be subject to cancellation without thirty (30) days written notice to the City. Applicants shall also submit verification that adequate Worker's compensation insurance coverage is maintained.  
5210 - Hold harmless agreement. 
The applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the City prior to the issuance of any permit.  
5211 - Conditions—Restrictions. 
The applicant shall comply with any conditions or restrictions the City may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes shall be made without first obtaining the approval of the City Manager or his designee.  
5212 - Clean-up—Restoration. 
The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris to the City's satisfaction within such time as determined by administrative regulation. Applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the City's satisfaction, the City Manager shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and applicant shall pay the cost of such repair, restoration or clean-up to the City within ten days of completing filming. Applicant shall also pay to the City within this time the cost of any charges for the use or restoration of any utilities, services, equipment, facilities or required standby employees which was not charged in advance.  
Chapter 3 - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMITS 
Sections: 
 
5300 - Intent. 
The intent of this Chapter is to regulate adult-oriented businesses that, unless closely regulated, may have serious secondary effects on the community. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values, increases in vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas, increases in incidences of criminal activity, increases in noise, litter and vandalism and the interference with property owners' enjoyment of their property in the vicinity of such businesses. 
It is neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
Nothing in this Chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any City ordinance or any law of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5301 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter: 
"Adult bookstore" means an establishment having, as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, material that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar or other establishment (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers, and where such performances are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult cabaret dancer" shall mean any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an "adult cabaret" or "adult business" and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs as a sexually oriented dancer, exotic dancer, stripper, go-go dancer or similar dancer whose performance on a regular and substantial basis focuses on or emphasizes the adult cabaret dancer's breasts, genitals, and/or buttocks, but does not involve exposure of specified anatomical areas or depicting or engaging in specified sexual activities. Adult cabaret dancer does not include such a patron. 
"Adult hotel/motel" means a hotel or motel, as defined in this Code, which is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas through closed circuit or cable television or through video playback devices where video recordings are provided by the hotel/motel. 
"Adult live entertainment" means any physical human body activity (except verbal communication), whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including, but not limited to, singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer or performers expose to public view, without opaque covering, specified anatomical areas or depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered. 
"Adult model studio" means any premises where there is furnished, provided or procured a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas where such model(s) is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, or videotaped for a fee, or any other thing of value, as a consideration, compensation or gratuity for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or remain on the premises. Adult model studio shall not include any live art class or any studio or classroom that is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree under California Education Code Section 94300 and following. 
"Adult motion picture arcade" means any business establishment or concern containing coin- or slug-operated or manually or electronically controlled still, motion picture or video machines, projectors, or other image producing devices that are maintained to display images to an individual in individual viewing areas when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Adult-oriented business" means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs or operates as an adult bookstore, adult theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret, adult model studio, adult hotel/motel; any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or distributes sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. "Adult-oriented business" does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by State law. 
"Adult theater" means a theater or other commercial establishment with or without a stage or proscenium which is used for presenting, on a regular and substantial basis, material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Entertainer" means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business, and who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, performs adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business. Entertainer does not include a patron. 
Establishment of an Adult-Oriented Business. As used herein, to "establish" an adult-oriented business shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any such adult-oriented business. 
"Live art class" means any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical areas; instruction is offered in a series of at least two (2) classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and preregistration is required at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of participation in the class. 
"Operate an adult-oriented business" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on such premises. 
"Operator" means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on such premises. 
"Owner" means all persons having a direct or indirect investment in an adult-oriented business; provided, however, where such investment is held by a corporation, for the purposes of this Chapter, all officers and directors of a corporation and all stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the stock of such corporation shall be deemed to be an owner. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other form of entity. 
"Permittee" means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued. 
"Regular and substantial course of conduct" means: 
(1)  Devoting more than fifteen (15) percent of total display area to the display of sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; 
(2)  Presenting any type of live entertainment characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas on any four (4) or more separate days within any thirty (30) day period; or 
(3)  Deriving at least fifty (50) percent of gross receipts from the sale, trade, display or presentation of services, products, or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Sexually oriented material" means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, or other written, oral or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
"Sexually oriented merchandise" means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia including, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activities" means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; 
(5)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; 
(6)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; and/or 
(7)  The presence of any person who engages in any specified sexual activity; or who exposes any specified anatomical area; or who performs in attire commonly referred to as pasties or a G-string, or any other opaque covering which covers only the areola or nipples of the female breast, and while covering the natal cleft and pubic area covers less than one (1) inch on either side of the entire length of the natal cleft and two (2) inches across the pubic area. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5302 - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish or operate any adult-oriented business within the City without first obtaining, and continuing to maintain in full force and effect, an adult-oriented business permit and a business license from the City. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5303 - Application process. 
(a)  Application. Any person desiring to obtain an adult-oriented business permit shall make application to the City Manager upon the form provided by the City. An applicant for a permit shall include all owners of the proposed adult-oriented business. The applicant shall also furnish the following information and items: 
(1)  Name and address; 
(2)  The previous residential addresses of all individuals, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of filing the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(3)  Written proof that all individuals are at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(4)  The history of the applicant as to the operation of any adult-oriented business or similar business or occupation within five (5) years of the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but shall not be limited to, a statement as to whether or not such person, in operating an adult-oriented business under a permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended and the reasons for any revocation or suspension; 
(5)  All criminal convictions or offenses described in Section 5305(b)(11) of this Chapter; and whether the applicant is required to register under the provisions of Section 290 of California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
(6)  Authorization for the City, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the permit; 
(7)  The height, weight, and color of eyes and hair of all individuals; 
(8)  Fingerprints and two (2) prints of a recent passport-size photograph of all individuals; 
(9)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the application; 
(10)  A nonrefundable deposit or fee as set forth by ordinance or resolution of the City Council; 
(11)  A narrative description of the proposed business explaining how such business complies or will comply with the applicable development and operational standards specified in Section 5305 of this Chapter; 
(12)  A site plan designating the building or unit proposed for the adult-oriented business and a dimensional interior floor plan depicting how the business complies or will comply with the applicable development and operational standards specified in Section 5305 of this Chapter. The site plan and interior floor plan need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches; 
(13)  If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or corporation, documentary proof that such entity was duly formed, and is authorized to do business and is in good standing in the State of California; 
(14)  If the applicant does not own the lot or parcel on which the adult-oriented business will operate, the property owner or lessor of the premises, as applicable, shall consent to the filing of the application by signing and dating the application. If the property owner or lessor is more than one (1) natural person, one (1) such person shall sign the application. If the property owner or lessor is a legal entity, a general partner, officer, director, member or other authorized person thereof shall sign the application; 
(15)  A statement in writing and dated by applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and 
(16)  Such other information as the City Manager may reasonably deem necessary. 
(b)  Determination of Completeness. The City Manager shall determine whether the application contains all the information and items required by the provisions of this Chapter. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. The applicant shall have thirty (30) calendar days to submit additional information to render the application complete. Failure to do so within the thirty (30) day period shall render the application void. Within five (5) business days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the City Manager shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth in this subsection. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. The applicant shall be notified within five (5) days of the date the application is found to be complete (hereafter the "application date"). All notices required by this Chapter shall be deemed given upon the date any such notice is either deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service of such notice is provided. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5304 - Approval or denial of adult-oriented business permit. 
(a)  Within sixty (60) days of the application date, the City Manager shall either issue the permit or send by certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, a written statement to the applicant setting forth the reasons for denial of the permit. If the City Manager has not issued a decision on the application within sixty (60) days of the application date, the applicant shall be entitled to engage in the proposed adult-oriented business for which a permit was sought subject to strict compliance with the remaining provisions of this Chapter, unless and until the City Manager notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for denial of a permit. 
(b)  The City Manager may deny the application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  An applicant has made one (1) or more material misstatements in the application; 
(2)  That the adult-oriented business, if permitted, will not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the zoning, building, health, housing and fire codes of the City; 
(3)  An applicant has been convicted within three (3) years of the application date of an offense specified in Section 5305(b)(11) of this Chapter; 
(4)  An applicant or any operator has had a permit or license for an adult-oriented business denied, revoked or suspended for cause by any City, County or State within three (3) years of the application date; or 
(5)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  The decision of the City Manager to issue or deny a permit shall be final and conclusive, unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. The applicant may elect to have the City bring an action pursuant to Section 1094.8 by filing written notice of such election with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after written notice of the City Manager's decision is deposited in the mail. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5305 - Adult-oriented business development and performance standards. 
(a)  Development Standards. 
(1)  Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of Port Hueneme. 
(2)  All off-street parking area and premise entries of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one (1) footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. A lighting and lighting maintenance plan shall be submitted at the time of application for a permit. 
(3)  The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside such premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building. 
(4)  The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen (18) years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Such notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Community Development Director or designee. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted within the premises at any time. 
(5)  All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times. 
(6)  The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any sexually oriented material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with the sale or rental of sexually oriented material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
(7)  No residential structure shall be converted for use as an adult-oriented business. 
(8)  No adult-oriented business shall be located in any temporary or portable structure. 
(9)  The building in which an adult-oriented business is located must comply with all applicable setbacks and parking requirements. 
(b)  Operational Standards. 
(1)  No adult-oriented business shall operate or be open for business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
(2)  No owner, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business shall employ or permit to be employed any person who is not at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  No owner or operator of an adult-oriented business shall allow, permit, suffer or tolerate any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter, be in or remain in any adult entertainment business. The age of persons who enter the premises shall be determined by checking the driver's license or other authorized identification of such person. 
(4)  No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
(5)  No alcoholic beverages shall be served, consumed or sold on the premises of an adult-oriented business. 
(6)  Any adult-oriented business that is also an adult motion picture arcade shall comply with the following provisions: 
(A)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be a direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(B)  The view area specified in subsection (b)(6)(A) of this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(C)  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one (1) person at any one (1) time. 
(D)  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two (2) such rooms such as would allow viewing from one (1) booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two (2) such booths or rooms. 
(E)  Customers, patrons or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or remain in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
(F)  The floors, seats, walls and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls. Repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the owner's adult-oriented business permit. 
(7)  All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following footcandles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level: 
Area 	Footcandles 
bookstores and other retail establishments 	20 
theaters and cabarets 	5 (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 footcandles) 
arcades 	10 
motels/hotels 	20 (in public areas) 
modeling studios 	20 
 
(8)  The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment or entertainers displaying specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities: 
(A)  No person shall perform adult live entertainment or display specified anatomical areas for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a permanently fixed stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the level of the floor, and which is separated by a distance of at least four (4) feet horizontally from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron shall be permitted within four (4) feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer. No onstage entertainer or onstage adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any onstage entertainer or onstage adult cabaret dancer. 
(B)  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers that are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers' use. 
(C)  The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
(D)  The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms, which is completely separated, from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three (3) foot wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers. 
(E)  As to offstage performances, no entertainer shall perform adult live entertainment characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities offstage. As to an adult cabaret dancer performing offstage, a distance of at least two (2) feet shall be maintained between the adult cabaret dancer and patron(s) at all times. As to offstage performances, no adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any adult cabaret dancer while the adult cabaret dancer is performing on the premises. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. 
(F)  In addition, while on the premises, no entertainer or adult cabaret dancer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with an entertainer or adult cabaret dancer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person's body either before or after any live entertainment by such entertainer or adult cabaret dancer. Patrons shall be advised of the no-touching requirements by signs and, if necessary, by employees, entertainers or adult cabaret dancers of the establishment. 
(G)  Fixed rail(s) at least thirty-six (36) inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection. 
(H)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer or adult cabaret dancers, and no entertainer or adult cabaret dancers shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. If patrons wish to pay or tip entertainers or adult cabaret dancers, payment or tips may be placed in receptacles. Patrons shall not throw monies to entertainers or adult cabaret dancers, hand monies directly to entertainers or adult cabaret dancers, place monies in the entertainers' or adult cabaret dancers' costumes or otherwise throw monies on the stage. Patrons shall be advised of these tipping and gratuity requirements by signs conspicuously placed on the premises. If necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the tipping and gratuity requirements by employees or independent contractors of the adult business. 
(I)  No owner or operator of an adult-oriented business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical areas required to be covered. 
(J)  All employees of adult-oriented businesses which offer adult live entertainment, other than performers while performing on the permanently fixed stage, shall, at a minimum, while on or about the licensed premises, wear an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas. 
(9)  Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards: 
(A)  Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one (1) security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than thirty-five (35) persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
(B)  Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the Police Chief that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in this Chapter from occurring on the premises. 
(C)  Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of State law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
(10)  Every adult-oriented business that provides live entertainment or entertainers depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises. The register shall contain the following information: 
(A)  Name, current resident address and telephone number; 
(B)  Date of birth; 
(C)  Social security number; 
(D)  Height, weight, color of eyes and hair; 
(E)  Stage name (if applicable) and other aliases used within the previous two (2) years; 
(F)  Dates and times of all performances. 
Such register shall be available for inspection at the premises during regular business hours by any Police Officer or Health Officer of the City of Port Hueneme. The above information shall be maintained for each person for a period of three (3) years following termination of employment or cessation of performance at the premises. 
(11)  No owner or operator of any adult-oriented business shall have been convicted within the past three (3) years of any of the following offenses or convicted of an offense without the State of California that would have constituted any of the following offenses if committed within the State of California: Sections 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, inclusive, 267, 314, 315, 316, 318, or subdivisions (a), (b) and (d) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code; any offense requiring registration under provisions of either Section 290 of the California Penal Code or Section 11590 of the California Health and Safety Code; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, giving away, of a controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, as those sections may hereafter be amended. 
(12)  No owner, operator, employee or entertainer of an adult-oriented business shall personally solicit, or shall permit personal solicitation of, motorists or pedestrians in the vicinity of the adult-oriented business. 
(13)  Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the permit may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5306 - Permit requirements—Effect of noncompliance. 
The requirements described in Section 5305 of this Chapter shall be deemed conditions of an adult-oriented business permit approval, and failure to comply with every such applicable requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5307 - Permit duration. 
An adult-oriented business permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5308 - Permit renewal. 
An adult-oriented business permit shall be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittee and the adult-oriented business continues to meet all applicable requirements set forth in this Chapter. A request for permit renewal must be accompanied by an adult-oriented business permit application, completed in full detail with current information. The application and appropriate fee must be received by the City at least forty-five (45) calendar days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. A request for a permit renewal shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5309 - Permit transferability. 
No adult-oriented business permit shall be sold, transferred, or assigned by any permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the City Manager stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the City Manager in accordance with Section 5303 of this Chapter (including payment of the applicable application fee), and the City Manager determines in accordance with Section 5304 that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit. Without such amendment to the permit, any other purported sale, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the permit and the permit shall be thereafter null and void. An adult-oriented business permit held by a corporation, partnership or limited liability company is subject to the same rules of transferability as contained above. An adult-oriented business permit shall be valid only for the exact location specified in the permit. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5310 - Enforcement and revocation. 
(a)  Inspections. Any and all investigating officials of the City shall have the right to enter the premises of an adult-oriented business from time to time during regular business hours to make reasonable inspections to observe and enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, plumbing or health regulations, and to ascertain whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  Revocation Grounds. The City Manager may revoke an adult-oriented business permit when: 
(1)  Any of the applicable requirements of this Chapter ceases to be satisfied; 
(2)  The application is discovered to contain incorrect, false or misleading information; 
(3)  An owner is convicted of a felony or misdemeanor occurring upon, or relating to the premises or lot upon which the adult-oriented business is located, which offense is one of those listed in Section 5305(b)(11) of this Chapter; 
(4)  Any operator, employee, agent or contractor of the permittee is convicted on two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period of a felony or misdemeanor occurring upon, or relating to the premises or lot upon which the adult-oriented business is located, which offense is one of those listed in Section 5305(b)(11) of this Chapter; 
(5)  The permittee, operator or any employee, agent or contractor has knowingly allowed prostitution, or solicitation for prostitution, on the premises; 
(6)  The permittee, operator or any employee, agent or contractor has knowingly allowed the premises to be used as a place where a controlled substance has been illegally consumed, sold or exchanged; or 
(7)  The adult-oriented business has been operated in violation of any of the requirements of this Chapter and: 
(A)  If the violation is of a continuous nature, the business continues to be operated in violation of such provision for more than ten (10) days following the date written notice of such violation is mailed or delivered to the owner, or 
(B)  If the violation is of a noncontinuous nature, two (2) or more additional violations of the same provision, or four (4) or more violations of any other of the provisions, of this Chapter occur (regardless of whether notice of each individual violation is given to the permittee) within any twelve (12) month period. 
(c)  Revocation Notice. Upon determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the City Manager shall furnish written notice of the proposed revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall summarize the principal reasons for the proposed revocation and shall state that the revocation shall become effective on the twentieth day after the notice was deposited in the U.S. mail, unless the permittee files an appeal in accordance with Section 5311 of this Chapter. The notice shall be delivered both by posting the notice at the location of the adult-oriented business and by sending the same, certified mail, return receipt requested and postage prepaid, to the permittee as that name and address appears on the permit. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5311 - Appeals. 
(a)  In the event the City Manager gives notice of an intended revocation of a permit, the permittee may appeal the City Manager's decision to the City Council by filing with the City Clerk a complete notice of appeal within fifteen (15) days from the date notice of such intended revocation is mailed to the permittee. To be deemed complete, the appeal shall be in writing, shall be signed under penalty of perjury by at least one (1) person who signed the application for the adult-oriented business permit, shall state the grounds for disagreement with the City Manager's stated reasons for revocation, shall include the address to which notice is to be mailed, and shall be accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  If such an appeal is timely filed, the revocation of the permit shall be stayed until a final decision is rendered on the appeal. The City Council shall, at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting held more than five (5) days after receipt of such notice of appeal, review the matter and shall determine whether the City Council or a Hearing Officer will hear the appeal. 
(c)  Once a determination is made, either the City Council or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, shall set a date, not less than five (5) days, not more than twenty-one (21) days from the date such determination is made by the City Council for the hearing of the appeal. The hearing may be continued for good cause. The hearing shall be a de novo hearing on the action appealed from. 
(d)  Upon the conclusion of such hearing, the City Council or the Hearing Officer, as the case may be, may uphold such revocation or may order the reinstatement of such permit. 
(e)  If the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer, the Hearing Officer shall cause a transcript of the hearing to be taken and shall issue findings and determinations in writing within ten (10) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The written findings and determinations shall be delivered or mailed to the permittee and shall be effective within five (5) days following the date of mailing, unless such appeal is heard by the Hearing Officer and revocation is upheld, and within such five (5) day period the permittee files with the Hearing Officer and the City Clerk a demand for City Council review. 
(f)  If such a demand for review is filed, the City Council shall, at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting held more than five (5) days after the filing of such demand, review the transcript of the hearing proceedings, and, at the conclusion of such review may uphold such revocation or may order that the permit be reinstated. Such review shall be comprised of a review of the entire record, including the transcript of the hearing proceedings, and any oral or written arguments that may be offered to the City Council. No additional testimony shall be taken. 
(g)  In the event such revocation is upheld by the City Council, the City Clerk shall deposit in the U.S. mail, certified, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at the address shown on the appeal, written notice of the decision, including findings of fact upon which the decision was based. Otherwise, the appeal shall be deemed sustained and the permittee shall be entitled to continue to operate the adult-oriented business subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The action by the City Council shall be final and conclusive, unless timely judicial review is sought pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. In the event a timely action or proceeding is brought pursuant to Section 1094.8, the decision to suspend or revoke the permit shall be stayed automatically pending a final decision on the merits by the trial court. As used in this subsection, final decision on the merits does not include rehearing or appellate procedures. The appellant may elect to have the City bring an action pursuant to Section 1094.8 by filing written notice of the election with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after written notice of the decision was deposited in the U.S. mail pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5312 - Reapplication after denial or revocation. 
(a)  Reapplication After Denial. An applicant for a permit under this Chapter whose application for such permit has been denied may not reapply for a permit for a period of one (1) year from the date such notice of denial may be deposited in the mail or received by the permittee, whichever occurs first. However, a reapplication prior to the termination of one (1) year may be made if accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the application no longer exists. 
(b)  Reapplication After Revocation. No person may obtain an adult-oriented business permit for two (2) years from the date any order of permit revocation affecting such person has become final. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5313 - Violations. 
Any adult-oriented business established, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney may commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult-oriented business and restrain and enjoin any person from establishing, operating, or maintaining an adult-oriented business contrary to the provisions of this Chapter or such other laws. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
5314 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this Chapter regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other applicable regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses adopted by the City Council. 
(Ord. 665 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Chapter 4 - UTILITY USERS TAX 
Sections: 
 
5400 - Title. 
This Chapter shall be known and referred to as the "Utility Users Tax Ordinance" of the City. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: amended during 4-95 supplement; Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5401 - Authority and purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of applicable law for the purpose of imposing utility users taxes to provide revenue to be used by the City for general municipal purposes. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5402 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this Chapter shall be construed as defined in this section. 
"Ancillary telecommunication services" means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunication services, including but not limited to the following services: 
(1)  "Conference bridging service" means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunication services used to reach the conference bridge. 
(2)  "Detailed telecommunication billing service" means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer's billing statement. 
(3)  "Directory assistance" means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information, and/or address information. 
(4)  "Vertical service" means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one (1) or more telecommunication services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services. 
(5)  "Voice mail service" means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service 
"Ancillary video services" means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including but not limited to electronic program guide services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video programming. 
"Billing address" means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer. 
"City" shall mean the City of Port Hueneme. 
"City Manager" shall mean the City Manager or his or her designee. 
"Communication services" means: "telecommunication services," "ancillary telecommunication services," "video services" and "ancillary video services." 
"Congenerator" shall mean any person employing congeneration technology (as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities Code) for producing power from other than a conventional power source for the generation of electricity or self use or sale to others. 
"Electrical corporation, gas corporation and water corporation" have the same meaning, except as hereinafter provided, as defined in Sections 218, 222, 241, respectively, of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California, or any successor statute. "Water corporation" shall be construed to include any organization or municipality, including but not limited to, a mutual water company, engaged in the selling or supplying of water to a service user. 
"Gas" shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternative hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor. 
"Mobile telecommunications service" has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder or any successor statutes or regulations. 
"Month" means a calendar month. 
"Nonutility supplier" shall mean: (a) an electricity supplier, other than an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City, which generates electrical energy in capacities of at least fifty kilowatts for its own use or for sale to others, including those using congeneration or fuel cell technologies; or (b) a gas supplier, other than a gas corporation franchised to serve the City, that sells or supplies gas to other users within the City. 
"Person" means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and non-profit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the City) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court. 
"Place of primary use" means the street address representative of where the service user's use of a communication service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer. 
"Post-paid telecommunication service" means a telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service. 
"Prepaid telecommunication service" means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount. 
"Private telecommunication service" means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications). 
"Service address" means either: 
(1)  The location of the service user's communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or, 
(2)  If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user's place of primary use. 
(3)  For prepaid telecommunication service, "service address" means the location associated with the service number. 
"Service supplier" means any entity or person, including the City, providing communication, electric, gas or water service to a user of such services within the City. 
"Service user" (as a beneficiary of service) means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this Chapter. 
"Tax Administrator" means the Finance Director of the City or his or her designee. 
"Telecommunication services" means: 
(1)  The transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used, and includes broadband services [e.g., T-1, digital subscriber line (eDSL), fiber optic, coaxial cable, and wireless broadband, including Wi-Fi, WiMAX, and Wireless MESH] to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such broadband services, now or in the future. The term telecommunication services includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with telecommunication services. 
(2)  Telecommunication services include, without limitation the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: Ancillary telecommunication services; broadband service (to the extent federal and/or state law permits taxation of such service); mobile telecommunication service; prepaid telecommunication service (to the extent that it is practicable for the service supplier to collect the correct tax imposed under this Article); post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); and 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service). 
(3)  Telecommunication services shall also include without limitation, charges for: Connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including without limitation call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory, administrative and other cost recovery charges; local number portability charges; and text messaging. Telecommunication services shall not include digital downloads that are not ancillary telecommunication services, such as video programming, music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products. 
"Telephone corporation," "electrical corporation," "gas corporation," "water corporation," and "cable television corporation" shall have the same meaning as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241 and 215-5, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code except, "electrical corporation" and "water corporation" shall also be construed to include any municipality or public agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas or water to a service user. 
"Video programming" means those programming services commonly provided to subscribers by a "video service supplier" including but not limited to basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on-demand, origination programming, or any other similar services, regardless of the content of such video programming, or the technology used to deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed. 
"Video services" means any and all services related to the providing or delivering of "video programming" (including origination programming and programming using Internet Protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or more channels by a "video service supplier," regardless of the technology used to deliver or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes data services, "telecommunication services," or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with "video services." 
"Video service supplier" means any person, company, or service which provides or sells one (1) or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the capability to receive one (1) or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential address in the City, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A "video service supplier" includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13) or any successor statute or regulation); open video systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); video services using internet protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on-demand), direct broadcast satellite (to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future); and other suppliers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 11-2-10)  
5403 - Exemptions. 
(a)  Constitutional. Statutory. Nothing in this section shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when the imposition of such tax upon such person would be in violation of the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the State, or any valid applicable statute or regulation of either the United States or the State. The Tax Administrator, upon the advice of the City Attorney, shall review each application for exemption from the payment of a tax, pursuant to this subsection, and shall allow such exemptions only when authorized pursuant hereto. 
(b)  Service Supplier Exemption. A service supplier shall not be obligated to pay any tax levied pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5404 - Communication services tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using communication services. The maximum tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of three and three-quarters percent (3.75%) of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the City, are used, in whole or in part, within the City's boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this Chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term "charges" shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services. 
(b)  Mobile telecommunications service shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) or any successor statute or regulation. The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this Chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including but not limited to post-paid communication services, prepaid communication services, and private communication services, provided that such rules are based upon industry custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multi-jurisdictional taxation. 
(c)  The Tax Administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this Chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefore, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection (a) above. 
(d)  Charges for video services and ancillary video services shall include, but are not limited to, charges for the following: 
(1)  Franchise fees and access fees (PEG); 
(2)  Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of communication services; 
(3)  Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees; 
(4)  Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees; 
(5)  All video programming services (e.g., basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, or on-demand programming); 
(6)  Ancillary programming services (e.g., electronic program guide services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming); 
(7)  Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices); and 
(8)  Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services. 
(e)  To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the Tax Administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the City under this section. 
(f)  The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or person receiving payment for the services. The amount of the tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator, and must be received by the Tax Administrator, on or before the last day of the following month. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by applicable federal or state law, if any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier's books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and non-taxable charges. 
(h)  For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this section, "substantial nexus" and "minimum contacts" shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the communication users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the City, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that "substantial nexus/minimum contacts" exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this Chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the City for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the City, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the City by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the City on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the City or distributed from a location with the City; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the City or through materials distributed in the City by means other than the United States mail. The City shall make available, upon request, an accurate description of its jurisdictional boundaries based on street addresses and/or ZIP plus four, in an electronic format. If a service supplier relies upon such information provided by City, it shall not be responsible for any errors in taxation that may result. 
(i)  Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users. Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to this Section with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to former Section 5404 and Section 5410 as codified immediately prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this section with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to April 1, 2011, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to former Section 5404 and Section 5410 as codified immediately prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this section shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to this section with respect to that charge. The intent of this paragraph is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior telephone and cable telephone tax to the new communication services tax (which transition period ends April 1, 2011) and to permit communication service providers, during that transition period to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax. 
(j)  Collection of Tax by Service Supplier. Service Suppliers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this Section as soon as feasible after the effective date of the Section, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 2, 11-2-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 704, § 2, adopted November 2, 2010, in effect repealed the former § 5404, and enacted a new § 5404 as set out herein. The former § 5404 pertained to telephone users tax and derived from Ord. No. 599, 1994 and Ord. No. 608, 1996.  
5405 - Electricity users tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using electrical energy in the City. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four (4) percent of the charges made of such energy by an electrical corporation franchised to serve the City and shall be paid by the person using the energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the City. Nonutility suppliers shall install and maintain an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section, or may arrange another methodology for applying the tax acceptable to the Tax Administrator. "Charges," as used in this section, shall include charges made for: (1) metered energy and (2) minimum charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, demand charges, standby charges and all other annual and monthly charges, fuel or other costs adjustments. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "using electrical energy" shall not be construed to mean the receiving of such energy by a person for the purpose of using it in the charging of a battery owned or possessed by him for use in an automobile or other machinery device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received. 
(c)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by any energy service supplier or nonutility supplier. An energy supplier providing wheeling service for delivery or electricity through its distribution system shall collect the tax from the service user base upon the cost of wheeling the electricity. The tax on energy provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 5408. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month upon the payment pattern of the customers of the service supplier, shall be remitted. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5406 - Tax on cogenerated electricity. 
(a)  The tax imposed on every person using cogenerated electrical energy in the City shall be at the rate specified in Section 5404. The tax applicable to cogenerated electrical energy used on site shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the cogenerator would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City. 
(b)  The cogenerator shall install and maintain an appropriate metering system which will enable compliance with this section. 
(c)  The tax shall be collected and paid by the cogenerator under Section 5408 if the cogenerator consumes the energy. If the congenerator sells the energy for consumption in the City, the tax will be imposed by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges for such service the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation franchised by the City, and shall be collected from the service user by the energy supplier. 
(d)  The amount of the tax collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5407 - Gas user tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person using gas in the City, gas which is transported through a pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four (4) percent of the charges made for such gas and shall be paid by the person using the gas. The tax applicable to gas provided by nonutility suppliers shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or gas transportation had been provided by the gas corporation franchised by the City. "Charges" as used in this section shall include: (1) the charge for gas which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or by mobile transport, (2) has transportation charges; and (3) demand charges, service charges, customer charges, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges and any other charges authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. 
(b)  There shall be excluded from the tax imposed in this section: (1) charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system or mobile transport; (2) charges made for gas used by cogenerator or as the primary fuel in a fuel cell to generate electricity; and (3) charges made for natural gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, utilizing natural gas. 
(c)  Tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the energy service supplier. An energy supplier providing transportation services for delivery of gas through a pipeline distribution system shall collect the tax from the service user based upon the cost of transporting the gas. The tax on energy provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 5408. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted by U.S. Mail, to the Tax Administrator, postmarked on or before the last day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the customers of the service supplier, shall be remitted. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5408 - Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity. 
(a)  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Sections 5404, 5405, 5406 or 5407 hereof, who produces electricity or gas for self-use or who receives electricity or gas directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this Chapter or otherwise not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the City directly billed and collected by the service supplier, shall report said fact to the Tax Administrator and remit the tax due directly to the city within thirty (30) days of such use. 
(b)  The Tax Administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility supplier and provide, subject to audit, filed tax returns or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of electricity or gas used and the price thereof. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5409 - Water users tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the City using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four (4) percent of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water. 
(b)  There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed, charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes. 
(c)  The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one (1) month shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5410 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 704, § 3, adopted November 2, 2010, repealed § 3, which pertained to cable television users tax and derived from Ord. No. 599, 1994 and Ord. No. 608, 1996.  
5411 - Interest and penalty. 
(a)  Taxes collected from a service user which are not remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the due dates provided in this Chapter are delinquent. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be postmarked on the first regular working day following a Saturday/Sunday, or legal holiday. 
(b)  Penalties for delinquency in remittance of any Utility Users Tax collected, shall attach to and be paid by the service supplier, in the amount equal to fifteen (15) percent of the total Utility Users Taxes collected and not remitted on or before the due date provided by this Chapter. 
(c)  An additional penalty shall be imposed upon any service supplier who fraudulently or negligently fails to timely report or remit Utility Users Taxes collected, in the amount equal to fifteen (15) percent of the amount of Utility Users Tax collected. 
(d)  Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this section shall be paid, forthwith, by service suppliers, to the City. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties imposed pursuant to this Chapter, each service supplier who fails for any reason to remit all taxes collected by it or its authorized agents, within thirty (30) calendar days after its collection, shall pay interest on the full amount of taxes due to the City, and upon the full amount of all penalties due thereon. The interest rate shall be the same rate applied by law to judgments rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5412 - Action to collect. 
Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the City. Any such tax collected from a service user which has willfully been withheld from the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this Chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5413 - Duty to collect—Procedures. 
The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this Chapter shall be performed as follows: 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5408, the tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the energy charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such share has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said energy charges Section 5415(c) will apply. 
(b)  The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this Chapter. Where a person receives more than one (1) billing, one (1) or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5414 - Additional power and duties of tax administrator. 
(a)  The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  The Tax Administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this Chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, exemption, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
(c)  The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this Chapter so that collection of any tax imposed herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this Chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator's office. 
(d)  The Tax Administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this Chapter. The Tax Administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the Tax Administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed hereby, together with the address to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The Tax Administrator shall notify the service supplier of termination of any person's right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. 
(e)  The Tax Administrator shall provide written notice to all service suppliers of any change in the City's boundaries at least ninety (90) days prior to any annexation or other changes in the City's boundaries. Said notice shall set forth the revised boundaries by street and address along with a copy of the final annexation order from Local Agency Formation Commission. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5415 - Assessment—Administrative remedy. 
(a)  The Tax Administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit. 
(b)  Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of tax, the Tax Administrator may relieve such person of the obligation to collect taxes due under this Chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. 
(c)  The service supplier shall provide the City with amounts refused and/or unpaid with the names and addresses of the service users neglecting to pay the tax imposed under provisions of this Chapter. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax for a period of two (2) or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. 
(d)  The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that the Tax Administrator has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the U.S. Mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have changed addresses, to the last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the Tax Administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, but not less than five (5) dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5416 - Records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and remit to the City any tax imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary to determine liability for the remittance to the Tax Administrator, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(b)  A person providing transportation services of natural gas to a user for delivery through a gas pipeline distribution system shall make available to the Tax Administrator records of the names and addresses of service users for whom only transportation services are provided by such persons. All information provided to the Tax Administrator pursuant to this section shall be used solely for the purposes of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5417 - Refunds. 
(a)  Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the Tax Administrator under this Chapter, it may be refunded by the Tax Administrator. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a service supplier may claim a refund; or take as credit against taxes remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established that the service user from whom the tax has been collected did not owe the tax; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax erroneously or illegally collected has either been refunded to the service user or credited to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the person required to collect and remit. A service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this Chapter and actually due from a service user, may refund such amount to the service user and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than three (3) years from the date of overpayment. 
(c)  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes the right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(d)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of shares or past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this Chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this Chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the City. 
(e)  A service supplier may refund the taxes collected to the service user in accordance with this section or by the service supplier's customary practice. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5418 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this Chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have been passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the act that any one or more section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5419 - Termination or suspension of utility users tax. 
The City Council of the City of Port Hueneme shall have the authority to (a) provide by resolution for the suspension of taxes collected under this Chapter, and (b) provide by resolution or a temporary reduction in the tax rates imposed by this Chapter. The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any Utility Users Tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective date of such action by the City Council. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5420 - Maximum tax payable. 
The following CAP or maximum amount shall be payable under the provisions of this Chapter: 
(a)  The combined total maximum of electricity, cogenerated electricity, gas, telephone, water, and cable user taxes paid by any single service user for one location under this Chapter shall not exceed the sum of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) during any twelve (12) month period between July 1 and June 30. 
(b)  A service user may deposit the maximum tax specified in subsection (a) of this section with the Tax Administrator during the month of July each year as payment in advance of taxes due under this Chapter for the twelve (12) month period commencing on the first day of said month and ending on June 30 thereafter. Any service user making a deposit of maximum tax shall not thereafter be billed for any tax under this Chapter for said twelve (12) month supplier when to cease and when to resume billing the tax to such service users. 
(c)  The penalty assessment provided in Section 5411 of this Chapter shall not be counted in computing the maximum tax as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Any service user paying more than a maximum tax provided for in subsection (a) of this section during any twelve (12) month period commencing July 1 and ending June 30, may claim a refund or credit for such overpayment from the Tax Administrator in the manner provided in Section 5417. 
(e)  The phrase "one location" as used in subsection (a) of this section shall mean one (1) or more contiguous sites for which the service user receives one (1) or more utility billing. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
5421 - Effective date. 
This Chapter shall become effective the 5th day of November 1996. 
(Ord. 608 § 1 (part), 1996: Ord. 599 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 5 - MASSAGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 710, § 2, adopted December 5, 2011, in effect repealed the former Chapter 5, §§ 5501—5517, and enacted a new Chapter 5 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5 pertained to massage permits and derived from Ord. No. 703, adopted December 6, 2010 and Ord. No. 707, adopted August 15, 2011. 
 
5501 - Declaration of purpose and intent. 
(a)  This chapter establishes new permitting standards intended to comply with California law and establish health and safety guidelines for massage establishments. 
(b)  This chapter is not intended to be exclusive and compliance will not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal services businesses, including but not limited to, all zoning applications, business license provisions, building code, and fire, electrical, plumbing, and health and safety code laws and regulations applicable to professional or personal services businesses. 
(c)  This chapter establishes a local regulatory system that allows only state certified massage therapists and massage practitioners to operate within the city. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5502 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning set forth elsewhere in this Code, the Business and Professions Code, or Government Code. 
"California Massage Therapy Council (CAMTC)" means the California Massage Therapy Council created pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 4500.5(a) 
"Certified massage practitioner" means a person who is currently certified as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation. 
"Certified massage therapist" means a person who is currently certified as a massage therapist by the CAMTC, and who administers massage for compensation. 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme. 
"Director" means the Community Development Director or such other director designated by the City Manager. 
"Massage" means any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus, or other appliances or devices, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniment, antiseptic, oil, powder, cream, lotion, ointment or other similar preparations. 
"Massage establishment" means and includes any massage establishment, parlor, or any room, place or institution where massage is given or administered by a massage technician as the primary service of the business establishment. 
"Massage technician" means any person, who gives, performs or administers to another person a massage for any form of consideration. 
"Person" means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or other forms of business organization or group. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
"Specified sexual activities" means and includes all of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Sex acts including, without limitation, intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any specified sexual activity listed in this definition. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5503 - Administration. 
The Director is authorized to administer this chapter and to adopt administrative policies and procedures required to implement the regulations set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5504 - Certifications required. 
(a)  Massage Establishment. It is unlawful for any person to own, operate or maintain a massage establishment unless all massage technicians employed by the massage establishment hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
(b)  Massage Technician. It is unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on the business or activities of a massage technician without a certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. 
(c)  Off-Premises Massage Service. It is unlawful for any person to own, operate, or maintain an off-premise massage service in the city unless all massage technicians employed by the off-premises massage service hold a current, valid certification from the CAMTC as a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5505 - Massage establishment owner background check required. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership, or corporation desiring to operate a massage establishment, that will own five percent (5%) or more of the massage establishment, and that is not a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist, must make an application to the Director for an investigation of the applicant's background and history, and must obtain background clearance as required by this section. A nonrefundable fee, in an amount set by resolution, must accompany the submission of each application to defray the cost of investigation, inspection and enforcement of this chapter. An annual nonrefundable renewal fee will also be charged to defray associated costs of investigation, inspection and enforcement. 
(1)  No investigation of the applicant's background and history is required for renewal of permits where: 
(A)  A background clearance was granted after the initial application and investigation; 
(B)  An approval under this chapter has not been revoked in accordance with this chapter; 
(C)  The owner has not been convicted of a violation of this chapter; and 
(D)  The owner has not been assessed a civil penalty under this chapter. 
(b)  Each applicant for a background check must submit the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Driver's license number and social security number. 
(4)  The proposed address of the massage establishment. 
(5)  Each residence and business address of the applicant for the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive dates for such address. 
(6)  Written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(7)  Applicant's height, weight, and color of eyes and hair. 
(8)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within four (4) months preceding the date of the application. 
(9)  Applicant's business, occupation and employment history for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(10)  The business license or permit history of the applicant, including whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency or board, city, county or state revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit revoked or suspended and the reason(s) for the revocation. 
(11)  All criminal convictions for any of the offenses set forth in this chapter, and a statement of the dates and places of such convictions. 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must be set forth exactly as shown in the articles of incorporation or charter, together with the state and date of incorporation and names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the names and residence addresses of each of the partners, including the limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it must furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to corporate applicants will apply. The applicant corporation or partnership must designate one (1) of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such person must complete and sign all application forms required of any individual applicant under this chapter, but only one (1) application fee will be charged. 
(13)  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the massage establishment is to be operated, and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property is required for each massage establishment permit location. 
(14)  The full true names and other names used, the present addresses and telephone numbers, driver's license numbers, and social security numbers, and state certificates from the CAMTC for all massage technicians who will be working as employees or independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location. The applicant must provide the Director with any changes in the massage technicians that work at the massage establishment during the permit period within ten (10) working days of each change. 
(15)  The Director may require the applicant to furnish fingerprints when needed for the purpose of verifying identification. 
(16)  Such other identification and information as may be required by the Director in order to verify the information to be included in the application. 
(c)  The city is allowed a reasonable time, not to exceed sixty (60) days, in which to investigate the information on the application. During the investigation of the background information, a city representative including, without limitation, a member of the Police Department, Fire Department, Building and Safety Division, Planning Division, or any authorized representative thereof, may inspect, with or without notice during regular business hours, the proposed place of business to determine whether it conforms to the requirements of this chapter. Upon completion of the inspection, the city representative must inform the Director in writing of the findings of the inspection. 
(d)  Background clearance will be issued, within sixty (60) days of receipt of the application, to any applicant who has furnished all of the information required by this section in the application for such license, provided 
(1)  The applicant has not made a material false statement in the application and that all massage technicians who will be working as employees or independent contractors at each massage establishment permit location possesses a certification from the CAMTC as a massage practitioner or massage therapist; 
(2)  The applicant, if an individual, or in the case of an applicant which is a corporation or partnership, any of its officers, directors, holders or five (5) percent or more of the corporation's stock, has not, within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following offenses: Penal Code §§ 243.4, 261, 266a through 266j, 267, 314, 315, 316, 318, or 647 (a, b, or d); any offense requiring registration under Penal Code § 290 or Health and Safety Code § 11590; or any felony offense involving the possession, possession for sale, sale, transportation, furnishing, or giving away of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code §§ 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058, as amended; or any offense in another state which, if committed in California, would have been punishable as one or more of the heretofore mentioned offenses; or any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person of another; or any offense involving theft, embezzlement or moral turpitude; 
(3)  The applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; and 
(4)  The applicant has not had a massage technician, massage establishment, escort service, nude entertainment, nude photo studio or similar type of license or permit suspended within one (1) year or revoked within three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, unless the applicant can show a material change in circumstances or that mitigating circumstances exist since the revocation or suspension. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5506 - Additional requirements. 
Before operating a massage establishment in the city, massage establishment owners must comply with all applicable codes adopted by the city, including, without limitation, the building, electrical, and plumbing codes. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5507 - Display of permit. 
Any owner of a massage establishment or off-premise massage service must display the CAMTC certificates for all massage technicians prominently in a conspicuous place, capable of being viewed by customers or city representatives, at every location where massage is performed or conducted. For off-premise massage services, massage workers must also carry a copy of their CAMTC certificate and display it to customers upon request. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5508 - Massage establishment—Massage technician certificates required. 
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off-site massage services to allow any person to perform massage that is not a certified massage therapist or certified massage practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5509 - Prohibited conduct. 
It is unlawful for owners of massage establishments or off-premise massage services, or massage technicians, to conduct or allow any of the following activities: 
(a)  It is unlawful for any massage technician or any other employee working in a massage establishment or for an off-premise massage service, or customers, patrons, or guests of the establishment or service, to engage in any specified sexual activities upon the premises of the massage establishment or the off-premise massage location. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any massage technician or other employee of a massage establishment to expose specified anatomical areas in the presence of any patron, customer, or guest. 
(c)  In the course of administering the massage, it is unlawful for any massage technician or other massage establishment employee to make intentional physical contact with the specified anatomical areas of any customer, patron or guest. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5510 - Facilities and operations. 
It is unlawful for any massage establishment to operate unless the massage establishment premises and operation comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Signs. A readable sign must be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided, however, that all such signs must otherwise comply with the sign requirements of this code. 
(b)  Lighting. Minimum lighting must be provided in accordance with the California Building Code, as adopted by this code, and, in addition, at least one (1) unobstructed artificial light of not less than nine hundred (900) lumens must be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(c)  Ventilation. Minimum ventilation must be provided in accordance with the California Building Code, as adopted by this code. 
(d)  Disinfection of Instruments. Instruments used for massage must be disinfected before each use. Where instruments for massage are employed, adequate quantities of supplies for disinfection must be available during all hours of operation. 
(e)  Water. Hot and cold running water must be provided at all times. 
(f)  Linen Storage. Closed cabinets must be utilized for the storage of clean towels and linen. After use, towels and linen must be removed and stored in a separate container until laundered. 
(g)  Dressing and Toilet Facilities. Separate dressing and separate toilet facilities must be provided for male and female patrons. This condition does not apply to massage establishments that offer foot massage services and provide no other form of massage services or other type of activity regulated by this chapter. 
(h)  Sanitary Conditions. All walls, ceilings, floors, steam, and vapor rooms, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be kept in good repair and be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(i)  Clean Linen. Clean and sanitary towels and linens must be provided for patrons receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens is permitted. 
(j)  Compliance with Laws. The premises to be used must at all times comply with all applicable state and local laws and regulations. 
(k)  Any room in which a massage establishment provides massage services may not be used for residential sleeping purposes. 
(l)  A register of all individuals employed as massage technicians, and copies of their current CAMTC certifications and massage technician business licenses, must be maintained and available for inspection at all times during regular business hours. 
(m)  Each person present in any area of the massage establishment outside the waiting area or other areas open to any member of the public must be a certified massage practitioner or certified massage therapist, or the massage establishment owner. 
(n)  The permits and certifications required by this chapter must be displayed in an open and conspicuous public place on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5511 - Exceptions. 
This chapter does not apply to the following classes of individuals, and no CAMTC certification is required of such persons, while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective professions: 
(a)  Acupuncturists who are duly certified to practice their profession in the State of California. 
(b)  Barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists with respect to scalp massage, who are duly permitted pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 7301 et seq., in accordance with the limitations of their permits. 
(c)  Nurses who are registered as such under the laws of the state of California. 
(d)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, or physical therapists who are duly permitted to practice their respective professions in the State of California, or provide professional services in lawful compliance with Corporations Code Section 13401(a). 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5512 - Public nuisance abatement. 
Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter is unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney is authorized, in addition to or in lieu of any other legal or criminal proceedings, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment of such massage establishment in the manner provided by law. The City Attorney may seek a court order to grant such relief to abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining such an establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5513 - Revocation. 
(a)  Grounds for Revocation. The Director or the City Attorney may revoke approvals issued under this chapter for one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or Deceit. That the licensee practiced fraud or deceit in obtaining an approval under this chapter; 
(2)  Violation of Chapter. That the massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee violated a provision or provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Criminal Conviction. That the licensee has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense described in this chapter; 
(4)  Improperly Maintained Facilities. That the facilities and operations of the massage establishment are not kept in compliance with this chapter, and that the holder has failed to promptly remedy any deficiency of which the holder has been notified. For purposes of this subsection, notice shall mean notice given personally or by leaving notice at the massage establishment premises, or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address designated by the massage technician or facility pursuant to Section 5505(b)(2); 
(5)  Employment of Uncertified Technicians. That the massage establishment has employed, allowed or permitted an uncertified person to perform massage in the massage establishment; 
(6)  Error. That the approval was issued in error; 
(7)  Civil Penalties. Assessment of three (3) or more civil penalties as provided by this chapter during any six month period; or 
(8)  Prohibited Conduct. A massage establishment owner, operator, massage technician, or its employee or agent has been found to have engaged in prohibited conduct in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Notice of Revocation. Upon a determination on the grounds to revoke an approval under this chapter, the Director or City Attorney must cause a notice of revocation to be mailed by first class, postage prepaid mail, to the address designated by the massage technician or massage establishment pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5514 - Civil liability and penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is liable in a civil action brought by the City Attorney for an amount up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. Such person is also liable for reasonable attorneys' fees and costs incurred by the City Attorney in any civil proceeding filed to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Enforcing this chapter through civil action may be filed as an alternative to criminal enforcement. Civil enforcement does not require the violation to be knowing or willful. A civil action cannot be filed if the person is being criminally prosecuted. 
(c)  Each violation of this chapter is a separate offense subject to the civil penalty. 
(d)  The City Attorney may settle any civil enforcement before or after to the filing of a civil action by imposing a civil penalty in an amount not exceeding the potential civil liability, including attorneys' fees, set forth in this section. If such civil penalty is paid in full, the City Attorney may agree not to file civil or criminal actions or, if action has already been filed, may dismiss such action. Imposition of all civil penalties is public record. 
(e)  All civil fines must be deposited into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
5515 - Appeal. 
Any person denied an approval under this chapter or a massage establishment owner or operator whose approval has been revoked may appeal the denial or revocation in writing pursuant to the appeal procedures provided in by Article I, Chapter 4 of this code. Any successful appeal will result in approval or reinstatement of an approval and refund of any fines collected by the City." 
(Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-5-11)  
Chapter 6 - ESSENTIAL MUNICIPAL SERVICES GENERAL TRANSACTION AND USE TAX 
 
5600 - Title. 
The Ordinance codified in this Chapter shall be known as the "City of Port Hueneme Essential Municipal Services General Transaction and Use Tax." The City of Port Hueneme hereinafter shall be referred to as the "City." This Ordinance shall be applicable within the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5601 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5602 - Purpose. 
(a)  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
(b)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates the provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained within Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(c)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
(d)  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the highest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting transactions and use taxes, and that the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(e)  The Ordinance codified in this Chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and the City Council directs the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
(1)  To enhance public safety by supporting the viability of City's Police Department; 
(2)  To provide quick responses to 9-1-1 emergencies and neighborhood police patrols; 
(3)  To prevent gang activity and drug-related crimes; 
(4)  To maintain City streets and repair potholes; 
(5)  To repair and maintain public buildings and infrastructure, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, curbs, storm drains, and gutters; 
(6)  To support crime prevention and investigations; 
(7)  To keep public areas clean and free of graffiti, including, but not limited to, graffiti abatement; and 
(8)  To maintain parks, beaches, and recreation facilities. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5603 - Contract with State. 
Prior to the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter, the City shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance; provided, that if the City has not contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract, and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5604 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of one (1) percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5605 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one (1) place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5606 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5607 - Adoption of provisions of State law. 
Except as otherwise provided in the Ordinance codified in this Chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5608 - Limitations on adoption of State law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
(a)  Whenever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefore. The substitution, however, shall not be made when: 
(1)  The word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
(2)  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof, rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter; 
(3)  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
i.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or 
ii.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under said provisions of that code. 
(4)  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(b)  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5609 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5610 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any State-administered transactions or use tax. 
(b)  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
(1)  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(2)  Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied: 
i.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
ii.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
(3)  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(4)  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(c)  There are exempted from the use tax levied by the Ordinance codified in this Chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property: 
(1)  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
(2)  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
(3)  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(4)  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(5)  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer. 
(7)  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: Vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City. 
(d)  Any person subject to use tax under the Ordinance codified in this Chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(e)  Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a federal or State statute, the Constitution of the United States, or the Constitution of the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5611 - Amendments. 
(a)  All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to the sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of the Ordinance codified in this Chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by the Ordinance codified in this Chapter. 
(b)  Except for amendments that would: (i) increase the tax rate or revise the methodology for calculating the tax such that a tax increase would result; (ii) impose the tax on transactions and uses not previously subject to the tax; or (iii) change the purposes and/or uses for which the tax is collected, the City Council may amend the Ordinance codified in this Chapter or the Expenditure Plan without submitting the amendment to the voters for approval. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5612 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or this City, or against any officer of the State or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under the Ordinance codified in this Chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5613 - Refunds and credits, suits and legal proceedings. 
(a)  Refunds of and credits for any tax paid pursuant to the Ordinance codified in this Chapter may be made only as provided in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
(b)  Suits and proceedings for the recovery of any amount alleged to have been erroneously or illegally determined or collected pursuant to the Ordinance codified in this Chapter may be maintained in any court only as provided for in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. A judgment shall not be rendered in favor of the plaintiff in any action brought against the Board of Equalization to recover any amount paid when the action is brought by or in the name of an assignee of the person paying the amount or by any person other than the person who paid the amount. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5614 - Independent annual audit. 
The proceeds resulting from this transactions and use tax shall be deposited into the City's general fund and become subject to the same independent annual audit requirements as other general fund revenue. The independent auditor's report, which shall include an accounting of the revenues received and expenditures made from the transactions and use tax, will be presented annually to the City Council and made available for public review. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
5615 - Citizens' oversight committee. 
Although not otherwise required by law, the City Council shall, by resolution adopted before the operative date of this Chapter, establish a citizens' oversight committee to review the revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax adopted by this Chapter. The members' terms, qualifications, duties, and scope of the committee shall be as established by the resolution. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 2, 12-17-18)  
Article VI - PUBLIC STREETS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - PUBLIC STREETS 
Sections:  
Part A. - Specifications and Standards 
 
6000 - Specifications for work on public streets. 
The Council, by resolution, shall adopt standard specifications for the construction, reconstruction, repair and maintenance of all public streets, pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage structures, traffic signals, sewers and related public works. Upon and after the adoption of such specifications, no person shall construct, reconstruct, maintain or repair any type of street work, as referred to in said specifications, except in conformity therewith.  
6001 - Specifications—Modification. 
The Director of Public Works may modify, vary or add to said specifications when, because of special circumstances or conditions pertaining to a particular job or area, such modification, variation or addition is required to secure the desired standard of work. Such modifications, variations or additions shall, as soon as possible after completion, be submitted to the Council for approval or ratification, as the case may be.  
6002 - Datum plane established. 
Sea level is hereby declared to be the datum plane or base elevation for the City for the purpose of establishing and designating the official elevations and grades of streets, sewers and other public works within the City.  
6003 - Street work—Barricades and warnings. 
No person shall ride or drive any animal, or drive or propel any vehicle or bicycle, or walk or throw any object upon any portion of any public street where street work is in progress and where there is a barrier or barricade to prevent traveling upon such portion of such public street, or at or near which there is a sign stating that the street is closed, or where warning lights are maintained to indicate that said street is closed. Nor shall any person injure, destroy or remove any such barrier, barricades or warning lights except under orders of the person having charge of such street work.  
6004 - Street work—Newly made pavement. 
No person shall drive or ride any animal or drive or propel any vehicle or walk or go upon, over or across or throw any object upon or deface any newly made pavement, sidewalk, curb, gutter or related street improvement work until all barriers or barricades protecting the work have been removed.  
6005 - Driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall ride or drive any horse or other animal, or drive or propel any vehicle upon or along or across any cement sidewalk or cement curb on any street, except where a driveway has been constructed across the same for the use of vehicles, nor permit any vehicles to park upon any cement sidewalk.  
6006 - Vehicle with studs, cleats, flanges, etc. 
No person shall drive along or upon any paved, macadamized or improved street or any public street, culvert or bridge in the City, any tractor, or motor vehicle having as a part of said vehicle, coming in contact with the surface of any street, any block, stud, flange, cleat, ridge, bead or any other protuberance of metal or wood which projects beyond the tread or traction surface of the tire, or wheel, which will or might cause damage to the pavement or surface of any such street. This Section shall not be deemed to prohibit the use of anti-skid chains of reasonable proportions on pneumatic tires attached to the wheels of motor vehicles.  
6007 - Unauthorized deposits. 
No person shall throw, deposit, or place or cause to be deposited or placed any materials in or upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or any other public place without the permission of the Director of Public Works, except refuse as provided for in Section 3900 et seq. hereof, properly contained and set out for collection.  
6008 - Obstructions. 
Except as provided in Part D hereof, no person shall leave, place or cause to be left or placed in any alley, street, sidewalk, parkway or any other public place in the City any obstruction whatsoever which interferes with the free and uninterrupted use of such alley, street, sidewalk, parkway or other public place by any person or vehicle.  
6009 - Removal of obstructions. 
The Director of Public Works shall immediately notify any person found to be obstructing any street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place, in violation of Section 6007 or 6008 of this Code, to remove the obstruction. If within a reasonable time after the giving of notice, the same has not been removed, the same shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. Thereupon, the Director of Public Works shall proceed to remove the same. All costs incurred by the City, including administrative costs, shall be charged to the person responsible for the obstruction.  
6010 - Closure or restriction of use. 
The Director of Public Works may restrict the use of, or close, any City Street whenever he considers such closing or restriction of use necessary: 
(a)  For the protection of the public; or 
(b)  For the protection of such City Streets from damage during storms; or 
(c)  During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon.  
6011 - Sidewalks and driveways—Repairs. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each lot or portion or such lot fronting on any portion of a public street to maintain all driveway approaches and/or adjoining sections of sidewalk over which vehicles pass that are located in parkways abutting such lot, in such a condition that the driveway approach and/or sidewalk will not constitute a hazard to person or property and will not interfere with the public convenience and necessity in the use of said sidewalk and/or driveway approach.  
6012 - Sidewalks and parkways—Cleaning and maintaining. 
No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to keep the sidewalk or parkway in front of his property in a clean condition and free of all accumulations of weeds, dirt and debris.  
6012.1 - Discharge into gutter or street.* 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any public street, gutter or storm drain the following wastes: 
(a)  Construction materials including, but not limited to, concrete, cement, paint, paint thinner, and asphalt; 
(b)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, petroleum oils or refined petroleum oils, oil, emulsions in any quantity or any other flammable or explosive liquid or solid; 
(c)  Waste containing toxic or poisonous solids or liquids in quantities which alone or in combination with other substances may create a hazard to humans, to animals or the local environment or may cause a public nuisance; 
(d)  Any solid or viscous substance which in size or such quantity that may cause obstruction to drainage or cause public nuisance; these solid or viscous substances include, but are not limited to, ashes, sand, mud, straw, industrial process shavings, metal, glass, tar, plastics and wood. 
* Section 6012.1 added by Ord. 572, 9/18/91: 572 as subsequently amended.  
Part B. - Street Benches 
 
6013 - Enforcement. 
The Director of Public Works shall enforce the provisions of this Part and shall have complete authority over the installation and maintenance of benches, subject to the provisions herein.  
6014 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Part, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(a)  Bench. Bench means a seat located upon public property along any public way for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation. 
(b)  Street. Street means any public thoroughfare or way including the sidewalk, the parkway and any other public property immediately adjacent to a public street.  
6015 - Permit required. 
No person shall install or maintain any bench on any street without a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works: a separate permit shall be obtained for each bench. Such permits shall be valid only for the particular location specified thereon. Each permit shall bear a separate number and not more than two permits shall be issued for any one location.  
6016 - Permit application. 
No bench permit shall be issued except upon written application showing the proposed location of each bench, the type of construction proposed, and such other information as the Director of Public Works may require.  
6017 - Fees. 
Each application must be accompanied by a filing and processing fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each such bench. No part of such fee shall be refundable.  
6018 - Denial of application. 
A permit application shall be denied if the Director of Public Works finds that the maintenance of the bench would tend to obstruct passage along any public way or create a hazard or would otherwise be detrimental to the public safety, welfare or convenience.  
6019 - Revocation. 
(a)  Any permit may be revoked, or renewal thereof denied for any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter, for any fraud or misrepresentation in the application, or for any other reason which would have been grounds for denial of the application. 
(b)  Any permit issued under this part shall be canceled and revoked if the permittee fails to install the bench within sixty (60) days after the date of the issuance of the permit.  
6020 - Removal of benches by the city. 
After the revocation of any permit, the Director of Public Works may remove and store the bench if the permittee fails to do so within ten (10) days after being given notice of such revocation. 
The permittee may recover the bench if, within sixty (60) days after the removal, he pays the cost of such removal and storage, which shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) for removal and ten dollars ($10.00) a month for storage for each such bench. After sixty (60) days, the Director of Public Works may sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of the bench at his discretion. All of the foregoing shall be at the sole risk of the permittee and shall be in addition to any other penalties provided by law for the violation of this Section.  
6021 - New permit required upon sale or transfer of title. 
Whenever a bench for which a permit has been issued is sold or title or control thereof assigned or transferred, a new permit shall be obtained for its maintenance.  
6022 - Advertising and signs on benches. 
(a)  No advertising matter or sign whatever shall be displayed upon any bench including the front and rear surfaces of the backrest.  
Part C. - Curb Painted House Numbers 
 
6023 - Permit required. 
No person shall paint house address numbers on the curb of any public street without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Director of Public Works. 
No such permit shall be issued unless the Director of Public Works finds that the issuance thereof is in the public interest.  
6024 - Type of markings. 
Where a permit is obtained allowing the painting of house address numbers on street curbs, such markings shall consist of a white field with black letters thereon. The field may be reflectorized by clear glass spherical beads applied with force against the white field paint while the same is still tacky so that the beads will be firmly bonded to the field paint upon drying. The field and numeral borders shall be sharply defined with no running or blurring of edges. The numerals shall be four inches (4") in height. The field shall have a minimum border of one inch (1 ") at all edges of the numerals. All work shall be performed in accordance with specifications prepared by the Director of Public Works.  
6025 - Permit fees. 
Fees and deposits required for the issuance of a permit pursuant to this Part shall be paid, prior to the issuance of a permit by the Director of Public Works in amounts prescribed by Resolution. However, no fee or deposit required by this Section shall apply to any applicant which would be exempt from the payment of a City business license pursuant to the Business License provisions of this Code.  
Part D. - Construction, Excavation, Encroachment, Moving and Load Regulations  
Division 1. - Definitions 
 
6026 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, for the purpose of this Part, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein. 
(a)  "Base Material" means that portion of the highway located between the pavement and the native soil. 
(b)  "Director" means Director of Community Services. 
(c)  "Driveway" means that portion of the public right-of-way between the property line and the pavement where vehicles enter and leave property abutting the street. 
(d)  "Encroachment" means any obstruction, tower pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable. conduit, stand or building, or any other structure or object of any kind or character which is placed in, along, under, over or across the highway. 
(e)  "Height" as that term relates to vehicles and their loads, means that dimension measured from the level surface upon which the vehicle stands to the highest projection thereof in a vertical line. 
(f)  Highway means any dedicated public right-of-way. 
(g)  "Load" means any object or thing which, when transported by a vehicle or combination of vehicles, over, upon, along or across any highway is required to have a special permit in accordance with provisions of the Vehicle Code and includes but is not limited to, any house, vessel, machine, equipment, transformer, tree, girder, boat or airplane. 
(h)  "Moving Contractor" means any person who for himself or for another moves or causes to be moved, any load over, upon, along or across any highway. 
(i)  "Native Soil" means the compacted soil that is "native" or "common" to the site. 
(j)  "Overhead Structure" means any structure other than franchise utility facilities extending over the dedicated portion of a highway, but excluding such projections from buildings as are permitted by this Code. 
(k)  "Pavement" means the surfaced portion of the highway which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with Portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds. 
(l)  "Permit" means a permit required pursuant to this Chapter. 
(m)  "Vehicle" as that term relates to moving oversize or overweight vehicles or equipment through the City means a vehicle or combination of vehicles as described in the Vehicle Code which: 
(1)  Whether laden or unladen is required by the Vehicle Code to have a special permit to be on any highway; 
(2)  Is so laden that it is required to have such special permit. 
(n)  "Vehicle Code" means the State of Vehicle Code in effect at the time of issuance of the permit. 
(o)  "Width" as that term relates to vehicles and their loads means that dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the load or portion thereof is, or is to be, loaded or moved.  
Division 2. - Permit Procedures 
 
6027 - Permits. 
(a)  Permit Required. Every person shall obtain a permit from the Director of Public Works for any of the following: 
(1)  Moving or causing to be moved over, along or across any highway any "Load" or "Vehicle"; 
(2)  Making or causing to be made any excavation or encroachment in any highway; 
(3)  Placing, changing or relocating any encroachment; 
(4)  Placing, constructing, or repairing any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain, culvert, or other work of any nature located on, in, over, under, along or across any highway; 
(5)  Constructing, reconstructing, repairing or maintaining any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility within any highway: 
(6)  Placing or leaving any impediment to travel upon any highway. 
No person shall participate in, or perform or cause to be performed, any of the acts described in this Section unless there is in full force and effect a validly issued permit therefor. 
Each permittee shall present for inspection a copy of the permit to any public official upon his request therefor, made at any reasonable time and place. 
(b)  Permit Applications. Applications or permits shall be made upon a form provided by the Director of Public Works. Such applications shall clearly specify the following: 
(1)  The nature of the activity; 
(2)  The location of the activity; 
(3)  The duration of the activity; 
(4)  The name, address and legal status of the applicant; 
(5)  The name and address of the person who will be in charge of the activity; and 
(6)  Such other information as the Director of Public Works deems necessary, including, but not limited to plans and specifications for the project contemplated. 
(c)  Expiration of Permit—Time Extension. Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall become null and void. The permit shall become null and void on the date so specified unless the time is extended. The Director of Public Works, for good cause, may extend such time. 
(d)  Issuance of Permit. The Director of Public Works shall issue the permit as requested if he finds; 
(1)  That the activity will not cause any unreasonable interference with the public's use of the highway; and 
(2)  That the activity is reasonably necessary and is consistent with the public interest: and 
(3)  That the activity can be conducted without the probability of injury to persons or property; and 
(4)  That all fees and charges established by the Resolution and/or deposits required hereunder have been paid or deposited. 
(e)  Imposition of Conditions Upon Issuance. The Director of Public Works shall be empowered to conditionally issue a permit where he finds such conditions are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Code and to carry out the purpose of this Chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The relocation, reconstruction, replacement or protection of any existing objects or structures, natural or man-made; and 
(2)  The routes to be utilized: and 
(3)  The locations to be utilized; and 
(4)  The depth, location, dimension and number of excavations to be permitted: and 
(5)  The type and nature of equipment, safety devices and personnel to be utilized; and 
(6)  The type and method of construction; and 
(7)  The duration of the term of the permit; and 
(8)  The amount of the required security deposits to be made, if any. The amount and form of such deposits shall be set by the Director of Public Works, based upon the estimated cost to the City of administration, engineering, field inspection and other services required. 
(f)  Denial of Application. If the Director of Public Works finds that any of the facts set forth in Paragraph three (3) hereof are not present, he shall refuse to issue the permit. 
(g)  Notice of Decision. The Director of Public Works shall give written notice to the applicant and others advising the same of his decision regarding a permit application. 
(h)  Appeal from Decision of Director of Public Works. Any decision of the Director of Public Works with regard to the issuance, refusal to issue, or conditional issuance of a permit shall be final and conclusive on the tenth day after the giving of written notice thereof to the applicant in the absence of an appeal filed in the time and manner set forth in Article I, Chapter 4 of this Code. Such appeals shall be processed and heard as prescribed in said Article I, Chapter 4 except that no filing and processing fee shall be required. 
(i)  Revocation of Permit. The Director of Public Works shall revoke a permit after its issue if he finds: 
(1)  The operations thereunder are not being conducted in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, the conditions of issuance, and all applicable laws; or 
(2)  The operations, as conducted, constitute a public nuisance or present an unwarranted possibility of injury to persons or property. In such case, the Director of Public Works shall issue, and give notice of, an Order of Suspension in the manner set forth in Section 5106 of this Code. Such an Order shall be effective, and subject to the appeal process, in the time and manner set forth in said Section 5106; or 
(3)  The applicant for a permit falsified information on the permit application. 
(j)  Permits Non-Transferable. Permits issued under the authority of this Part are non-transferable. 
(k)  Compliance. Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by this Part must comply with the provisions of this Part. The provisions of this Part, the provisions of the specifications and all Codes referred to by this Part shall be deemed to be conditions of approval imposed upon each permit. 
(All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or presented by the Director of Public Works in the matters specified on the permit or by attachments, or by any other matter in any way relating to or affecting their use of the highway, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents, and employees, except in the case of a public utility, regulated by the Public Utilities Commission when such order, decision, direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission applicable to such public utility.) 
(l)  Certificate of Completion. If the Director of Public Works ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor and of all applicable laws, he shall issue, if requested to do so by the permittee, a certificate of completion which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. 
(m)  Obligations of Permittee. 
(1)  Whenever street reconstruction has occurred, within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the permit issuance, permittee shall resurface the entire street within the limits of the longitudinal excavation. Individual service cuts to a single lot are exempted. 
(2)  Whenever street reconstruction has occurred within the last three (3) years but not less than one (1) year preceding the permit issuance, permittee shall resurface the half street within the limits of the longitudinal excavation. Individual service cuts to a single lot are exempted. 
(3)  Whenever street reconstruction has occurred within the last five (5) years but not less than three (3) years preceding the permit issuance, permittee shall resurface the street within the limits between the edge of the gutter and the longitudinal excavation. Individual service cuts to a single lot are exempted.  
Division 2.5. - Street Cut Fees 
 
6027.1 - Findings. 
(a)  Based on a study prepared for the City of Oxnard, California, a municipality adjacent to the City of Port Hueneme, with similar physical characteristics to the City of Port Hueneme, and a letter summarizing and analyzing such study prepared and submitted to the City by Pavement Engineering, Inc., a copy of which is on file with the City Clerk, the City Council finds that utility cuts have a significant, cumulative impact on pavement life that is inherent in the process of cutting the pavement and excavating the pavement structure and underlying soils and that is not completely eliminated by the trench backfill and pavement restoration. 
(b)  This Division is for the purpose of obtaining funds to maintain and repair streets damaged by utility cuts. 
(Ord. 628 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6027.2 - Street cut fee. 
(a)  Excavation shall be avoided in paved rights-of-way. If excavation cannot be avoided, an encroachment permit applicant shall pay the street cut fee which shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The street cut fee is in addition to any backfill, compaction, pavement replacement or other requirements imposed as a condition of the encroachment permit. 
(b)  Excavations in paved rights-of-way scheduled in the City's capital improvement program for complete rehabilitation within one (1) year of the date of the encroachment permit is issued shall be exempt from the street cut fee. Excavations in paved rights-of-way attributable to redevelopment projects of the City and repair or reconstruction of curbs, gutters, sidewalk and driveway approaches shall be exempt from the street cut fee. 
(c)  As provided in Section 6027.3, the street cut fee shall be waived for those public utilities granted franchises by State statute or by a franchise agreement with the City, obligating the franchisee to make all repairs to City streets necessitated by the operations of the franchisee. 
(d)  As provided in Section 6027.4, the street cut fee may be waived by the Director of Public Works for those City utilities that request such waiver and that present evidence satisfactory to the Director of Public Works of the capacity to perform the conditions of the waiver set out in Section 6027.4. 
(Ord. 628 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6027.3 - Periodic inspection and repair by franchised utilities. 
(a)  No later than January 1, 2000, and every five (5) years thereafter, each franchised public utility for which the street cut fee is waived pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 6027.2, shall inspect, as directed by the Director of Public Works, the pavement in the City's streets where the utility has made an excavation or street cut at any time, until such portion of the street is completely resurfaced or reconstructed. 
(b)  As directed by the Director of Public Works, the utility shall identify all defects in the pavement over and around such excavations and street cuts that arise from such excavations and street cuts and make repairs and perform maintenance in accordance with City specifications. 
(c)  The utility shall have such repairs and maintenance inspected and report thereon to the Director of Public Works. The inspections and reports may be made by the utility, by City staff or by an inspector approved by the Director of Public Works, as directed by the Director of Public Works. If the inspections and reports are made by City staff, the City shall bill the utility for the cost thereof. If the inspections are made by an inspector approved by the Director of Public Works, the utility shall pay such person for such work. 
(d)  In addition, the Director of Public Works may, from time to time, inspect such excavations and street cuts and notify the utility of any defects in the pavement that arise from such excavations and street cuts, whereupon the utility shall make repairs and perform maintenance as directed by the Director of Public Works. 
(e)  The utility need not perform such inspection, repair and maintenance on streets that will be repaved within one (1) year. Before performing such inspection, repair or maintenance, the utility may request from the Director of Public Works the locations and names of such streets. 
(f)  If the utility fails to perform any of the utility's duties set out in this section, the Director of Public Works shall give the utility written notice thereof, specifying the failure. If the utility does not cure the failure within twenty (20) calendar days of receiving the notice, or such additional time as the Director of Public Works may grant, the Director of Public Works may refuse to issue any additional encroachment permits to the utility until the duty is performed. 
(g)  If, as part of or in the course of doing pavement work in the City streets, City employees or contractors identify a defect in the pavement over or around an excavation or street cut that was previously made by a franchised public utility and that arises from such excavation or street cut, such employee or contractors may repair such defect, and the City may bill the cost of making such repair to such utility. 
(h)  If the utility fails to timely pay any bill from the City authorized by this section, the Director of Public Works may refuse to issue any additional encroachment permits to the utility until the bill is paid. 
(Ord. 628 § 1 (part), 1999)  
6027.4 - Periodic inspection and repair by City utilities. 
(a)  Each City utility shall state on its application for an encroachment permit whether the utility will pay the street cut fee or request a waiver thereof. A City utility that requests a waiver of the street cut fee shall also present evidence satisfactory to the Director of Public Works that the utility has the capacity to perform the conditions of waiver set out in this section. 
(b)  If the Director of Public Works waives the street cut fee for a City utility, the utility shall, within ninety (90) days of the issuance of the encroachment permit for which the street cut fee was waived, and every five (5) years thereafter, inspect, as directed by the Director of Public Works, the pavement in the City's streets where the utility has made an excavation or street cut at any time, until such portion of the street is completely resurfaced or reconstructed. 
(c)  As directed by the Director of Public Works, the utility shall identify all defects in the pavement over and around such excavations and street cuts that arise from such excavations and street cuts and make repairs and perform maintenance in accordance with City specifications. 
(d)  The utility shall have such repairs and maintenance inspected and report thereon to the Director of Public Works. The inspections and reports may by made by the utility, by other City staff or by an inspector approved by the Director of Public Works, as directed by the Director of Public Works. If the inspections and reports are made by an inspector approved by the Director of Public Works, the utility shall pay such person for such work. 
(e)  In addition, the Director of Public Works may, from time to time, inspect such excavations and street cuts and notify the utility of any defects in the pavement that arise from such excavations and street cuts, whereupon the utility shall make repairs and perform maintenance as directed by the Director of Public Works. 
(f)  The utility need not perform such inspection, repair and maintenance on streets that will be repaved within one (1) year. Before performing such inspection, repair or maintenance, the utility may request from the Director of Public Works the locations and names of such streets. 
(g)  If the utility fails to perform any of the utility's duties set out in this section, the Director of Public Works shall give the utility written notice thereof, specifying the failure. If the utility does not cure the failure within twenty (20) calendar days of receiving the notice, or such additional time as the Director of Public Works may grant, the Director of Public Works may refuse to issue any additional encroachment permits to the utility until the duty is performed or may issue any additional encroachment permits only on condition that the utility pay the street cut fee. 
(h)  If, as part of or in the course of doing pavement work in the City streets, City employees or contractors not working for the utility identify a defect in the pavement over or around an excavation or street cut that was previously made by a utility and that arises from such excavation or street cut, such employee or contractors may repair such defect. 
(i)  If the utility is required to pay the street cut fee, or if City employees or contractors not working for the utility make inspections and reports or perform repairs necessitated by the utility's excavations or street cuts, the City Council may determine a method for the utility to reimburse the City program doing such work or paying such contractor. 
(Ord. 628 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Division 3. - Driveways 
 
6028 - Driveway construction—Permit required. 
No person shall construct or reconstruct a vehicular access driveway to any lot in the City without first obtaining a permit therefor in the time and manner set forth in Division 2 of this Chapter, except as otherwise provided herein. A filing and processing fee shall be set by Resolution.  
6029 - Type of construction. 
Driveways shall be constructed of cement concrete where a cement concrete curb exists.  
6030 - Location of driveways. 
(a)  General. The Director of Public Works shall approve the location of driveways so as to ensure that the same will not constitute a hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic, nor encroach upon, or constitute a nuisance as to adjacent and/or abutting properties. 
(b)  Location. The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or returns of adjacent driveways serving the same lot or parcel shall be twenty- two (22) feet, unless a lesser distance is approved by the Director of Public Works. In the case of adjacent driveways serving two adjoining lots or parcels, the intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be at least one (1) foot; otherwise a common or continuous driveway may be required. 
A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed: 
(1)  Between the prolonged intersecting property lines of any highways, or 
(2)  Between the points of curvature of any curb return having a radius of twenty (20) feet or less. 
In applying the provisions of this Section, the condition producing the greater length of curb between the specified control points in the particular case shall govern. 
A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed between the points of curvature of any curb return except as hereinafter provided. In the case of a curb return having a radius of twenty- five (25) feet or more, driveways may encroach at each end thereof for a distance not greater than one- eighth of the total arc length of the return, leaving in the clear at least three-quarters of such arc length, if such encroachment does not conflict with other requirements of this Section. 
The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to modify these requirements based upon receipt of evidence from the permittee that he will suffer a hardship if not granted an encroachment into the curb return. 
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, a driveway shall not encroach on any curb return beyond or ahead of any traffic regulating device located on or adjacent thereto. 
Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a modification of the provisions of the preceding paragraphs pertaining to driveways are necessary for the promotion of traffic safety, and the Director of Public Works so finds, he may permit a deviation from the provisions of such Sections to the extent which he finds necessary. 
A driveway shall not be constructed or maintained where fences, building natural grade. or any other obstacle will prevent a vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way after entering such driveway. 
(c)  Size. 
(1)  Residential Driveways. Driveways serving properties classified in any of the "R" zones of the City shall be constructed and maintained so that: 
(a)  The width of each individual driveway shall be not more than twenty (20) feet nor less than ten (10) feet; and 
(b)  The sum of all driveway widths on any lot shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the street frontage of the property on each abutting street. 
(2)  Commercial and Industrial Driveways. Driveways serving properties classified in any zone other than an "R" zone shall be constructed and maintained so that: 
(a)  The width of each individual driveway shall not exceed thirty (30) feet if the street frontage of the property is less than one hundred (100) feet; 
(b)  The width of each individual driveway shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the street frontage of the property when such frontage is one hundred (100) feet or more, provided no individual driveway width shall exceed sixty (60) feet; and 
(c)  The sum of all driveway widths on any lot does not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the street frontage of the property on each abutting street.  
Part E. - Street Banners 
 
6031 - Street banners. 
The phrase "Street Banner," as used in this Part means any cloth or canvas sign or banner, or other device, designed for use in or over a public street, public right-of-way or other public place.  
6032 - Permits. 
No person shall erect, maintain, place, suspend, attach or move, any street banner for any purpose whatsoever, in, along, over, above or across any public street, alley or other public place, or any portion thereof, without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner hereinafter prescribed.  
6033 - Issuance. 
Any person desiring to place or locate a street banner, in, along, over, across or above any public street, alley or any other public place shall file with the Director of Public Works an application therefor, on the forms prescribed by him, together with a filing and processing fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00). A service fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged if permittee desires to have the City hang and remove the banner on the permittee's behalf. No fee is required to any applicant which would be exempt from the payment of a City business license pursuant to the Business License provisions of this Code. 
Upon receipt of an application for a street banner, the Director of Public Works shall issue a permit for the placement thereof if he finds that the same will not cause a traffic hazard or create a public or private nuisance. The Director of Public Works may condition the issuance of such permit to ensure that compliance is had with all provisions of this Code.  
6034 - Regulations. 
The holder of any permit for any street banner shall comply with the following regulations: 
(a)  The exact design and wording proposed to be used on the street banner shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works together with the application. There shall be no deviation from such design and wording without the Director of Public Works' prior approval; and 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for banners for partisan, political or commercial occurrences or events; and 
(c)  Each permit issued shall contain on its face, and the applicant shall be bound thereby, a designation of the location or locations at which the banner or banners may be placed, and the time during which said banner or banners may be so placed: and 
(d)  No banner shall be erected pursuant to this Chapter unless the banner or device is of a substantial cloth or canvas material, adequately ventilated for wind, and securely suspended from existing poles or other structures, at least eighteen (18) feet above the highest point of the underlying roadway or other public place. The erection of special poles or other supports on public or private property shall not be authorized or allowed pursuant to this Chapter except by specific approval of the Director of Public Works; and 
(e)  Banners shall not be placed so as to interfere with street lights, traffic signals or other structures of a public or private nature: and 
(f)  No permit for a banner shall be issued for a period of time longer than thirty (30) days; and 
(g)  All banners hung by permittee shall be so hung only under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.  
6035 - Indemnity. 
On each application the applicant or his agent shall sign a statement that he agrees to preserve and hold harmless the City and its officers and employees thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of his activities pursuant to the permit applied for.  
6036 - Suspension—Revocation. 
The Director of Public Works, upon twenty-four (24) hours written notice given to the applicant shall suspend a permit whenever it is found by him that the applicant has not complied with any conditions of issuance imposed upon such permit, or has violated any other rule, regulation or law. The order of suspension shall be an order of revocation unless an appeal is filed in the time and manner as hereinafter provided.  
6037 - Appeal. 
Any decision of the Director of Public Works with respect to suspension or with regard to the denial, issuance or conditions imposed upon the issuance of a permit hereunder shall be directly appealable to the Council if a letter of appeal is filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after mailing of notice of suspension or within ten (10) days after notification of the decision of the Director of Public Works with respect to a permit. Upon receipt of a timely appeal the City Clerk shall place the same on the next Council Agenda for consideration by the Council. The City Clerk shall give at least twenty-four (24) hours' written notice to the appealing party of the time and place of such hearing before the Council in regard to such an appeal. 
At the time and place set for the Council hearing upon such an appeal, the Council shall consider any applicable staff report or other pertinent material concerning such decision that is being appealed. The hearing in such case need not be a formal public hearing as is required in Zoning Regulations cases, but the Council shall give the appealing party and any other interested person a reasonable opportunity to be heard and present relevant evidence. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to show that the decision appealed from was unreasonable, arbitrary or was not correct in law or fact. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.  
6038 - Removal of banners. 
Upon final revocation of a permit, the applicant shall, within twenty-four (24) hours, remove the Street Banner. If such banner is not removed within the said time limit, the Director of Public Works shall cause the same to be removed and shall charge the applicant for the cost thereof, Such charges shall be collectible as a civil debt.  
6039 - Removal of hazardous and defective street banners. 
Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this Chapter, the Director of Public Works is hereby empowered to remove any street banner at any time, without notice to the permittee, if he finds the same is hazardous and/or defective and represents and constitutes an immediate threat to the public peace, health, welfare and safety.  
6039.1 - Expiration of permit. 
Upon the expiration of a permit for a Street Banner, the applicant shall cause the said banner to be removed within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter. If such street banner is not removed within said time, the Director of Public Works shall cause the same to be removed and charge the applicant for the cost thereof. Such charges shall be collectible as a civil debt.  
Chapter 2 - PARKWAY TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 716, § 1, adopted August 4, 2014, amended Chapter 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 2, §§ 6040—6046, pertained to similar material. 
 
6040 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter certain terms and words are hereby defined as follows: 
(a)  "Director" means the City Manager or his/her designee; 
(b)  "Maintain" or "Maintenance" means and includes, but is not limited to, chipping, spraying, fertilizing, staking and tying, treating for disease or injury, and any other similar acts, which promote the life, growth, health, or beauty of trees; 
(c)  "Parkway" means those strips of land between lot lines and portions of abutting public streets utilized for vehicular traffic, which are owned by the City in fee, or, as to which the City has an easement for public street purposes; 
(d)  "Public area" means parks, playgrounds, open space, and areas around public buildings or other areas maintained by the City; 
(e)  "Street" means any public street, avenue, boulevard, lane, walk, road parkway, right-of-way, or other public way, except alleys; 
(f)  "Parkway tree" is defined to include any tree planted for the purpose of providing shade or beauty to the street area; 
(g)  "Tree" means any tree planted or maintained by the City located in a parkway or in a public area. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 8-4-14)  
6041 - Director's authority. 
(a)  Tree Maintenance. The Director may direct the manner in which trees, shrubs, and other vegetation are planted, trimmed, pruned, cut removed, placed, and otherwise maintained in and along all public streets to ensure a coherent tree and plant palette consistent with the City's Landscape Design Guidelines. 
(b)  Kind and Spacing of Trees. The Director will identify a standardized type and variety of trees that may be placed in, upon, or along any street or portion thereof and the distance apart at which such trees will be planted consistent with the City's Landscape Design Guidelines. 
(c)  Improper Planting. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this Chapter, the Director may remove it in accordance with this Chapter. The cost of removal may be charged to the property owner responsible for the planting thereof. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 8-4-14)  
6042 - Director's duties. 
(a)  Planting Trees. The Director will cause trees to be planted in, upon, or along the streets of this City in accordance with all applicable laws and encourage the planting, care, and preservation of all such desirable trees. 
(b)  Records. The Director will prepare and maintain all necessary maps, plans, and records relating to the various functions carried on under this Chapter. 
(c)  Pest Control. The Director will properly control and remedy, by recognized methods, all insect pests and diseases which, if untreated, may permanently injure, disfigure, or kill any street tree or trees. 
(d)  Tree Guards. Tree stakes or guards may be placed around trees, providing the same are near the tree for protecting or training such tree and providing that no hazard to public safety is created. 
(e)  Protection from Injury. No person will pile building material, or other material, around any tree, plant, or shrub in a street in such a manner that will in any way injure the tree. 
(f)  Landscaping Plans. The Director will review landscaping plans for proposed developments and may require that trees be planted in any of the streets, parking lots, and other public places abutting the proposed development in accordance with zoning and the City Landscape Design Guidelines and tree policy. 
(g)  Administrative Policies and Procedures. The Director is authorized to promulgate administrative policies and procedures to implement this Chapter including requirements for a property owner to maintain vertical clearances of private property trees that hang over the parkway or street and requirements for a property owner to maintain private property trees that may adversely impact the parkway or street. 
(h)  Maintenance of Trees. The City shall be responsible for maintenance of all trees within public areas and for the trimming, only, of trees located in Parkways unless it is the City's interest to maintain and preserve the tree(s) as determined by the Director. Owners or persons in possession of each lot in the City shall properly maintain in parkways abutting such lots all plants, trees and other vegetation located therein. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 8-4-14)  
6043 - Tree removal or adjustment by Director. 
The Director may remove or adjust trees in public areas or parkways if the Director determines that one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  If a tree is dead, in severe physical decline, or if there is splitting or cracking of major limbs or the tree trunk, or if the tree appears dangerous or obstructive to public safety or travel that cannot be reasonably mitigated without removing the tree. 
(b)  If the tree is incurably infected with a disease which will permanently injure, disfigure, or kill it. 
(c)  If there is conflict between tree roots and underground utility lines that cannot be reasonably mitigated without removing the tree. 
(d)  If tree growth results in sidewalk, curb, or gutter disruption that cannot be reasonably repaired without removing the tree or if the disrupted flat work cannot be reasonably withdrawn or modified to provide more tree growth area. 
(e)  If the Director determines that a specific tree is an inappropriate species, which was not permitted by the City, or obstructs implementation of the City's Landscape Design Guidelines Master Street Tree Plan. 
(f)  When the Director determines that tree removal or adjustment is justified to otherwise protect public health, safety, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 8-4-14)  
6044 - Tree removal request by private persons. 
Whenever the owner or person in possession of a lot desires to have a tree removed from an abutting parkway located off a residential collector street or cul-de-sac, said person shall file a written request for consideration by the Director. If the tree is found to be in good condition or any impact can be reasonably repaired or mitigated without removing the tree, then the request is deemed solely for the convenience of the applicant, and the full cost of such removal and replanting, shall be borne by the person making such request and the estimated amount, as determined by the Director, shall be paid to the City before removal and replanting shall take place. The Director may determine that tree replacement for a removed tree is not required due to underground utility conflicts, lack of room, or similar site characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 716, § 1, 8-4-14)  
Article VII - PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - WATER 
Sections: 
 
7101 - Exclusive provider of services. 
The City shall be the exclusive provider of water and related services to the City. This section shall not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the City from contracting for the provision of any part or all of the water and water-related service requirements of the City or its inhabitants.  
7101.5 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Bi-monthly basis" means a billing period not exceeding sixty-six (66) days. 
"Customer" means the property owner or other person to whom domestic water or water-related services are provided in accordance with this chapter. 
"Water charges" means charges and fees (including, if applicable, penalties and interest) assessed for domestic water service in accordance with this Chapter. 
(Ord. 646 § 5, 2003)  
7102 - Service fees. 
Each customer must pay to the City or its designated agent, the water charges for such services as established by Council ordinance pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 5471, and any successor statute. Payment is due and payable in the time and manner set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. 646 § 6, 2003)  
7102.5 - Water charges—Manner of collection. 
(a)  As to each service location served with domestic water by the City, the customer must pay the water charges imposed pursuant to this Code on a bi-monthly basis. 
(b)  If for any reason the customer fails to pay the water charges due for such service on or before the twenty-first (21) day following billing of such water charges, as of that date the water charges are deemed delinquent. 
(c)  Upon the water charges becoming delinquent, the City Manager, or designee, will cause a notice of delinquency and intent to discontinue service to be mailed to the customer of record. Every notice of termination of service must include all of the information required in Public Utilities Code Section 10010.1(d). 
(d)  If payment is not received within fifteen (15) days after mailing of the notice of delinquency and impending termination, a shut-off notice must be delivered to the service address and posted in a conspicuous location at the premises. When the shut-off notice is delivered and posted, a fee will be applied to the customer's account in accordance with the water charges. Failure to make payment within two (2) business days of notice will result in shut off of the meter and assessment of a reconnect fee in accordance with the water charges. 
(e)  The restrictions on termination of service set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 10010 are applicable to any shut-off proceedings. 
(Ord. 646 § 7, 2003)  
7102.10 - Penalties. 
Penalties are imposed upon all delinquent water charges as follows: 
(a)  Basic Penalty. A basic penalty of ten percent (10%) of total delinquent charges applicable to each service location is imposed as of the date of such delinquency; and 
(b)  Additional Penalties. An additional penalty of ten percent (10%) is imposed on delinquent charges, not including previously imposed late fees, on each billing date upon which the charges remain unpaid. 
(c)  Limit of Penalty. The total penalty imposed cannot exceed one hundred percent of the total of any such delinquent account. 
(Ord. 646 § 8, 2003)  
7102.15 - Interruption in water service—Penalties. 
(a)  Service will be discontinued if payment is not received or arrangements made to pay any delinquent bill. If payment is not made within the time specified in this Chapter, or for any other reason relating to nonpayment of an outstanding bill or charge, including, without limitation, checks returned for insufficient funds, credit card denial, or other, similar type of payment problem, a service charge, in an amount determined by the water charges will be imposed and be due and payable each time service is discontinued. 
(b)  Except as provided in Public Utilities Code Section 10009, where water is shut off, service will not be restored until all required payments (including, without limitation, arrearage, penalties, deposits and service charges) are paid in full. 
(Ord. 646 § 9, 2003)  
7102.20 - Special assessment. 
The City may initiate proceedings to make delinquent collection service fees and charges a special assessment against properties owned by a customer indebted to the City in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 5470, et seq. 
(Ord. 646 § 10, 2003)  
7102.25 - Billing disputes. 
(a)  The Financial Services Director, or designee, will review the accounts of customers who dispute water charges within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request for review. If an error is found after such review, the City will promptly correct the error and, if required, either charge or credit, at the City's sole discretion, the customer account or issue the customer a refund. 
(b)  The review conducted by the Financial Services Director, or designee, will include consideration of whether to establish a payment plan for the customer to pay any unpaid balance of delinquent account over a reasonable time not to exceed twelve (12) months. Unless otherwise required by this Code, the City will not terminate service for customer fully complying with such a payment plan. 
(c)  If a customer fails to comply with a payment plan established pursuant to this section, the City must give the customer a forty-eight (48) hour notice to comply in order to avoid termination of service. Such notice does not entitle the customer to further investigation or review by the City. 
(d)  Water bills must contain information regarding dispute resolution procedures set forth in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 646 § 11, 2003)  
7103 - Interest on delinquent accounts. 
The city finance director may impose interest upon delinquent accounts at a rate not to exceed one percent (1%) per month. If imposed interest may compound monthly.  
7104 - Deposits. 
(a)  Deposits are required on all new customer accounts at start of service, in accordance with the water charges. The deposit must be returned to the customer in the form of a credit to the customer's account after twelve (12) months' consecutive timely payment of bills. 
(b)  If a customer's service is discontinued because of recurring non-payment of bills, then a customer must provide a deposit of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per service location. After twelve (12) months' consecutive timely payment of bills, the deposit will be credited to the next bill. 
(c)  The City must return the balance of any deposit, after all applicable deductions, to the person making the deposit within sixty (60) days after services are discontinued. 
(Ord. 646 § 12, 2003)  
7105 - Fees a civil debt. 
The service and interest charges, as hereby provided for, shall be deemed to be civil debts due and owing to the City from the owner of each such property described above within the City. The collection of such charges may be enforced by the City in any lawful manner, including, but not limited to, by appropriate suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. The City shall be entitled to collect its reasonable attorney's fees and court costs incurred in connection with the collection of said civil debt.  
7106 - Administrative rules. 
The City Manager may promulgate administrative regulations relating to the provision of water and water related services which are not specifically provided for in this Chapter.  
7107 - Unlawful to meddle with water department's property. 
It is unlawful for any person to open any street hydrant, stopcock, or gate valve or to meddle with any street service, water connection, or any water meter attached to any service pipe connected with City mains, water pipes or hydrants, or to turn on and off water City mains or water pipes; or to tap, break or injure any water main, water pipe, meter or other fitting of the City laid in any street, avenue, alley or other public place, or to tamper with, deposit, or cause to be deposited in any City water main or pipe of said City, any fluid, solid matter or substance of any kind or to do any act that might cause water to become polluted. It is unlawful to take, pump or draw water from any City water main, pipe or hydrant without first arranging with the City for same and paying the established rate, therefor. 
No person excepting a duly authorized agent of said City shall turn the water on or off from any building or premises, and no person shall tap, cut or move any water main or pipe laid in streets, avenues, alleys or other public places, unless permission to do so has been previously granted by the City.  
7108 - Shut-off for non-payment. 
If any owner shall fail to pay the amount due for water or sewage service, the City may shut off the water or sewage service to such property and such service may not be restored until such indebtedness has been paid.  
7109 - Wasting water. 
No watering of lawns, gardens or shrubbery shall be done with open hose unless the same is held or immediately attended by the person using it. 
It is unlawful for any person or persons willfully or negligently to waste water in any manner whatever, and any person having knowledge of any condition where water is being wasted shall immediately notify the City of such waste. 
The Public Works Director or his designee may shut off the water without notice whenever water is found running in violation of this Section, and a charge of ten dollars may be made for turning it on again, or a charge of not less than one dollar nor more than ten dollars may be made against the consumer's account for waste in addition to charges for the water used. 
No person shall take water from any service to adjoining property, or to a vacant lot, without first securing the permission of the water department. 
(Ord. 646 § 4 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4, 6-15-09)  
7110 - Restricting the use of water. 
After notice published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, the Public Works Director may restrict the use of water for sprinkling, wetting, irrigation, or construction purposes to such hours and for such time as may be deemed in the public interest. 
Any person failing to restrict their usage of water as prescribed by the Public Works Director shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 646 § 4 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4, 6-15-09)  
7111 - Use of water at construction sites. 
Contractors or any person desiring to use water in construction work where connections must be made with City hydrants, shall in each and every instance obtain a written permit from the Public Works Director, before connecting with any such fire hydrant or using water therefrom. 
(Ord. 646 § 4 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4, 6-15-09)  
7112 - Permit to furnish water. 
Consumers may supply water to persons, firms or corporations for use in the performance of any contract for the improvement of any street or other public place after having given notice to and receiving a permit to do so from the Public Works Director; but no such permit shall issue to or for any consumer, person, firm or corporation whose indebtedness to the City for water or damage to hydrants are delinquent until such indebtednesses for the same are paid. 
(Ord. 646 § 4 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4, 6-15-09)  
7113 - Very low-income residents rate reduction. 
(a)  Any customer in the very low-income category who receives water services at his or her personal residence may apply for a seven and one-half percent (7.5%) reduction in water consumption and service charges. Applications for reduced rates must be on forms supplied by the City. The applicant under penalty of perjury must supply all information required to be given on such forms. 
(b)  Reduced rates must be granted to qualifying applicants who file their applications with the City. A change of address terminates the special rate provided in this section, but a new application by such person at his or her new address may be made and the reduced rate allowed, if the requirements set out in this section are satisfied. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a "qualifying applicant" is defined as any household qualified under Southern California Edison's CARE program. 
(d)  The City Manager, or designee, may adopt such rules and regulations deemed necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 682 § 1, 2007: Ord. 646 § 13, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 708, § 1, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 721, § 1, 2-1-16)  
Chapter 1.5 - WATER WELL REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
7125 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the enactment of provisions of this Chapter is to provide, in cooperation with the County of Ventura, for the construction, maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification, and destruction of water wells located within the city; to ensure that the groundwater of the County of Ventura will not be contaminated or polluted; to ensure that water obtained from wells will be suitable for use; and to preserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7126 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
(a)  "Abandoned Well." Abandoned Well means any of the following: 
(1)  A well, other than a monitoring well, which has been in continuous disuse for one (1) year or more, unless such disuse is attributable to removal of the pump for repair or replacement and efforts to repair or replace the pump are being diligently pursued; or 
(2)  A monitoring well from which no monitoring date has been taken for a period of two (2) or more years; or 
(3)  A well which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be made functional for its original use or any other use permitted by this Chapter; 
(4)  An engineering test hole, twenty-four hours after construction and testing work has been completed on the same. 
(b)  "Cathodic Protection Well." A Cathodic Protection Well means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground. 
(c)  "City." City means the City of Port Hueneme. 
(d)  "City Inspector." City Inspector means a person authorized by the Director to inspect all work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
(e)  "Community Water Supply Well." Community Water Supply Well means any water well which provides water for public water systems as defined in Section 4.010.1(e) of the Health and Safety Code. 
(f)  "Completion Operation." Completion Operation means any of the following work produced after artificial excavation: 
(1)  Placement of a well casing; 
(2)  Gravel packing; 
(3)  Sealing; 
(4)  Perforation of a well casing; or 
(5)  Any other work listed on a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter as being a required part of a Completion Operation. 
(g)  "Contamination." Contamination means an alteration of waters by waste, salt water intrusion or other material to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through actual or potential poisoning or through an actual or potential spreading of disease. 
(h)  "Department." Department means the City's Public Works Department. 
(i)  To "destroy" a well means to fill it (including both interior and annular space if the well is cased) completely in such a manner that it will not produce water or act as a conduit for the interchange of water between any water bearing formations penetrated. 
(j)  "Director." Director means the Public Works Director or his or her duly authorized representative. 
(k)  "Engineering test hole" means an uncased excavation used to determine the engineering or geological properties of subsurface material by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means. 
(l)  "Individual Domestic Well." Individual Domestic Well means any water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence, commercial establishment, or farming operation. 
(m)  To "inspect" a well means to personally witness, record and certify compliance, for work pursuant to a condition or conditions of a valid permit. 
(n)  To "Modify" or "Repair." To modify or repair a well means to replace its casing in a manner which involves removal or partial removal of the old casing, to reperforate its casing, to install a liner in the well, or to change the depth of the well. 
(o)  "Monitoring Well." Monitoring Well means a cased or uncased well used exclusively for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality. 
(p)  To "Own." A person shall, for the purpose of this Chapter be deemed to "own" a well if such person is the owner of the land on which the well is located. 
(q)  "Permit." Permit shall mean a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(r)  "Permittee." Permittee shall mean the person to whom a Permit is issued. 
(s)  "Person." Person means any natural person and any artificial person including any corporation, partnership or governmental entity. 
(t)  "Pollution." Pollution means an alteration of waters by waste, salt water intrusion or other material to a degree which adversely affects either the suitability of such waters for beneficial uses or the facilities employed in conjunction with such beneficial uses. 
(u)  To "Possess." A person shall be deemed to "possess" a well if such person is in actual possession of the well or has a legal right to the possession thereof. 
(v)  "Registered Inspector" or "Inspector." Registered Inspector or Inspector means a professional engineer or registered geologist currently registered in California, approved by the Director, to inspect drilling and sealing operations for engineering test holes and monitoring wells. A technician trained and experienced in drilling and sealing operations who is working under the direct supervision of a Registered Inspector shall be deemed qualified to perform required inspection(s) provided a Registered Inspector reviews the well inspection record and assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the work by signing the well inspection record. 
(w)  "Water Well." Water Well means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of determining the availability of water, extracting water from or injecting water into the underground, except the following: 
(1)  Oil wells, gas wells, and geothermal wells subject to regulations under the provisions of Division 3 (commencing with Section 3000) of the Public Resources Code; 
(2)  Wells used exclusively for the purposes of dewatering excavation during construction or of stabilizing or earth embankments; and 
(3)  Seepage pits approved for use under permit from the Department. 
(x)  "Well." Well includes a cathodic protection well, engineering test hole, monitoring well or water well. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 690, § 4, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7127 - Permit required. 
No person, either on his or her property or the property of another, shall, within the city construct, repair, modify or destroy any Cathodic Protection Well which is over 50 feet deep, any Engineering Test Hole which is over 50 feet deep, any Monitoring Well, or any Water Well, unless such work is done pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired written Permit for such work. The Director may issue an annual Permit for one or more Engineering Test Holes which are over 50 feet deep and which are inspected by a Registered Inspector. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7128 - Application for permit. 
Applications shall be filed with the Director, and shall include all of the following: 
(a)  A plot plan indicating the exact location of the Well with respect to the location of the following items within a radius of 500 feet of the Well: 
(1)  Approximate lot lines; 
(2)  Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or containing sewage; 
(3)  All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial water bodies or water courses; 
(4)  Drainage pattern of the property; 
(5)  Existing wells of all types, regardless of whether they are subject to regulation under this Chapter; and 
(6)  Access roads. 
(b)  Location of property. 
(c)  Name, address, telephone of the person who will perform the work on the well. 
(d)  Name, address, telephone and affiliation of Registered Inspector (monitoring wells and engineering test holes only.) 
(e)  Proposed depth of well. 
(f)  Use of well. 
(g)  Proof satisfactory to the Director that the person who will construct the well is in possession of a valid license appropriate to such work which has been issued in accordance with the Contractor's License Law (Chapter 9, commencing with Section 7000, of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code). 
(h)  A certificate satisfying the requirements of Section 3800 of the Labor Code (Worker's Compensation). 
(i)  Such other information as the Director may deem necessary in order to determine whether underground waters will be protected. 
Permits shall be issued or denied within 15 working days after the day on which the completed applications are received by the Department. If an application is incomplete, or does not comply with the provisions of this Chapter, no Permit shall be issued thereon. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7129 - Permit requirements—Conditions—Term—Expiration. 
Permits, when issued, shall be deemed conditioned to require compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and all other applicable provisions of law. The Director shall have the authority to impose additional conditions upon the issuance of a Permit as is reasonably necessary to protect the public peace, health and general welfare. A permit shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance unless it is extended by the Director, in writing. The Director may grant one or more extensions to the term of a Permit, each for a period not to exceed three months, if the Permittee proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director that circumstances beyond the control of the Permittee make it infeasible to complete the permitted work prior to the prior expiration date. Annual Permits for Engineering Test Holes shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7130 - Time to complete permitted work and satisfy permit requirements. 
The Permittee shall complete work authorized by the Permit and satisfy all the conditions imposed upon the Permit prior to the expiration date of the Permit. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7131 - Guarantee of permitted work. 
Prior to the issuance of a Permit or any extension thereof, the applicant/permittee may be required by the Director to post with the City, a security guaranteeing compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and the conditions imposed upon such Permit, such security shall be in a form approved by the Director in an amount deemed necessary by the Director, to remedy improper work, but not in excess of the total estimated cost of the permitted or required work. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7132 - License and registration required of persons performing permitted work. 
No person shall perform any work at any location in the City, for which a Permit is required by this Chapter, unless such person is in possession of: 
(a)  A valid license for such work issued in accordance with the Contractors License Law (Chapter 9, commencing with Section 7000, of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code); and 
(b)  A valid business license issued by the City; and 
(c)  Such other licenses as are required by applicable law. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7133 - Suspension or termination of permit. 
Any Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to termination prior to its expiration date as provided in this Section. 
(a)  Grounds. A Permit issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be revoked and terminated if the Director finds any of the following: 
(1)  That the license of the person performing work pursuant to a Permit was revoked or terminated; or 
(2)  Failure of the Permittee and its contractors to comply with any provision of Section 3800 of the Labor Code; or 
(3)  Failure of the Permittee or of any person who owns or possesses the Well to which the Permit relates, to comply with any provisions of this Chapter; or 
(4)  The misrepresentation by the Permittee or its agents of any material fact in the application for such Permit; or 
(5)  A failure by the Permittee or Owner or person in possession of a Well to comply with an Order issued pursuant to such Section 7137. 
(b)  Notice. To initiate proceedings to terminate a Permit, the Director shall send written notice thereof to the Permittee and any other person requesting in writing such notice. The notice shall briefly describe the circumstance which the Director believes constitutes a ground for termination; and the time and place of the administrative hearing. 
(c)  Hearing. The City Manager or his designee ("Hearing Officer") shall conduct the hearing at the time and place specified in the notice. The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by the strict rules of evidence applicable to courts of law, but the Hearing Officer shall observe the substance of those said rules to the end that the matter will be decided based upon reliable evidentiary matters. The burden of proof to justify termination shall be on the Director. The Permittee and any other interested person shall have the right to present relevant evidence at the hearing. Within not to exceed thirty(30) days after the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall determine, based upon the preponderance of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether there is justification for such termination. The determination of the Hearing Officer shall be final and conclusive. Such determination shall be in writing and shall contain a brief statement of the findings of fact upon which the determination is based. If the determination is to terminate the Permit, the Hearing Officer shall terminate the Permit. If the Hearing Officer determines that a ground for termination exists, but the ground or grounds for termination can be remedied, the Hearing Officer may continue the matter for a reasonable time to allow the Permittee a reasonable period of time to correct the deficiency. 
(d)  Prehearing Suspension. The Director may suspend a Permit without a hearing when the Director determines that such action in necessary to protect the public peace, health or safety or the environment from imminent danger. The Director shall notify the Permittee of such suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the Hearing Officer makes a final determination after the conduct of the hearing; provided, however, that the Director may vacate the order of suspension, if the Director determines that it is no longer necessary to protect the public peace, health or safety. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7134 - Standards. 
Standards for the construction, repair, modification or destruction of Wells shall be those set forth in the California Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1 entitled "Cathodic Protection Well Standards," Bulletin No. 74-9, Chapter IV, entitled "Water Well Standards—Ventura County" and Bulletin No. 74-81, Chapter II, entitled "Water Well Standards—State of California," as supplemented or revised from time to time by the California Department of Water Resources, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  The Director may adopt additional or more stringent standards to be applicable in any or all zones of the City as delineated in aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-9. 
(b)  All Community Water Supply Wells and Individual Domestic Wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which chlorine or other disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the well. If a pipe is provided, it shall be installed at a height equal to the pump slab or at least four inches above the finished grade, shall be kept sealed, and shall be provided with a threaded or equivalently secure cap. Equivalent protection for excluding contamination from the Well shall be provided for subsurface pump discharge installations. If an air relief vent is used, it shall terminate downward and be screened with 16 mesh screen to prevent contaminating material from entering the vent. 
(c)  Every new, repaired or modified Community Water Supply Well or Individual Domestic Water Well, after construction, modification or repair, and before being placed into service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substance and shall be thoroughly disinfected utilizing the procedures set forth in Appendix C of the aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-81. 
(d)  In Sealing Zone III as described in the aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-9, no permit shall be issued pursuant to Section 3 for the construction, repair, or modification of any Well which is perforated in the Oxnard aquifer zone and/or the Mugu aquifer unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director either that: 
(1)  There is no substantial possibility that use of the Well will cause overdraft or seawater intrusion into an aquifer; or 
(2)  All of the following conditions apply: 
(i)  The Well is necessary to carry out seawater intrusion control programs and projects; 
(ii)  The Well has a casing diameter no greater than six inches; 
(iii)  The pump will have no more than five horsepower; 
(iv)  Extraction will not exceed ten acre feet per year; 
(v)  The Well will be used for domestic purposes. 
(e)  Engineering Test Holes having a depth greater than 50 feet shall be destroyed immediately upon completion of testing by complete filling and/or sealing of the borehole in accordance with criteria established by the Director. The Director may waive complete sealing if the Permittee demonstrates to the Director's reasonable satisfaction that the public peace, safety and general welfare will not be placed in jeopardy. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7135 - Log of well. 
Any person who has performed any work for which a Permit is required by this Chapter, and which involves drilling, digging, excavating or boring of a Well, shall, within 30 days of completion of such work, submit to the Director an accurate and complete well log in a form satisfactory to the Director. In areas for which the Director deems the available subsurface information to be insufficient, the Director may require any Permittee or other person performing a completion operation to submit a well log prior to commencement of the complete operation. A well log shall include all of the following: 
(a)  A detailed record of the boundaries, character, size, distribution and color or all lithologic units penetrated; 
(b)  The type and size of well casing; 
(c)  The location of perforations and sealing zones; 
(d)  Reports on the quantity and quality of groundwater (if available); and 
(e)  Any other data required by the Director in the permit conditions. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7136 - Well inspection report. 
Any Registered Inspector who has inspected any work accomplished pursuant to a Permit which involves drilling, digging, excavating or boring a Well, within thirty (30) days of completion of such work, shall submit to the Director an accurate and complete well inspection report on forms satisfactory to the Director. A well inspection report shall include all of the following: 
(a)  Permit number; 
(b)  Type and volume of sealing material and depth of seal; 
(c)  Diameter of borehole and well casing in sealing zone; 
(d)  Method of placement (if grout pipe include number and length of sections); 
(e)  Confirmation that casing was ripped or perforated (destruction only); 
(f)  Conditions which may have caused sealing to be less than satisfactory; 
(g)  Date sealed; 
(h)  An opinion as to whether the well sealing operation was satisfactory or unsatisfactory certified by signature of the registered inspector; and 
(i)  Any other data required by the Director in the permit conditions. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7137 - Corrective actions. 
Any person who owns or possesses a Well may be required to take corrective action with respect to the Well as provided in this Section. 
(a)  Grounds. Any of the following occurrences shall constitute a ground for ordering corrective action: 
(1)  Maintenance, operation or use of the well in a manner that will cause or contribute to, or run a substantial risk of causing or contributing to, the pollution or contamination of the groundwater; or 
(2)  Construction, maintenance, repair, modification or destruction of the Well in a manner that violates any provision of this Chapter. 
(b)  Notice. To initiate proceedings to order corrective action, the Director shall give written notice to the person who owns the Well and/or the person in possession of the Well. The notice shall briefly describe the occurrence which the Director finds constitutes a ground for ordering the corrective action; the proposed corrective action; and the time and place for a hearing to determine whether such a corrective order would be issued. At the noticed hearing, all interested persons shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence on the issue of the necessity for ordering the proposed corrective action. 
(c)  Hearing. The Director shall conduct the hearing specified in the notice. The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by the strict rules of evidence applicable to courts of law, but the substance of those said rules shall be utilized to the end that the matter will be decided based upon reliable evidentiary matters. Permittee and all other interested persons shall have the right to present relevant evidence at the hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing, not later than thirty (30) calendar days thereafter, the Director shall determine, based upon the preponderance of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether the proposed corrective order should be issued. The determination of the Director shall be final and conclusive. Such determination shall be in writing and shall contain a brief statement of the findings of fact upon which the determination is based. 
(d)  Order. If the determination is that all or part of proposed corrective action is required, the Director shall issue and serve upon the Permittee a written order ("Order") requiring such corrective action. The Order shall state a deadline for commencing the corrective action if such action is to be ongoing and shall state a deadline for completing the corrective action if such corrective action is not to be ongoing. The Order shall further state that, if the corrective action may be taken by the City at the expense of the Permittee, and/or that the Permit is subject to termination as provided in Section 7133 for a failure to comply with such Order. 
(e)  Compliance. Any owner or possessor of a Well who is served with such an Order shall, on or before the deadline stated therein, commence and prosecute to completion every corrective action described in the Order. Any owner or possessor of a Well to which an Order relates, who is served with such an Order, and any person who thereafter acquires ownership or possession of such a Well, with actual or constructive notice of the Order, shall, for so long as such person owns or possesses the Well, continue to take all corrective actions described in the Order. 
(Ord. 547 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7138 - Destruction of abandoned wells. 
No person shall own, possess or maintain an abandoned Cathodic Protection Well which is over 50 feet deep, or an abandoned monitoring Well, an Abandoned Engineering Test Hole which is over 50 feet deep, or an abandoned Water Well unless either such Well has been destroyed pursuant to this Chapter or a current certificate of exemption has been issued therefor as provided in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 547 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7139 - Certificate of exemption. 
Any person who owns or possesses a Water Well or Monitoring Well which is abandoned or is about to become abandoned but who intends to use such Well again, may apply to the Director, in a form satisfactory to the Director, for a certificate of exemption from the requirement that such Well be destroyed. If the Director determines from the application for such exemption, that groundwater pollution and/or contamination of groundwater would not occur and/or hazard to the public peace, health or safety would result, the Director shall issue such a certificate of exemption. A certificate of exemption shall expire three (3) years after issuance. A Certificate of Exemption shall be terminated by the Director at any time prior to expiration upon a determination that destruction of the Well is necessary to prevent pollution or contamination of groundwater or is necessary to avoid a hazard to public health or safety. Such determination by the Director shall be made only after the Director conducts a noticed public hearing thereon, in the time and manner described in Section 7137 et seq. Successive certificates of exemption may be issued with respect to a Well in the same manner as the original certificate. 
(Ord. 547 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7140 - Inspection. 
The Director and designated City inspectors may, at any and all reasonable times, enter any and all places, property, enclosures and structures for the purpose of making examinations and investigations to determine whether any violation of this Chapter exists. Where any work for which a Permit is required by this Chapter be completed in stages, all work completed for any stage shall be inspected prior to any further work being accomplished. Registered Inspectors shall inspect drilling and sealing operations for Engineering Test Holes and Monitoring Wells if required by conditions of approval imposed upon a permit. 
(Ord. 547 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7141 - Misdemeanor—Infraction. 
Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which such violation is committed, continued or permitted, and shall be subject to the same punishment for each such offense as for the original offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the prosecuting attorney determines that such action would be in the best interests of justice, the prosecuting attorney may specify in the accusatory pleading that the violation of this Chapter shall be treated as an infraction; in such case, the violation shall then be prosecuted as an infraction. The provisions of this Section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions which are or may be imposed under this Chapter or any other provision of law. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7142 - Public nuisance. 
If any corrective action required by an Order is not taken in full compliance with such Order, such failure shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by direction of the City Manager, in such manner as is permitted by law. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7143 - Recovery of costs. 
Where a criminal or civil action of any kind is required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter, the City shall recover all of its costs incurred, including applicable administrative overhead charges and costs for investigative, engineering and/or legal services. The amount of such costs shall be assessed as provided in Section 3411 of this Code. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7144 - Exemption. 
The foregoing provision of this Chapter do not apply to any leak detection system installed or destroyed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section 25280) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety code or of Article 2 (commencing with Section 4521). 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
7145 - Fees. 
The City Council, by resolution, shall set filing and processing fees applicable to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 574 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 2 - SEWER SERVICE 
Parts: 
 
SECTION 7151. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
7151A - Purpose and policy. 
This Chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the municipal wastewater system of the City and enables the City to comply with all applicable State and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. sections 1251 et. seq.), general pretreatment regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403), and the requirements of the Control Authority's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. The objectives of this Chapter are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system that will pass through the system inadequately treated, enter receiving waters, or otherwise interfere with or be incompatible with the system; 
(2)  To protect City and Control Authority personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(3)  To promote reuse and recycling of wastewater and biosolids from the system; 
(4)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the system; and 
(5)  To enable the Control Authority to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or State laws and regulations to which the system is subject. 
(6)  This Chapter authorizes the issuance of Industrial Wastewater Discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(7)  This Chapter shall apply to all persons within the City who use the system and to persons outside the City who, by contract with the City, are included as users of the system. By discharging wastewater into the system, users located beyond the City limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in this Chapter, as well as any permits, contracts or orders issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7151B - Administration. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the Public Works Director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Public Works Director may be delegated by the Public Works Director to other City personnel. 
(2)  The City is authorized to promulgate regulations and standards reasonably necessary to protect the system, to comply with all applicable federal and State laws required by the Act and the general pretreatment regulations, to control and regulate the proper use of the system, to regulate the rate of flow and the quality and quantity of wastewater discharges to the system, to prevent overflow, and to provide for the issuance, suspension or revocation of IWD permits, provided, however, the regulations shall be consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and formulated to result in the uniform control of the system. 
(3)  The City shall be the exclusive provider of sewer and related services to the City. This part shall part not be construed in such a manner as to prevent the City from contracting for the provision of any part or all of the sewer and sewer-related service requirements of the City or its inhabitants. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7151C - Abbreviations. 
For purposes of this Chapter the following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
• BOD 	biochemical oxygen demand 
• CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
• COD 	chemical oxygen demand 
• EPA 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
• gpd 	gallons per day 
• IWD 	Industrial wastewater discharge 
• LC 50 	lethal concentration for 50% of the test organisms 
• L 	liter 
• mg 	milligrams 
• mg/L 	milligrams per Liter 
• NPDES 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
• O&M 	operation and maintenance 
• POTW 	publicly owned treatment works 
• RORA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
• SIC 	standard industrial classification 
• SWDA 	Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. sections 6901, et seq.) 
• TDS 	total dissolved solids 
• TSS 	total suspended solids 
• TTO 	total toxic organics 
• USC 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7151D - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
"Act" means The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. sections 1251, et seq. 
"Approval Authority" means California State Water Resources Control Board or Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region. 
"Authorized representative of the user" means: 
(a)  If the user is a corporation: 
(1)  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation, or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding 25 million dollars (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  If the user is a partnership, association, or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(c)  If the user is a federal, State, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(d)  The individuals described in paragraphs (a) through (c), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City. 
"Biochemical oxygen demand" means quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic material under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration such as mg/L. 
"Building sewer" means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a person to the public sewer, private sewer, individual wastewater disposal system or other approved point of disposal. 
"Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste and/or wastewater from any portion of a user's pretreatment facility. 
"Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1317) that apply to a specific category of users and that appear in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-47 1, incorporated herein by reference. 
"Color" means the optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water in which one hundred percent (100%) transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
"Composite sample" means the sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals, based on an increment of either flow or time. 
"Cooling water" means the water discharged from any use, including but not limited to, air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration units to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
"Compliance schedule" means a schedule containing increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of pretreatment equipment and/or systems required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
"Connection" means that part of any sewer extending from a sewer main in a public easement or right-of-way to private property for exclusive use of the property. 
"Control Authority" means the City of Oxnard, as owner and operator of the regional Oxnard Wastewater Treatment Plant, responsible for compliance with NPDES Permit CA0054097 and subsequent revisions. 
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City or designee. 
"Discharge" means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the system by a person. 
"Domestic wastewater" means human excrement and gray water from such uses as household showers and dishwashing. 
"Environmental Protection Agency" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official. 
"Existing source" means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
"Fee" means any charge assessed to a person associated with the use, or continued use, of any portion of the system and includes, but is not limited to, a charge for: connection or tap for new customers; monthly sewer service; IWD permit; excess capacity connection; wastewater treatment; excessive wastewater strength; laboratory testing; waste hauler's permit; oversize sewer; and noncompliance. 
"Food establishment" means any facility engaged in the preparation of food products for sale. A facility engaged in the sale of food products that are wholly prepared off-site is not included within this definition. 
"Formula users" means those users who are regulated under the IWD permit system and billed ac cording to the City of Port Hueneme user charge formula, a formula based on the measured or set strength and volume of their wastewater discharged. 
"Garbage" means the putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation and consumption of foods. 
"Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
"Gravity separation device" means a device designed, constructed, and operated for the purpose of retaining sand, silt, grit, mineral material, and oil by gravity-differential separation from wastewater. 
"Grease" means a varied group of compounds having the common properties of immiscibility with water and a specific gravity lower than water as determined by appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
"Grease interceptor" or "interceptor" means a device designed, constructed, and operated to separate and retain grease while permitting the wastewater to be discharged into the system. 
"Ground garbage" means the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in a public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
"Holding tank wastewater" means any wastewater from holding tanks including, but not limited to, vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
"Indirect discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the system from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
"Industrial user" means any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or similar person that discharges, directly or indirectly, wastewater into the system, which is solid, liquid or gaseous waste and contains pollutants different from or stronger than or with constituents other than those defined for domestic wastewater. 
"Industrial Wastewater" means the liquid and water-carried industrial waste, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the system. 
"Industrial wastewater discharge permit" or "permit" means a conditionally written authorization to allow a user to utilize the system for the discharge of industrial wastewater. 
"Instantaneous maximum discharge limit" means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
"Interference" means a discharge that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the system, its treatment processes or operations or its biosolids processes, use or disposal; and that is therefore a cause of a violation of the Control Authority's NPDES permit or of the prevention of biosolids use or disposal in compliance with all applicable federal, State, or local regulations, including but not limited to: section 405 of the Act, the SWDA, including Title II, commonly referred to as RCRA; any and all federal and State clean air acts: the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
"Mass emission rate" means the weight of material discharged to the system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
"Medical waste" means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
"Monitoring facilities" means an approved opening to a building sewer for the purpose of inspection, sampling and/or flow measurement. 
"Municipal wastewater system" or "system" means a "treatment works" as defined by section 212 of the Act, owned by the City or the Control Authority and includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of wastewater (domestic or industrial) and any conveyances which convey wastewater to the treatment plant. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit" means a permit issued to the Control Authority pursuant to section 402 of the Act. 
"National prohibitive discharge standard" or "prohibitive discharge standard" means any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act. 
"New Source" means: 
(a)  Any building structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(2)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge or pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(b)  Any construction on a site at which an existing source is located and results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (a)(2) or (3) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(c)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
(2)  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
(3)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment that is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
"Non-contact cooling water" means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
"Pass-through" means a discharge that exits the system into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Control Authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
"Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns; and including all federal, State and local governmental entities. 
"pH" means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. 
"Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, domestic wastewater, garbage, sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes and certain characteristics of the wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
"Pretreatment" or "treatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the system. Such pretreatment or treatment accomplished by: physical, chemical, or biological processes: or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutant unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
"Pretreatment facility" means any works or device for the treatment or flow limitation of domestic wastewater, liquid waste, industrial waste or industrial wastewater prior to discharge into the system. 
"Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
"Pretreatment standards" or "standards" means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and/or local limits. 
"Private sewer" means a sewer, other than a connection, laid by a person to serve one or more buildings, so as to connect a building(s) to a public sewer and irrespective of whether the sewer is constructed on public or private property. 
"Private wastewater disposal system" means a septic tank with the effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits or into a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pit or other wastewater holding facilities. 
"Prohibited discharge standards" or "prohibited discharge" means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in part 7153A of this Chapter. 
"Public Works Director" means the Public Works Director of the City or a designee. 
"Radioactive material" means material containing chemical elements that spontaneously change their atomic structure by emitting any particles, rays or energy forms in excess of normal background radiation. 
"Raw wastewater" means wastewater prior to treatment or discharge. 
"Seepage pit" means a lined excavation in the ground that receives the discharge of a septic tank and designed to permit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and side. 
"Septage" means any domestic wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
"Septic tank", means a watertight receptacle which receives the domestic wastewater discharge of a building and is designed and constructed to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of detention and allow the liquid to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a system of open joint or perforated piping or a seepage pit. 
"Settleable solids" means any solid that will settle out of a liquid in a specified interval of time as determined by appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
"Sewer" means a pipe or conduit together with appurtenances for carrying wastewater. 
"Significant change" means plus or minus twenty-five percent (25%) in an industrial user's typical discharge pattern: flow rate, peak flow rate, constituents, concentration of constituents or characteristics. 
"Significant Industrial User" means 
(a)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards, or 
(b)  A user that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of industrial wastewater to the system (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
(2)  Contributes a waste stream which makes up five percent (5%) or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the system; or 
(3)  Is designated as such by the City on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the system's operation or for violating a pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(c)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subpart (b) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the system operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
"Slug load" or "slug" means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards set forth in this ordinance. 
"Standard industrial classification (SIC)" means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual (latest edition) issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
"Standard methods" means Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater (latest edition) published by American Water Works Association, Water Environment Association, and the American Public Health Association, 1015 18th Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20036. 
"Standard specifications" means the current edition of standards and requirements relating to size, quantity, quality and performance, including standard drawing, as detailed and made available by the City. 
"State" means State of California. 
"Storm water" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelts. 
"Suspended solids" means the total suspended matter in wastewater, as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
"Total dissolved solids" means the solid matter in solution in wastewater, as determined by the appropriate procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136. 
"Total toxic organics" means the summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter of the organics contained in 40 CFR 403, Appendix B, incorporated herein by reference. 
"Toxic pollutant" means one of the pollutants or combination of those pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA (40 CFR 401.15) under authority of Section 307 of the Act. 
"Uncontaminated water" means any water not contaminated or polluted with sewage or other waste. 
"Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical and/or local pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user; but does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
"User" means a source of direct or indirect discharge. 
"Wastewater" means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and domestic wastewater from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed directly or indirectly to the system. 
"Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment Plant" means that portion of the system designed to provide treatment of domestic and industrial wastewater. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7152. - WASTEWATER COLLECTION/CONVEYANCE SYSTEM 
 
7152A - Service connections. 
(1)  Sewer service connections may be made to either publicly or privately owned and maintained authorized collection systems. No person shall connect any private property in the City to the system without first obtaining a connection permit issued by the Public Works Director and paying to the City the connection fee required therefore. 
(2)  The number of connection permits required for any development shall be based upon the number of sewer service connections. A separate sewer connection is normally required for each detached building. 
(3)  Food establishments and commercial laundries shall have a separate water connection from other users in the same building, unless specifically authorized by the Public Works Director. 
(4)  The Public Works Director may impose other requirements if he or she determines that public health and safety, system protection, maintenance costs or liability concerns so dictate. 
(5)  In order for the City to have sufficient information to make a determination of appropriate fees to be charged, building permit applicants shall submit sewer service plumbing plans prepared by a registered engineer or project architect in conjunction with the building permit application for all new and replacement structures. The plumbing plans shall show all the proposed line sizes and locations. 
(6)  Every connection, disconnection and permanent blocking or plug made between private property and the system shall be made in the manner and with the material required by the specifications for public sewers approved by the City and in accordance with the City's standard specifications for construction. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7152B - Connection to mains to be maintained by owner. 
All connections, including the lateral, wye or saddle at the City's sewer, shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner of which the connection originates. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7152C - Demolition and abandonment of services/premises. 
The owner of property connected to the system shall disconnect or permanently block or plug connections when further use of the property, for any purpose requiring the connection, is abandoned or when the structure or facility on the property requiring the connection is demolished without replacement. A Utility Services permit for abandonment of sewer lateral shall be required prior to commencement of abandonment. If a property owner or his/her agent has failed to so effect the disconnection or blockage, the Public Works Director may disconnect or block the connection, and the cost thereof shall be deemed a debt to the City and shall be charged to the owner. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7152D - Availability of capacity—Restriction of discharge rate. 
(1)  If the system capacity is not available, the Public Works Director may restrict discharge until sufficient capacity is made available. The Public Works Director may refuse immediate service to any new facility located in an area where there is insufficient capacity in the system to accommodate the proposed quantity of the wastewater. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may restrict the rate of discharge into the system during the peak flow hours (8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.) or at any other time when required to prevent the overloading of the system. A discharger so restricted shall be required either to curtail the rate of discharge or to provide approved storage or retention facilities for the wastewater. Wastewater so retained may be discharged into the system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or during other periods and at a rate of flow prescribed by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7152E - Excessive sewer maintenance expense. 
Any person who introduces or causes to be introduced into the system, either directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which creates a stoppage, plugging, breakage, reduction in the capacity of any portion of the system or any other damage to the system shall be liable for the damage and for maintenance, operation, and replacement expenses, including overhead costs, occasioned thereby. Expense of the damage, any excessive maintenance expense, or any other expenses attributable thereto shall be deemed a debt to the City and shall be charged to the offending person by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part) 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7152F - Damage to City's municipal wastewater system—Creation of other liability. 
Any person who introduces or causes to be introduced into the system, either directly or indirectly, any prohibited pollutant or wastewater which causes detrimental effects to the City's system or treatment plant processes or causes a violation of the Control Authority's NPDES permit or other regulation imposed by a regulatory agency shall be liable for all damages and costs occasioned thereby, including any penalty assessed by a regulatory agency. The damages, costs or penalty assessed shall be deemed a debt to the City and shall be charged to the offending person by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7152G - Provisions for extension of system. 
(1)  In addition to the payment of a connection fee, any person requesting service to a lot that is not adjacent to the system shall be responsible for installation of a sewer extension in dedicated streets, alleys or easements accepted by the City. Sewers shall be installed in sewer easements only when it is not in the public interest for the City to accept dedication of a street or alley in the particular location. The required sewer extension shall include all facilities necessary to serve the property as well as all unsewered properties that could feasibly be served by said extension. All construction shall conform to City standards and detailed plans approved by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall determine the size sewer required for the area for which application for service is made. 
(2)  If sewer facilities that the person would otherwise be required to provide have previously been installed, the person shall be required to pay to the City a sewer charge consisting of a pro rata share of such facilities as determined by the Public Works Director. If such previous installation was made by the applicant or his/her predecessor in interest in the property to which service is desired, the applicant may be entitled to credit in an amount to be determined by the Public Works Director for such installation. Previous installations eligible for these credits must have been made less than twenty (20) years before the application. Credit for previous installations will be applied against sewer charges, but in no event shall such credits be greater than the amount paid for actual construction of the extension. 
(3)  When installed, connected and finally inspected, all sewer extensions shall be deemed automatically offered for dedication to the City and upon acceptance shall become the property of the City. All necessary easements shall be granted to the City. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7152H - Special provision for extension of system. 
(1)  When an application requires a sewer extension and it is necessary or desirable to design the extension to serve an area or users, actual or potential, in excess for that which the application is made, the applicant may be eligible for a credit for a portion of the design and construction costs for the extension. Any such credit shall be granted in an amount to be determined by the Public Works Director. 
(2)  If the sewer to be constructed is included in the current sewer master plan implementation schedule, and said sewer is constructed, in part, by the applicant, the Public Works Director may authorize an appropriate credit against the applicant's sewer connection fee. No applicant may receive a credit for more than the total amount of sewer connection fees that would be normally required of the applicant. Any credit granted by the Public Works Director shall only be for the actual engineering and construction costs of the sewer. 
(3)  Upon completion of a sewer which is not in the current sewer master plan implementation schedule and to which future connections could be made, the Public Works Director shall determine the actual cost thereof and the existing sewer charge against each front foot of abutting property, taking into consideration intersections and other property that would not receive water service. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7153. - WASTEWATER INTRODUCTION INTO THE CITY'S MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM 
 
7153A - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(1)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced to the system, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater that causes pass-through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all persons, whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(2)  No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the system the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(a)  Pollutants that create a fire or explosive hazard in the system, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(b)  Any pollutant or wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 10.0, or that may otherwise cause corrosive structural damage to the City system or equipment; 
(c)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts that will cause obstruction of the flow in the system resulting in interference; 
(d)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the system; 
(e)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 140°F (60°C), or that will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater that causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
(f)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through; 
(g)  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(h)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the Public Works Director in accordance with part 7154F 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7153B - Local limits. 
Limits for the pollutants listed below are established to protect against pass-through and interference. No person shall introduce, or cause to be introduced, wastewater containing excessive quantities or concentrations, as set out in a resolution adopted by the City Council and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c), of the following pollutants: 
	
arsenic 	zinc 
cadmium 	oil and grease (mineral) 
chromium (T) 	oil and grease (vegetable) 
copper 	biochemical oxygen demand 
lead 	total suspended solids 
mercury 	total toxic organics 
nickel 	dissolved hydrogen sulfide 
silver 	pH 
 
Concentration limits apply at the point of discharge to the system or at an alternate point (or points) specifically designated by the Public Works Director. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal. At the discretion of the Public Works Director, mass limitations may be imposed on users in addition to or in place of the concentration based limitations on the above listed pollutants. Compliance with all parameters may be determined from a single grab sample. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7153C - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(1)  The federal categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405471 are hereby incorporated by reference. A violation of such standards shall constitute a violation of this part. 
(2)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the Public Works Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(3)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Public Works Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(4)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(5)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7153D - City's right of revision. 
The City reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in IWD permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the system. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7153E - Special agreements. 
The City reserves the right to enter into special agreements with users, setting out special terms under which they may discharge into the system. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment or prohibited discharge standard or requirement. However, the user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. The user may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment standard from the approval authority. Such a request will be approved only if the user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that categorical pretreatment standard. A user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7153F - Variances. 
(1)  The Public Works Director may grant a variance from one or more of the provisions of this Chapter. Prior to issuing such a variance, the Public Works Director shall verify that in no case will the granting of a variance either (a) allow the user to exceed applicable categorical pretreatment standards or requirements or federally mandated prohibitions or (b) place the general public, wastewater system or wastewater system personnel at risk of adverse health and safety effects. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may require the user to monitor the volumes and/or concentrations of the discharge in excess of previously imposed levels, if the Public Works Director deems it necessary to properly enforce any variance granted under this part. 
(3)  The Public Works Director reserves the right to impose requirements that are stricter than, or in addition to, those specified under the authority of parts 7153B and 7153C if the quantity or quality of the users discharge merit unique consideration by virtue of the impact of the users discharge on the system or public health and welfare. 
(4)  The Public Works Director reserves the right to revoke the variance at any time. 
(5)  The Public Works Director reserves the right to charge additional fees and/or deposits related to the granting of a variance. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7153G - Dilution. 
No user shall ever modify the use of process water for the purpose of diluting a discharge, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge. The Public Works Director may impose volume limitations on users that are suspected of using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of volume limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7154. - PRETREATMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER 
 
7154A - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater pretreatment as necessary to comply with this Chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this Chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the Public Works Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for review, and shall be approved by the Public Works Director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce a discharge in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7154B - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, to protect the wastewater system or public health and safety, the Public Works Director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this Chapter. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may require any person discharging into the system to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure active management of flow. An IWD permit may be issued solely for flow regulation. 
(3)  Users shall provide gravity separation devices when, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of oil and grease or sand that exceed discharge limitations set forth in this Chapter. All gravity separation devices shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Public Works Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such devices shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at user's expense. 
(4)  The Public Works Director may require users with the potential to discharge flammable substances to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7154C - Separation of domestic and industrial wastewater. 
All domestic wastewater including, but not limited to, those from restrooms, showers and drinking fountains shall be kept separate from all industrial wastewater until the industrial wastewater has passed through any required pretreatment system and/or monitoring facility. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7154D - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(1)  At least once every two years, the Public Works Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The Public Works Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the Public Works Director may develop such a plan for any user. 
(2)  An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the Public Works Director of any accidental or slug discharge; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impacts of any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7154E - Tenant and owner responsibilities. 
Any tenant or sub-tenant under any rental, lease, or other agreement shall be jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Chapter in the same manner as the owner, and both owner and tenant and, if applicable, sub-tenant, shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for any costs, damages fines or penalties incurred and/or imposed by the City due to non-compliance by the tenant, sub-tenant or owner with provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7154F - Hauled wastewater. 
Discharge of wastes or wastewater into the system from vehicles, including septage, industrial wastewater, and other hauled liquid wastes, is strictly prohibited. The Public Works Director may grant a variance to this prohibition. Hauled wastes do not violate the provisions of Section 7153 of this Chapter or any other federal, State or local regulation. The Control Authority implements a comprehensive program allowing discharge of septage and other hauled wastes at specific locations. Wastewater haulers within the City shall fully comply with Control Authority requirements for hauled waste. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7154G - Vandalism. 
No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the system. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in Sections 7158 through 7160 of this Chapter and appropriate criminal and/or civil prosecution. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7154H - Discharges from food establishments, vehicle maintenance facilities, and commercial and industrial laundries. 
All food establishments or similar establishments that introduce industrial wastewater into the system shall install an approved grease interceptor or grease trap that is of adequate design and sufficient size so as to prevent discharges of oil and/or grease above regulatory limits into the system. The grease interceptor or grease trap shall be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. The Public Works Director may grant variances from the requirements of this paragraph on a case-by-case basis and to the extent that the variance conditions do not violate federal or State law. The Public Works Director may take into account the following items when determining whether to grant a variance: 
(1)  Size of the restaurant; 
(2)  Type and number of meals served per day; 
(3)  Seating capacity; 
(4)  Dishwashing facilities on-site; and 
(5)  Any other criteria the Public Works Director deems applicable. 
(6)  All vehicle maintenance facilities that introduce industrial wastewater into the system shall be required to install a gravity separation device designed to prevent the excessive discharge of sand, silt, oil and grease above regulatory limits into the system. The Public Works Director may grant variances from the requirements of this paragraph on a case-by-case basis and to the extent that the variance conditions do not violate federal or state law. 
(7)  All commercial and industrial laundries that introduce industrial wastewater into the system shall install a gravity separation device of a size and design approved by the Public Works Director. These facilities shall also install other pretreatment facilities as required by the Public Works Director to ensure their compliance with all requirements and provisions of this Chapter. The Public Works Director may grant variances from the requirements of this paragraph on a case-by-case basis and to the extent that the variance conditions do not violate federal or state law. 
(8)  If the Public Works Director finds that a grease interceptor, grease trap or gravity separation device installed prior to the effective date of this Chapter is incapable of adequately retaining the grease, sand or oil in the wastewater flow from a food establishment, a vehicle maintenance facility, or a laundry, the Public Works Director shall require that an adequately sized grease interceptor, gravity separation device or other pretreatment facility be installed within a reasonable time period. 
(9)  The Public Works Director may maintain an information file available for public use of acceptable designs of grease interceptors, grease traps and gravity separation devices. The installation of a design shown in such file or of any design meeting the size requirement set forth in this Chapter or any recommendation of requirements made by the Public Works Director shall not impute any liability to the City for the adequacy of the interceptor or gravity separation device under the actual conditions of use. Such installation shall not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping prohibited substances or substances above the limitations of this Chapter out of the system. If the user's grease interceptor, gravity separation device or other pretreatment facility is not adequate under the conditions of use the user shall construct a pretreatment facility that is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose and meeting the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7154I - Maintenance of grease interceptors, grease traps and gravity separation devices. 
(1)  Any grease interceptor, grease trap or gravity separation device required by this Chapter shall be readily accessible for inspection and properly maintained to assure that the accumulations of grease, sand or oil do not impair its efficiency or pass out with the effluent. 
(2)  All persons required to use and maintain a grease interceptor, grease trap or gravity separation device shall keep records of the pretreatment device cleaning maintenance and grease removal and provide such reports on request to the Public Works Director. These records shall include the date the name of the person who cleaned the device and the disposal site of the waste. The report may be reviewed by the Public Works Director at each routine inspection. 
(3)  Persons hauling wastes and wastewater removed from these interceptors or gravity separation devices shall be registered to do so by the appropriate permitting agency. 
(4)  Improper maintenance of any grease interceptors and gravity separation devices or failure to maintain adequate records shall be considered a violation of this part. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7154J - Industrial wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the Public Works Director, an industrial user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its raw wastewater within thirty (30) days of the request. The Public Works Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update this information. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7155. - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT SYSTEM 
 
7155A - Industrial wastewater discharge permit requirements. 
(1)  No industrial user shall discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the system without first obtaining an IWD permit from the Public Works Director. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may require other users to obtain an IWD permit as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Chapter. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IWD permit shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter, and subjects the user to the sanctions set out in Sections 7158 through 7160 of this Chapter. Obtaining an IWD permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and State pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, State and local law. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155B - Industrial wastewater discharge permitting—User connections. 
Any user required to obtain an IWD permit that proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the system shall obtain such permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for an IWD permit, in accordance with parts 7155C and 7155D of this Chapter, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7155C - Industrial wastewater discharge permitting—Extra jurisdictional industrial users. 
New users located beyond the City limits that are required to obtain an IWD permit shall submit a permit application to the Public Works Director ninety (90) days prior to any proposed discharge into the system. Upon review of such application, the Public Works Director may enter into an agreement with the user that requires the user to subject itself to and abide by this Chapter, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions herein. Alternatively, the Public Works Director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of pretreatment program requirements against the user or the Public Works Director may conclude that no such agreement with the user or the neighboring jurisdiction is warranted. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155D - Industrial wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain an IWD permit shall submit a permit application to the Public Works Director at least ninety (90) days before any proposed discharge. The Public Works Director may require any user to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by part 7156A of this Chapter; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility that are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the system; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of the discharge; and 
(8)  Any other relevant information deemed necessary by the Public Works Director to evaluate the application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155E - Industrial wastewater discharge permit application signatories and certification. 
All IWD permit applications shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief true accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7155F - Industrial wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The Public Works Director shall evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional in formation. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete permit application, as such is determined by the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director shall determine whether to issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit and notify the user of such decision. If no decision is made during such time period, the permit application shall be deemed denied upon expiration of the sixty (60) day period. The Public Works Director may deny any application for an industrial wastewater discharge permit that is inconsistent with any of the provisions in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155G - Industrial wastewater discharge permit duration. 
IWD permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. Each IWD permit shall indicate a specific date of expiration. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7155H - Industrial wastewater discharge permit contents. 
(1)  An IWD Permit shall include such conditions that are consistent with the provisions of this Chapter and as are reasonably deemed necessary by the Public Works Director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate biosolids management and reuse, and protect against damage to the system. 
(2)  IWD permits shall contain: 
(a)  A statement of the duration of the permit; 
(b)  A statement that the permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval of the Public Works Director in accordance with part 7155K, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing permit; 
(c)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(d)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, State and local law; and 
(e)  A statement of applicable civil, criminal and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, State or local law. 
(f)  IWD permits may contain additional conditions including, but not limited to, the following: 
(g)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(h)  Requirement for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the system; 
(i)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(j)  Development an implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the system; 
(k)  Requirements or installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(l)  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and State pretreatment standards, including those that become effective during the term of the permit; and 
(m)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Public Works Director to ensure compliance with this Chapter, and State and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155I - Industrial wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
(1)  Any person, including the user, may petition the City to reconsider denial of an IWD permit or the terms of an IWD permit by filing a petition for reconsideration with the Public Works Director within ten (10) days of denial or issuance of the industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(2)  Failure to submit a timely petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative remedy. 
(3)  The petition for reconsideration shall identify and address, as applicable, reasons why the IWD permit should not have been denied, specific permit provisions objected to and any additional or alternative conditions petitioner seeks to be included in the permit. 
(4)  The conditions and provisions of the permit objected to by the user shall not be stayed pending a hearing on the petition. 
(5)  If the Public Works Director fails to act on the petition within forty-five (45) days, the petition shall be deemed denied. Decisions not to reconsider a permit, not to issue a permit, or not to modify a permit shall be considered final administrative actions. 
(6)  Parties seeking judicial review of such final administrative petitions shall comply with the requirements set out in section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155J - Industrial wastewater discharge permit modification. 
(1)  The Public Works Director may modify a permit for good cause consistent with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(2)  Good cause includes, but is not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or characteristic since the time of permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the system that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the system, City personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of, or a grant of, variance from categorical pretreatment standard pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit; or 
(i)  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155K - Industrial wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
(1)  IWD permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty (30) days advance notice to the Public Works Director and the Public Works Director approves the transfer. The notice shall include a written certification by the new owner or operator that: 
(a)  The new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes: 
(b)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(c)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(2)  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(3)  The Public Works Director shall approve the transfer unless he/she determines that the proposed transferee is unwilling or unable to abide by the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155L - Industrial wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
The Public Works Director may revoke an IWD permit for good cause consistent with the provisions of this Chapter, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Failure to notify the Public Works Director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the Public Works Director of changed conditions pursuant to part 7156E of this Chapter; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering, with monitoring equipment: 
(6)  Refusing to allow the Public Works Director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer use charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the permit or this Chapter. 
(14)  IWD permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All IWD permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new IWD permit to that user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155M - Industrial wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
A user may apply for reissuance of the permit by submitting a complete IWD permit application in accordance with parts 7155A and 7155E of this Chapter; such application shall be made at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7155N - Continuation of expired industrial wastewater discharge permits. 
An expired IWD permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until a decision is rendered as to whether to reissue the permit if: 
(1)  The user has submitted a complete IWD permit reissuance application at least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and 
(2)  The failure to reissue the IWD permit before the expiration of the existing permit is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7155O - Regulation of wastewater received from other jurisdictions. 
(1)  If another legal jurisdiction outside the City, or user located within another legal jurisdiction outside the system, contributes wastewater to the system, the Public Works Director shall enter into an agreement for wastewater services with the entity or user pursuant to part 7155C of this Chapter. 
(2)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (1) of this part, the Public Works Director shall request the following information from the contributing entity: 
(a)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the system by the contributing entity; 
(b)  An inventory of all users within the contributing entity that are discharging to the system; and 
(c)  Any other information as the Public Works Director may deem necessary. 
(3)  The agreement, as required by paragraph (1) of this part, shall contain the following conditions: 
(a)  A requirement for the contributing entity to adopt sewer use legislation which is at least as stringent as this Chapter and local limits that are at least as stringent as those established under authority of part 7153B. The requirement shall specify that such legislation and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to this Chapter or local limits; 
(b)  A requirement for the contributing entity to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(c)  A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation activities, including IWD permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement will be conducted by the contributing entity: which of these will be conducted by the Public Works Director; and which of these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing entity and the Public Works Director; 
(d)  A requirement for the contributing entity to provide the Public Works Director with access to all information that the contributing entity obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(e)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing entity's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the system; 
(f)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing entity's discharge; 
(g)  A provision ensuring the Public Works Director access to the facilities of users located in the contributing entity's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the Public Works Director; and 
(h)  A provision specifying remedies for breach of the terms of the agreement. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7155P - Monitoring facilities. 
(1)  All users required to obtain an IWD permit shall furnish, install and properly maintain a monitoring facility for wastewater sampling. This monitoring facility shall be of a design or configuration approved by the Public Works Director, who may require wastewater flow measurement equipment, automatic flow-proportional sampling equipment and automatic wastewater analysis and data recording equipment. 
(2)  Each user, as a part of its application for obtaining an IWD permit, shall propose a suitable location and design for the wastewater monitoring facility. The monitoring facility shall be located so as to be safe and accessible to City employees, and shall be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements and all applicable local building codes and other local construction requirements. The user's proposal for a wastewater monitoring facility shall comply with the City's design requirements and shall or be reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director. 
(3)  The users wastewater sampling analysis and flow measurement procedures, equipment, and results shall be subject to inspection by the Public Works Director at any time. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times by the user. 
(4)  Failure of a user to keep approved wastewater monitoring facilities clean and in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that any sample results are unrepresentative of the user's wastewater. Flow measurement systems shall be regularly maintained and calibrated in accordance with guidelines established by the Public Works Director and the manufacturer. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7156. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
7156A - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard by an agency with the appropriate jurisdiction and authority to adopt categorical pretreatment standards, or within one hundred eighty (180) days after the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the system shall submit to the Public Works Director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (c) below. 
(2)  At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Public Works Director a report which contains the information listed in subpart (3) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
(3)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(a)  The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner; 
(b)  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
(c)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the system from the regulated processes; 
(d)  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the system from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e); 
(e)  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
(f)  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or the Public Works Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported; 
(g)  The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in part 7156I of this Chapter. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out in part 7156J of this Chapter; 
(h)  A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance ("O & M") and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(i)  If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user shall provide the Public Works Director with the shortest schedule by which the user shall complete such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this part must meet the requirements set out in part 7156B this Chapter; 
(j)  Any other relevant information requested by the Public Works Director; 
(k)  Sign and certified baseline monitoring reports in accordance with part 7155E of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156B - Compliance schedules. 
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by part 7156A(3)(i) of this Chapter: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments, in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the Public Works Director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether user complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156C - Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the system, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Public Works Director a report containing the information described in part 7156A(3)(a)-(k). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with part 7155E of this chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156D - Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the Public Works Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with part 7155E of this Chapter. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user, subject to the reporting requirement in this part, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the Public Works Director, using the procedures prescribed in part 7156I of this Chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report sent to the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156E - Report of changed conditions. 
(1)  Each user shall notify the Public Works Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of an IWD permit application under parts 7155C or 7155D of this Chapter, if necessary. 
(3)  The Public Works Director may issue a IWD permit under part 7155F of this Chapter, or modify an existing IWD permit under part 7155J of this Chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(4)  For purposes of this part, significant changes include, but are not limited to, increases of twenty-five percent (25%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156F - Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, which may cause potential problems for the system, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the Public Works Director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless this requirement is waived by the Public Works Director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the system, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by this Chapter or any other applicable provision of federal, State or local law. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156G - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain an IWD permit shall provide appropriate reports as the Public Works Director may require. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156H - Notice of violation—Repeat sampling and reporting. 
If user's sampling indicates a violation, the user shall notify the Public Works Director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Public Works Director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the Public Works Director conducts monitoring at user's facility at least once a month, or if the Public Works Director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156I - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of an IWD permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7156J - Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in paragraph (2), below, the user shall collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the Public Works Director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156K - Timing. 
Written reports, applications, notices, and all mailings shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports that are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7156L - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this Chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this Chapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples, the dates analyses were performed, who performed the analyses, the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7156M - Right of entry—Inspection and sampling. 
(1)  The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with the requirement of this Chapter and any IWD permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the Public Works Director or his/her designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspecting, sampling, examining and copying records, and performing of any additional duties. 
(2)  Where a user has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into user's premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with user's security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the Public Works Director or his/her designee shall be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(3)  The Public Works Director or his/her designee shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation. 
(4)  The Public Works Director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at user's sole expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow shall be electronically calibrated at least every six (6) months and hydraulically calibrated at least every five (5) years to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the Public Works Director and shall not be replaced. The costs clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(6)  Refusal of access or unreasonable delays in allowing the Public Works Director or his/her designee access to the users premises shall be a violation of this Chapter. The Public Works Director may give notice of inspections at the Public Works Directors discretion, but unannounced inspections are an important part of the City's enforcement program, and users shall have no right to advance notice of any City inspections. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7157. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
7157A - Inspection—Search warrants. 
If the Public Works Director or his/her designee has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, in violation of this Chapter and/or any IWD permit, the Public Works Director may seek issuance of an inspection or search warrant from a court in addition to pursuing any other remedies available to the City provided by federal, State or local law. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7157B - Confidential information. 
(1)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, IWD permit applications, IWD permits and monitoring programs, and from the Public Works Director's or his/her designee's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable federal and State law. Any such request must be asserted by the user at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(2)  Upon request and demonstration by the user that information or data should be held confidential, the portions of such report containing the confidential information or data shall not be made available to the public for inspection. The entire report, including confidential information and data, shall be made available to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program, pretreatment program enforcement proceedings or any other permitted action in accordance with applicable federal and State law. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7157C - Publication of significant violators. 
(1)  The Public Works Director shall annually publish, in the daily newspaper with the largest circulation published in the area where the system is located, a list of the users that during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(2)  The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six (6)-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(b)  Technical review criteria violations, defined as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(c)  Any other discharge violation that the Public Works Director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, and/or endangered the health, safety and welfare of City personnel or the general public; 
(d)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the City's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(e)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in an IWD permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(f)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(h)  Any other violation that the Public Works Director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the City's wastewater manage program. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7157D - Notification of violation. 
(1)  When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. 
(2)  Within ten (10) calendar days of the service of such notice, the user shall submit to the Public Works Director an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, including specific required actions. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(3)  Nothing in this part shall limit the authority of the Public Works Director to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7158. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
7158A - Consent orders. 
The Public Works Director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for the noncompliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to parts 7158C and 7158D of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158B - Order to show cause. 
(1)  The Public Works Director may order a user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Public Works Director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user, specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
(2)  The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days before the meeting. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. An order to show cause shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158C - Administrative compliance orders. 
(1)  When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement the Public Works Director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued until such time as the conditions of the administrative order have been satisfied. 
(2)  Issuance of an administrative compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158D - Cease and desist orders. 
(1)  When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit or order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirements, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the Public Works Director may issue an order to the user directing the user to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(2)  Immediately comply with all applicable requirements; and 
(3)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
(4)  Issuance of a cease-and-desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the taking of any other action against the user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158E - Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director may issue an administrative complaint alleging the act or failure to act that constitutes the violation, the provisions of law authorizing imposition of the administrative fine, and the proposed administrative fine. 
(2)  The administrative complaint shall be served by personal delivery or certified mail on the user and shall inform the user that a hearing shall be conducted within sixty (60) days after the user has been served. The hearing officer shall be the Public Works Director or his/her designee. The user may waive the right to a hearing, in which case the hearing officer shall not conduct the hearing and decide the matter based upon the administrative complaint. 
(3)  The Public Works Director may impose administrative fines as follows: 
(a)  In an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000) per day for failing or refusing to furnish a self-monitoring report or any other technical report required by this Chapter; 
(b)  In an amount not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000) per day for failing or refusing to timely comply with any compliance schedule order by the Public Works Director; 
(c)  In an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000) per violation per day for discharges in violation of discharge standards or limits, permit conditions, or prohibitions issued, reissued, or adopted by the Public Works Director; and 
(d)  In an amount not to exceed ten dollars ($10) per gallon for discharges in violation of any suspension, cease-and-desist order or other order, or prohibition issued, reissued, or adopted by the Public Works Director. 
(4)  The amount of any administrative fine imposed under this part, which remains delinquent for a period of sixty (60) days or more, shall accrue interest at a standard rate of ten percent (10%) per year. Further, the amount of any administrative fine and interest accrued that remains delinquent after sixty (60) days shall constitute a lien against the real property of the user from which the discharge originated. 
(5)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action, whether criminal or civil, against the user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158F - Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The Public Works Director may immediately suspend a user's permission to discharge into the system, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that could or does cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the operation of the system, to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare. The Public Works Director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after the user is given notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the system, or that presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment or the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  Any user notified of the suspension of the user's permission to discharge into the system shall immediately halt discharge into the system. In the event any user fails to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Public Works Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the system, the receiving waters, to the environment, or the public health, safety or welfare. The Public Works Director may allow the user to recommence discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that the threat of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in part 7158G of this Chapter are initiated against the user. 
(3)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful or potentially harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any such future occurrence, to the Public Works Director before the date of any order to show cause or termination hearing under parts 7158B and 7158G of this Chapter. 
(4)  Nothing in this part shall be interpreted as requiring any hearing before issuance of any suspension order and the taking of any action permitted under this part. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158G - Termination of discharge. 
(1)  In addition to all other remedies available under this Chapter, federal, State and local law, the Public Works Director may terminate any user's permission to discharge into the system if the user does any of the following acts: 
(a)  Violates IWD permit conditions; 
(b)  Fails to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of the user's discharge; 
(c)  Fails to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(d)  Refuses reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling; or 
(e)  Violates the pretreatment standards in Section 7153 of this Chapter. 
(2)  Any user violating the provisions in part 7158G(1) will be notified of the proposed termination of the user's permission to discharge into the system and be offered an opportunity to show cause under part 7158B of this Chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Public Works Director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any action, whether criminal or civil, against the user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158H - Appeal. 
Except for actions taken pursuant to part 7158F, all actions taken by the Public Works Director or his/her designee pursuant to this Division may be appealed in writing to the City Council within thirty (30) days of notice of such action, in which case the decision of the City Council shall be deemed the final administrative action of the City. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7158I - Injunctive relief. 
(1)  When the Public Works Director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Public Works Director, through the City attorney, may petition the Superior Court of the County of Ventura for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that restrains or compels the specific performance of the conditions/requirements of an IWD permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Chapter on activities of the user. 
(2)  The Public Works Director may also seek other appropriate legal and/or equitable relief; including an order for the user to perform environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, the taking of any action, whether criminal, civil, or administrative against a user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7159. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
7159A - Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user that has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement may be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) per violation per day. 
(2)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other enforcement action, whether criminal, civil or administrative, against a user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7159B - Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user that willfully or negligently violates any provision of this Chapter, an IWD permit or an order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this Chapter, an IWD permit, or an order issued hereunder, or that falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this Chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7159C - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The provisions in Chapter are not exclusive remedies. The Public Works Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City's enforcement response plan. However, the Public Works Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Public Works Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. 639 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
SECTION 7160. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
7160A - Collection of fees. 
The amount of any fee or charge imposed by the provisions of this Chapter, including interest and penalty assessments, are a debt owed to the City. The City Attorney, or designee, is authorized to file an action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fees or charges, and if legal action is brought by the City or its assignee to enforce collection of any amount charged and due under this Chapter, any judgment rendered in favor of the City may include costs of suit incurred by the City or its assignee, including actual attorneys' fees. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7160B - Fees—Due date. 
All fees and charges made or assessed under the provisions of this Chapter are due on receipt of the billing statement and become delinquent fifteen (15) days thereafter. Fees not received by the City within thirty (30) days after the billing date are subject to a penalty of twenty percent (20%) of the unpaid balance, and interest accrues thereafter at a rate of ten percent (10%). 
(Ord. No. 694, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7160C - Connection fees. 
Sewer connection fees and deposits may be adjusted periodically to account for inflation in accordance with specific provisions as set forth by ordinance of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7160D - Schedule of charges. 
Fees and charges made and collected in accordance with and under the authority of this Chapter must be set and established by the City Council. 
Current charges must be established by City Council ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7160E - Estimated quantities and values. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, whenever the fees and charges required by this Chapter are based on estimated values or estimated quantities, the City Manager, or designee, must make the necessary determinations in accordance with established practices. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7160F - Specific fees. 
A.  User fees. All persons connected to the City's sewer system must pay to the City monthly fees for sewer service as established by the City Council. 
B.  Industrial wastewater discharge permit fees. All persons requiring an industrial waste discharge permit must pay to the City a yearly permit fee as established by the City Council. 
C.  Service fees. Should the City or its agents perform required industrial wastewater sampling, analysis, review, flow measurements or other activities for an industrial user, said user must be held responsible for all accrued costs. Fees for the service must be as established by the City Council. 
D.  Connection fees. The Director must charge and collect the fees specified by the City Council from persons connecting to the City sewer system, from applicants for permit and permittees under this Chapter and from users of the City sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 694, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7160G - Very low-income residents rate reduction. 
(a)  Any customer in the very low-income category who receives wastewater services at his or her personal residence may apply for a seven and one-half percent (7.5%) reduction in wastewater fees and service charges. Applications for reduced rates must be on forms supplied by the City. The applicant under penalty of perjury must supply all information required to be given on such forms. 
(b)  Reduced rates must be granted to qualifying applicants who file their applications with the City. A change of address terminates the special rate provided in this section, but a new application by such person at his or her new address may be made and the reduced rate allowed, if the requirements set out in this section are satisfied. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a "qualifying applicant" is defined as any household qualified under Southern California Edison's CARE program. 
(d)  The City Manager, or designee, may adopt such rules and regulations deemed necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 708, § 3, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 721, § 2, 2-1-16)  
Chapter 3 - INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Sections:  
Part A. - Definitions 
 
7211 - Definitions generally. 
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this Chapter shall have the meaning ascribed by Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40105—40201, and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, if defined therein, and if not, as defined in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act ("RCRA"), 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq., and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended from time to time. 
"AB 939" or "Act" means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Bi-monthly basis" means a billing period not exceeding sixty-six (66) days. 
"Bin" means a composite or metal container, designed for mechanical emptying, provided by a collector for the accumulation of solid wastes. 
"Bulky goods" means and includes, but not by way of limitation, discarded large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, clothing, tires, and oversized yard waste such as tree trunks and large branches if no larger than one (1) foot in diameter and two (2) feet in length and weighing not more than sixty (60) pounds each. 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme, California, a municipal corporation, and all of the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the City as presently existing, including all Federal facilities, and all geographic areas which may be added or annexed to the City. 
"City Manager" means an individual having that title in the employ of the City of Port Hueneme or the City Manager's duly authorized representative. 
"Civic litter containers" means City-owned receptacles located in public areas for disposal of nonhazardous waste generated by the public, which meet the standards of 14 C.C.R. Chapter 3, Article 9, Sections 17830, et seq., as amended. 
"Collection" means the act of collecting solid waste, at or near the place of generation or accumulation. 
"Collector" means a solid waste enterprise with a written franchise, contract, license or permit (collectively referred to in this Chapter as "franchise") for the collection of solid waste and/or recyclable materials, granted by resolution adopted by the City Council naming the collector or a solid waste enterprise purporting to have the right to collect solid waste and/or recyclable materials in the City pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520—49521 or other law. "Collector" may include "City" when City acts as a collector. 
"Commercial bins" means bins provided by a collector and designed for the temporary accumulation of commercial solid waste. 
"Commercial premises" means all premises in the City, other than residential premises, where solid waste is generated or accumulated. The term "commercial premises" includes, but is not limited to, stores; restaurants; rooming houses using bins and not standard residential solid waste containers; hotels; motels; office buildings; military facilities (except family quarters); department stores; manufacturing, processing, or assembling shops or plants; government offices (to the extent authorized by law); hospitals; clinics; and nursing homes; and condominiums and other residential developments utilizing commercial bins, and not standard residential solid waste containers. 
"Commercial solid waste" means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at commercial premises in the City, except medical waste, hazardous waste and documents to be shredded. 
"Construction and demolition waste" means and includes solid wastes such as building materials; and packaging and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Construction refers to SIC Codes 152 through 1794, 1796, and 1799. Demolition refers to SIC Code 1795. 
"Container" means any commercial bin, standard residential solid waste container, vessel, can, cart or other receptacle used for accumulating and collecting solid wastes for removal. 
"Customer" means the responsible person who obtains collection services from the City or its contractor. 
"Designated recyclable solid waste collection location," as used in this Chapter, means the place designated by arrangements between a collector and its customers from which the collector is to collect recyclable solid waste. This location may be, but the City does not require that it be, at curbside in residential neighborhoods or service alleys of commercial premises. "Designated recyclable solid waste collection location," as used in this Chapter, may also mean, depending on the context, the place or places designated by arrangements between a collector and the City from which the collector is to collect recyclable solid waste. 
"Franchise" means the right and privilege: (1) to make arrangements for the collection of and to collect, (2) to transport to landfill or other licensed disposal facilities and/or (3) to recycle all solid waste, including recyclable solid waste and green waste, kept, generated and/or accumulated within the City from the franchise area. "Franchise" means a franchise, contract, license or permit, granted by the City Council, in writing, naming the collector. A franchise is subject to whatever, if any, rights which may be held by another solid waste enterprise pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520-21 or other law. 
"Franchise fee" means the fee or assessment imposed by the City on a collector because of its status as collector. 
"Green waste" (also sometimes referred to as "yard waste") means leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic matter generated from landscapes and gardens and incidental pieces of untreated and unpainted scrap lumber no longer than twenty-four (24) inches and containing no metal objects, separated from other forms of solid waste. "Green waste" also includes holiday trees from which all tinsel, flock, base attachments and ornaments have been removed. Green waste does not include stumps or branches exceeding six (6) inches in diameter or two (2) feet in length, palm fronds, yucca, food waste, manure, dirt, rocks, garbage or any other form of solid wastes which are not suitable for composting. 
"Gross revenues" means any and all revenue or compensation in any form derived directly or indirectly by a collector, subsidiaries, parent companies or other affiliates for the collection, transportation, processing, disposal and other services with respect to solid waste collected in the City, pursuant to a franchise, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The term "gross revenues" includes, but is not limited to, monthly customer fees, special pickup fees, bin and drop box rental and collection fees, fees for redelivery of bins and drop boxes, and revenue from the sale of recyclable solid waste, without subtracting franchise fees or any other cost of doing business. 
"Hazardous waste" means (1) all waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. Sections 3251 et seq.), as amended, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq.) as they may be amended from time to time, and all implementing regulations, (2) all waste defined or characterized as hazardous pursuant to the provisions of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and all implementing regulations, and (3) all waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by agencies of the State of California (including without limitation the Department of Health Services, the Department of Toxic Substances Control and the California Integrated Waste Management Board) having jurisdiction over solid and hazardous waste. The term "hazardous waste" means, in addition to any substance included in any of the foregoing categories, those substances which are not normally permitted to be disposed of by generally accepted sanitary landfill disposal methods, but which may be contained in solid waste streams. In the event of a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more governmental agencies having concurrent or over-lapping jurisdiction over hazardous waste, the broader, more encompassing definition shall apply. 
"Infrastructure use fee" means the fee or assessment imposed by the City on a collector to compensate for the increased deterioration of the City's public infrastructure as a result of the collector's activities. 
"Recyclable material" means a material which has commercial value and which is sold or donated to an entity other than a solid waste collector or solid waste enterprise. Recyclable materials are commodities and are not part of the solid waste stream. Recyclable materials lose their character as recyclable materials upon being disposed of in the waste stream and become solid waste subject to this Chapter. If the seller or donor of recyclable material pays the buyer or donee, including any solid waste enterprise, any consideration for collecting, processing, recycling, transporting or disposing of "recyclable material" or for providing consultation or other services which exceed the market price of the "recyclable material," the transaction shall not be regarded as a sale or donation of "recyclable material," but as an arrangement for the disposal of solid waste subject to this Chapter. 
"Recyclable solid waste" means a form of solid waste which has been separated by a solid waste service recipient from other forms of solid waste before having been disposed of into the waste stream. "Recyclable solid waste" is a part of the solid waste stream which can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of the Act. The term "recyclable solid waste" includes both mixed (commingled) recyclable solid wastes which have been segregated from other waste material as well as source-separated single-category recyclable solid waste. "Recyclable solid waste" does not include those potentially recoverable items which are commingled with non-recyclable solid waste, i.e., commingled non-recyclable solid waste and potentially recyclable solid waste. Nor does "recyclable solid waste" include recyclable material, which is not a part of the waste stream. Recyclable solid waste shall be deemed to be contaminated if the container into which it has been placed contains more than fifteen (15) percent non-recyclable solid waste, or any amount of hazardous waste. 
"Recyclable solid waste container" means a container, vessel, can, cart or other receptacle used for accumulating and collecting recyclable solid waste. 
"Refuse" means solid waste. 
"Residential premises" includes single-family residences, townhouses, apartments, condominiums and mobile homes, each with its own cooking and bathing facilities, at which standard residential solid waste containers, not commercial bins, are used. "Residential premises" does not include hotels or motels, nursing or convalescent homes or barracks or other military housing without separate cooking facilities. 
"Residential solid waste" means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at residential premises and placed in standard residential solid waste containers for accumulation and collection. "Residential solid wastes" does not include commercial solid waste or recyclable material. 
"Responsible person" means the person responsible for daily operations of every residential or commercial premises, including, without limitation, every military post, facility, station, center or other military property. 
"Single-family residential" includes single family residences and any other residences, including military family quarters, that do not use commercial bins on a regular or periodically recurring basis for the accumulation of solid waste. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, and semisolid waste, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste, radioactive waste or medical waste. As used in this Chapter, the term solid waste includes green waste and recyclable solid waste. 
"Standard residential solid waste container" means a container provided by the collector for the accumulation, storage and collection of residential solid waste. 
(Ord. 687 § 3, 2008; Ord. 645 § 4, 2003: Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part B. - Integrated Waste Management 
 
7212 - Providers of solid waste services. 
In order to protect public health, safety, and well-being, and to control the spread of vectors, the City Council may authorize one or more collectors to make arrangements with persons in charge of day-to-day activities at premises in the City at which solid waste is generated or accumulated, for the collection, transfer, and disposal of solid wastes within and throughout the City. The City Council, by resolution, may direct that City shall provide all or any part of these services to all or any part of the City. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7213 - Manner, time and frequency of collection. 
Collectors who arrange for the collection of solid wastes shall make arrangements with their customers specifying the manner in which integrated waste management services are provided, subject to the City's duty to protect public health, safety, and well-being by prohibiting the collection of solid wastes between certain hours and on certain holidays, to control vectors and to limit sources of noise and air pollution within the City. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7214 - Categories. 
In order to carry out its duties to plan for the management of vehicular traffic and mitigate adverse air quality and storm water run-off effects, the City Council may determine waste management collection categories, i.e., residential, single-family residential, multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, special, special event, household hazardous waste and other, and may make or impose franchise, license, contract or permit requirements, and service charges which may vary for such categories. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7215 - Collection arrangements required. 
Responsible persons must arrange with the City for collection services as set forth in this Chapter except that responsible persons may instead self-haul solid waste generated or accumulated on premises of which they are in charge after first obtaining a self-haul permit from the City pursuant to this Chapter. 
(Ord. 645 § 5, 2003: Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7216 - Source separation of recyclable solid waste and green waste. 
Upon notice to do so by the City Manager, when determined to be necessary to protect public health, safety and well-being and to implement the policy of the State of California and the City with respect to the diversion of recyclable solid waste, green waste or both from disposal in landfills or transformation facilities, the person responsible for the day-to-day operation of each premises in the City, including but not limited to common areas of common interest subdivisions, shall segregate, cause to be segregated, or arrange for the separation of, recyclable solid waste, green waste, or both from other forms of solid waste generated or accumulated on those premises and shall place or cause to be placed the segregated recyclable solid waste, or green waste, in containers designated by the collector for the temporary accumulation of recyclable solid waste or green waste, as appropriate. The City, by resolution, may set special collection rates for collection of recyclable solid waste, green waste, or both, and for collection of containers of recyclable solid waste or green waste, or separate containers of each, which have been contaminated by excessive amounts of non-recyclable solid waste or by hazardous waste. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7216.1 - Diversion of green waste. 
Each person in the City required to obtain a business license to perform gardening or landscaping services in the City for hire shall place all green waste generated or accumulated in the course of the performance of that person's gardening or landscaping services in the City into a green waste container at the premises where the green waste was generated or accumulated. If no green waste container is available on the premises where the green waste was generated or accumulated, the person performing gardening or landscaping services shall self-haul the green waste pursuant to a gardener's self-haul permit (as provided for in Section 7230, below), and deliver the green waste to a permitted green compost facility or other composting facility exempt from permitting by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or a permitted facility serving as a collection facility for a permitted green compost facility or other composting facility exempt from permitting by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7216.2 - Diversion of construction and demolition waste. 
Each person applying for a building or demolition permit shall submit a construction and demolition waste diversion plan to the City as part of the application. The construction and demolition waste diversion plan shall explain the measures to be implemented to divert construction and demolition waste from landfilling and to recycle or reuse construction and demolition waste to the maximum extent practicable. Each person in the City in charge of day-to-day activities at premises at which construction and demolition waste is generated or accumulated shall implement measures to divert construction and demolition waste from landfilling and to recycle or reuse construction and demolition waste to the maximum extent practicable. Persons providing bins for the temporary accumulation of construction and demolition waste in the City shall implement measures to divert construction and demolition waste from landfilling and to recycle or reuse construction and demolition waste to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part C. - Fees, Franchises, Permits and Licenses 
 
7217 - Fees, franchises and licenses. 
(a)  The City may impose charges and fees for collecting, inspecting, auditing, recycling, transferring and disposing solid waste and planning for and response to hazardous materials releases and spills. Rates for charges and fees must be set by ordinance in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 5471. 
(b)  The City Council may, by resolution, waive permit fees for collection of green waste. 
(c)  The City Council, by resolution, may waive permit fees for collectors of green wastes. 
(Ord. 645 § 6, 2003: Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7218 - Residential solid waste collection franchises, permits and licenses. 
(a)  The City Council may award one or more franchises, contracts, licenses or permits (collectively "franchises") for collection of solid wastes from all or a portion of single-family residential properties. Any such franchise shall be granted by the City Council by written resolution naming the collector, upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being so require. 
(b)  The franchise shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the City Council shall establish in its discretion. At a minimum, however, the franchise shall provide: 
(1)  That the franchisee, permittee or licensee (collectively "franchisee") shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter as it, from time-to-time may be amended; and, 
(2)  That the franchisee shall be required to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold the City harmless from liability, including, specifically, liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 et seq., and the California Health & Safety Code, as they may be amended from time to time and all regulations implementing these acts, and the common law; and 
(3)  That the franchisee shall be required to cooperate with City in solid waste generation studies and the preparation of waste stream audits, and to implement measures to reach the solid waste and recycling goals and reporting requirements mandated by AB 939, as it may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  That the franchisee shall be required to pay a franchise fee as a percentage of gross revenues, as determined by the City Council. 
(5)  That the franchisee shall be required to pay an infrastructure use fee, as may be set by the City Council. 
(c)  Any solid waste enterprise which asserts a right to collect solid waste pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520 et seq., or other law, shall meet all standards required of holders of a franchise. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7219 - Commercial solid waste collection franchises, permits, licenses and fees. 
(a)  The City Council may award one or more franchises, permits, contracts, licenses or permits (collectively, "franchises") for collection of solid wastes from commercial, industrial, governmental, military, institutional, and multifamily residential properties in the City. Any such franchise shall be granted by the City Council by written resolution, naming the collector, upon a determination that the public health, safety, and well-being so require. 
(b)  The franchise shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the City Council shall establish in its sole discretion. At a minimum, the franchise, permit, or license shall provide as follows: 
(1)  That the franchisee shall comply with the provisions of this Chapter as it, from time-to-time, may be amended; 
(2)  That the franchisee shall be required to protect, defend, indemnify, and hold the City harmless from liability, including, specifically, liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq.) and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 et seq., and the California Health & Safety Code, as they may be amended from time to time and all regulations implementing these acts, and the common law; 
(3)  That the franchisee shall be required to cooperate with City in solid waste generation studies and the preparation of waste stream audits, and to implement measures to reach the solid waste and recycling goals and reporting requirements mandated by AB 939, as it may be amended from time to time; 
(4)  That the franchisee shall be required to pay a franchise fee as a percentage of gross revenues, as determined by the City Council; 
(5)  That the franchisee shall be required to pay an infrastructure use fee, as may be set by the City Council. 
(c)  Any solid waste enterprise which asserts a right to collect solid waste pursuant to Public Resources Code Sections 49520 et seq., or other law, shall meet all standards required of holders of a franchise. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7220 - Solid waste facilities. 
No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility, including but not limited to a materials recovery facility, landfill, composting facility, buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility or a recycling center without first satisfying all City requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7221 - Liability for fees. 
Every customer, including, without limitation, corporate and government entities, is liable for the fees and charges for collection. All charges, fees, penalties, and interest imposed pursuant to this Chapter are civil debts owed to the City by the customer. 
(Ord. 645 § 7, 2003: Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7221.5 - Collecting fees and charges. 
(a)  Customers must pay the fees and charges imposed by this Chapter on a bi-monthly basis. 
(b)  Fees and charges are delinquent if unpaid on the twenty-second (22nd) day after a customer is billed. 
(c)  Upon delinquency, the City may give written notice to the delinquent customer that the bill is now overdue and payable in full and attempt to collect payment through all legal means. 
(Ord. 645 § 8, 2003)  
7221.10 - Delinquent billings. 
(a)  Delinquent bills presented to a customer must include a written notice warning that nonpayment within five (5) business days of the earliest unpaid period may include collection charges and may result in a lien being recorded against the property for which collection service was rendered. 
(b)  The City must advise the debtor in writing that a minimum fee of ten percent (10%) of the bill amount is imposed in all collection cases, that an additional lien fee will be charged in all cases where the filing of a lien is necessary, and that thirty days (30) notice is given to allow payment of the debt to the City to avoid payment of the lien fee and to avoid a special assessment against property benefiting from collection service in the amount of all fees, charges, penalties, and interest. 
(c)  Originally billed amounts will be paid to the City's designated collector on a quarterly basis. All fees and lien charges collected will be retained by the City. 
(Ord. 645 § 9, 2003)  
7221.15 - Special assessment. 
The City may initiate proceedings to make delinquent collection service fees and charges a special assessment against properties owned by a customer indebted to the City in accordance with Health and Safety Code Sections 5470, et seq. 
(Ord. 645 § 10, 2003)  
7221.20 - Penalties generally. 
Penalties will be imposed upon all delinquent charges as follows: 
(a)  Basic Penalty. A basic penalty of ten percent (10%) of total delinquent charges will be imposed as of the date of such delinquency; and 
(b)  Additional Penalties. An additional penalty of ten percent (10%) will be imposed on the total delinquent charges on each billing date upon which the charges remain unpaid. 
(c)  Limit of Penalty. The total penalty imposed may not exceed one hundred percent (100%) of the total of any such delinquent account. 
(Ord. 645 § 11, 2003)  
7221.25 - Service termination. 
Failure to pay the fee assessed for the collection of solid waste, green waste, and recyclable materials in accordance with this Chapter, may, except as otherwise stated, result in the noncollection of solid waste, green waste, and recyclable materials, which condition the City Council may determine and may declare to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and which condition may be declared to be, if permitted to exist, a public nuisance. The City will continue to collect solid waste, green waste, and recyclable materials when directed to do so by the City Manager, or designee. 
(Ord. 645 § 12, 2003)  
7221.30 - Service restoration. 
Where collection service is discontinued, service will not be restored until all required payments (including, without limitation, arrearage, penalties, and service charges) are paid in full. The City may also require a customer to pay a deposit to guarantee payment for future collection service in an amount determined by the City Council. 
(Ord. 645 § 13, 2003)  
7221.35 - Interest on unpaid assessments. 
All assessments remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the City Council bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per year from and after such date. 
(Ord. 645 § 14, 2003)  
7221.40 - Very low-income residents rate reduction. 
(a)  Any customer in the very low-income category who receives solid waste collection services at his or her personal residence may apply for a seven and one-half percent (7.5%) reduction in fees. Applications for reduced rates must be on forms supplied by the City. The applicant under penalty of perjury must supply all information required to be given on such forms. 
(b)  Reduced rates must be granted to qualifying applicants who file their applications with the City. A change of address terminates the special rate provided in this section, but a new application by such person at his or her new address may be made and the reduced rate allowed, if the requirements set out in this section are satisfied. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a "qualifying applicant" is defined as any household qualified under Southern California Edison's CARE program. 
(d)  The City Manager, or designee, may adopt such rules and regulations deemed necessary to properly carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 645 § 15, 2003) 
(Ord. No. 708, § 2, 9-6-11; Ord. No. 721, § 3, 2-1-16)  
Part D. - Solid Waste Containers 
 
7222 - Containers—Availability on premises. 
To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, it is the duty of every person required under Section 7215 of this Chapter to arrange for solid waste collection (or to obtain a self-haul permit) to keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the collector, one (1) or more containers of adequate size and quantity, capable of holding without spilling all solid waste accumulated on the premises between the time of two (2) successive collections. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7223 - Use of containers. 
(a)  To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, every person required under Section 7215 of this Chapter to arrange for solid waste collection and removal (or to obtain a self-haul permit) shall deposit or cause to be deposited in containers or bins approved by the collector all solid waste generated or accumulated on the premises. 
(b)  To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person shall place for collection any residential solid waste in a container not in conformance with the standard residential solid waste container or bin designated by the collector. 
(c)  No commercial solid waste, industrial solid waste, institutional solid waste, medical waste as defined in the Health & Safety Code, hazardous waste, automobile parts weighing more than thirty (30) pounds, tree stumps, construction debris nor any asbestos-containing materials may be placed in any standard residential solid waste container, nor shall any hazardous waste be placed in any commercial bin. 
(d)  In the event a container provided by a collector is damaged by a service recipient, and replacement is required, the collector may charge a replacement fee, in an amount to be set by the City Council, by resolution. 
(e)  To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, every person required under Section 7215 of this Chapter to arrange for solid waste collection (or to obtain a self-haul permit) shall cause all containers on the premises of which the person is in charge to be maintained in a clean condition. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part E. - Solid Waste Set-Out and Collection 
 
7224 - Frequency, time of removal. 
(a)  To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, persons in charge of the day-to-day operation of premises other than commercial premises where food is prepared, shall make arrangements to have all solid waste removed from the premises not less frequently than once a week. This requirement shall not apply to on-site composting of green waste. 
(b)  To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, every person in charge of commercial premises where food is prepared shall cause all waste food refuse to be removed from the premises not less frequently than once per week, and more often if necessary to protect public health, safety and well-being from the spread of vectors and the release of odors. 
(c)  Subject to the requirements for minimum removals per week, set forth above, persons in charge of the day-to-day operation of premises may specify the frequency of collection and removal of solid waste created, produced, or brought upon the premises of commercial or multi-family residential premises, and the size and number of bins required. 
(d)  In order to protect residents' quiet enjoyment of their residential premises, collection from residential premises, single-family and multifamily, shall not be made between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day. Collection of solid waste from commercial premises shall not be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Subject to the foregoing requirements, collections shall be made by arrangement between the person in charge of day-to-day operation of the premises and the collector. 
(e)  Collectors shall design their routes and times for collection in a manner which minimizes air pollution, traffic, noise, wear and tear on public and private streets, and other problems having the potential to adversely affect public health, safety, or the environment. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7225 - Placement for collection. 
During the hours for collection, each person required under Section 7215 of this Chapter to arrange for solid waste collection (except those persons who have been issued a current self-haul permit) shall place, or cause to be placed for collection standard residential solid waste containers at the location designated by the collector and such containers shall be accessible for mechanized pick-up. Commercial bins shall be made accessible to the collector. 
(a)  To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place a container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection service prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day prior to the regularly scheduled collection day. 
(b)  To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, containers shall be removed from the street or right-of-way location not later than 6:00 a.m., on the day after the regularly scheduled collection day. 
(c)  To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, tree trimmings and brush shall be cut into pieces not to exceed two (2) feet in length and six (6) inches in diameter, before being placed for collection as green waste. 
(d)  To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, bulky goods shall be placed for collection only pursuant to arrangement between the service recipient and the collector. 
(e)  To minimize interference with the automated collection trucks, no person shall place a container in public rights-of-way closer than four (4) feet from any object. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part F. - Special Collections 
 
7226 - Special collections. 
Service recipients of solid waste services may order special collections of bulky goods, temporary bin service and other special solid waste services, at rates not to exceed the rate ceilings set by City Council ordinance. 
(Ord. 645 § 16, 2003: Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part G. - Collection Equipment 
 
7227 - Collection equipment. 
(a)  To protect public health, safety, and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, any truck used for the collection or transportation of solid waste within the City shall be leak proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover which shall be affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping, or blowing of any solid waste upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation. 
(b)  Collectors shall maintain all of their trucks and bins used in the City free of "tagging" or graffiti. 
(c)  Each collector shall post each commercial bin it places within the City with conspicuous notices on each side of the commercial bin that the commercial bin is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste. 
(d)  No person shall park, or cause to be parked within the City any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle and its contents are free from odor. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7228 - Solid waste collection trucks—Noise. 
To protect the public health, safety, and quiet enjoyment of the residents of the City, the noise level for solid waste collection vehicles during the stationary compaction process shall not exceed seventy-five (75) dB(A) at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five (5) feet from the horizontal base place of such vehicles. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part H. - Self-Haulers and Gardeners 
 
7229 - Self-haulers—Disposal at authorized sites—Reporting requirements. 
Persons desiring to transport and dispose of solid waste generated or accumulated at premises which they own or of which they are in charge of day-to-day activities ("self-haulers"), shall obtain a self-haul permit from the City. Self-haulers shall transport and dispose of such solid waste only in vehicles owned or leased by the self-hauler, and only at permitted solid waste facilities. At such times as the City Manager may specify, and upon notice by the City Manager, self-haulers shall report to the City the type, weight and disposal facility destination of such solid waste transported and shall submit to the City a copy of weight or gate tickets or receipts from each permitted disposal facility to which the self-hauler transported solid waste. If self-haul reporting fees have been set by the City Council, by resolution, self-haulers shall pay such fees to the City. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7230 - Gardeners—Disposal at authorized sites—Reporting requirements. 
Each person in the City required to obtain a business license to perform gardening, landscaping or landscape maintenance services in the City for hire (collectively referred to as "gardeners"), who transports green waste shall obtain a gardener's self-haul permit from the City and shall transport green waste only in vehicles owned or leased by the gardener and only to permitted solid waste facilities or green compost facilities or exempt facilities or other lawful places. At such times as the City Manager may specify, and upon notice by the City Manager, gardeners holding business licenses, self-haul permits, or both, shall report to the City the type, weight and destination of such green wastes transported and shall submit to the City a copy of weight or gate tickets or receipts from each permitted facility or exempt facility to which the self-hauler transported green waste. If self-haul reporting fees for gardeners have been set by the City Council, by resolution, gardeners shall pay such fees to the City. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part I. - Recyclable Solid Waste and Recyclable Material 
 
7231 - Ownership and diversion of recyclable solid waste. 
Upon placement of recyclable materials or recyclable solid waste at a designated recycling collection location or placement of a container for collection of recyclable solid waste by a collector, the recyclable solid wastes become the property of the collector, by operation of state law. Persons providing bins for the temporary accumulation of construction and demolition waste in the City shall implement measures to divert construction and demolition waste from landfilling and to recycle or reuse construction and demolition waste to the maximum extent practicable. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7232 - Recyclable material. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall limit the right of any person, organization, or other entity to donate or sell any recyclable material owned by that person, organization or other entity, provided that any disposal of recyclable material into the solid waste stream shall cause the recyclable material to lose its status as recyclable material, and shall convert it into recyclable solid waste, subject to the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part J. - Cleanup Responsibility 
 
7233 - Solid waste cleanup responsibility. 
Until solid waste has been picked up by a collector, the person in charge of day-to-day operation of each premises in the City shall be responsible for the cleanup of any and all solid waste generated, deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment (including the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles) or which otherwise has come to be located outside an authorized container for the collection of such solid waste at the premises of which the person is in charge, notwithstanding human or animal interference with bins or containers, wind or other natural forces, and whether during storage, collection, removal, or transfer. The collector shall be responsible for any solid waste spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the environment during its collection, removal, or transfer and each collector shall clean up immediately, or cause to be cleaned up immediately, any solid waste spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the environment during collection, removal or transfer. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part K. - Prohibited Acts and Enforcement 
 
7234 - Use of containers. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person shall place or keep solid waste in containers or bins other than those approved by a collector; nor shall any person keep upon any premises in the City any solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious, or unsanitary. All of the foregoing is unlawful, constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner now or hereafter provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7235 - Removal of solid waste. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person, other than the person in charge of any premises, or the collector authorized by the person in charge of any premises, shall remove any container from the location where the container was placed for storage or collection by the person in charge of the premises, or remove any solid waste from any container, or move any container from the location in which it was placed for storage or collection, without prior written approval of the person in charge of such premises. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7236 - Bulky goods. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection or removal without first having made arrangements with a collector for the pick-up of the bulky goods. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7237 - Institutional, commercial or industrial solid waste. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person shall place or deposit commercial solid waste, industrial solid waste, institutional solid waste, medical waste (as defined in the Health & Safety Code), or hazardous waste in any civic litter container or in any standard residential solid waste container. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7238 - Solid waste burning. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person shall burn any solid waste within the City, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility or other device for which a permit has been issued by the Building Official, and which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of air pollution control authorities, and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7239 - Collection without permit or franchise prohibited. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person other than a self-hauler with a self-haul permit issued pursuant to Section 7229, above, a gardener with a self-haul permit issued pursuant to Section 7230, above, or a City-authorized (by resolution of the Council) collector shall collect any solid waste from any premises within the City. To protect the public health and welfare and to enable the City to achieve and verify its AB 939 diversion goals and reporting requirements, no person other than a City-authorized collector shall collect any recyclable materials from any premises within the City. 
(Ord. 687 § 2, 2008: Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7240 - Unauthorized removal. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to prevent the spread of vectors, it is unlawful for any person, other than a collector, to take, remove, or appropriate for his/her own use any solid wastes, recyclable solid waste, potentially recyclable articles commingled with solid waste, source-separated single recyclable solid waste or green waste which has been placed for collection or removal by a collector, whether so placed in containers or not. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7241 - Public nuisance. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to prevent the spread of vectors, it is unlawful, and a public nuisance, for any person to occupy, inhabit, maintain, or to be in control of day-to-day activities of any premises within the City at which solid waste is generated or accumulated for which arrangements have not been made for regular collection and removal of solid wastes or for which the person in charge of day-to-day operations has not obtained a self-haul permit. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7242 - Unauthorized disposal. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, and to prevent the contamination of solid waste and recyclable solid waste, it is unlawful for any person to place solid waste in, or to otherwise use the solid waste, green waste or recyclable solid waste containers of another person, without the permission of such other person. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7243 - Unauthorized removal of recyclable materials prohibited by state law. 
The unauthorized removal of recyclable solid waste placed at a designated recycling location is prohibited by California Public Resources Section 41950. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7244 - Spills. 
To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, it is unlawful for any person transporting solid waste to fail to immediately clean up, or arrange for the immediate cleanup, of any solid waste released, spilled or dumped during removal or transport within the City by such person. It is unlawful and a nuisance for the person in charge of day-to-day operation of any premises in the City to permit or suffer solid waste to be deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment (including the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles) or otherwise come to be located outside an authorized container for the collection of such solid waste at the premises of which the person is in charge, notwithstanding human or animal interference with bins or containers, wind or other natural forces, and whether during storage, collection, removal, or transfer. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7245 - Unlawful dumping. 
It is unlawful for any person to deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, dump or dispose into the environment, including the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever, any solid or liquid waste upon any premises, including, but not limited to any storm drain or channel, within the City, or to cause, suffer, or permit such solid or liquid waste to come to be located upon any premises in the City, except as authorized by the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7245.1 - Unlawful disposal of green waste. 
It is unlawful for any person in the City required to obtain a business license to perform gardening or landscaping services in the City for hire to place green waste generated or accumulated in the course of the performance of that person's gardening or landscaping services in the City into any container other than a green waste container at the premises where the green waste was generated or accumulated or to deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, dump or dispose into the environment, including the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles, any green waste at any other place in the City, or outside the City at any place other than a permitted green compost facility or other composting facility exempt from permitting by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or a permitted facility serving as a collection facility for a permitted green compost facility or other composting facility exempt from permitting by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, and in the case of green waste placed at any location other than into a green waste container at the premises where the green waste was generated or accumulated, to fail to report to the City Manager the date of disposal, the quantity disposed of, and the place of disposal at the times and in the manner prescribed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7246 - Enforcement. 
Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the Public Works Director, persons designated by the Director, and all City Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and as well as those of California Penal Code Sections 374, 374a, 374.2, 374.3, 374.4, 374d, 374.7, and 375; California Government Code Sections 68055 et seq.; and California Vehicle Code Sections 23111 and 23112. 
(Ord. 645 § 3, 2003 (part); Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000) 
(Ord. No. 695, § 3, 11-16-09)  
7247 - Violation. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, violations of this Chapter are punishable as set out in Article I, Chapter 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7248 - Infraction. 
Violation of this Chapter shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7249 - Enforcement—Authority. 
The City Manager or the City Manager's Designee shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers pursuant to the Municipal Code. The City Manager may promulgate administrative regulations relating to the provision of integrated waste management services, which are not specifically provided for in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
7250 - Civil action by collector. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a collector to bring a civil action against any person who violates Section 7239 of this chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a collector. 
(Ord. 632 § 1 (part), 2000)  
Part L. - Bins for Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials 
 
7251 - Definitions generally. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meaning ascribed by Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40105—40200, and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board. 
"Collection day" means that day of the week on which refuse collection normally occurs for each property in the city as established by the refuse hauler under a franchise, license, permit, or other authority from the city pursuant to Article VII, Chapter 3 of this Code. 
"Owner" means the person (including a corporate entity) who holds legal title to a temporary service bin. 
"Temporary service bin" means a container or receptacle, usually of three (3) cubic yards or greater capacity, used on a temporary basis at a service location for the collection of solid waste (including garbage and other refuse) and recyclables, including potentially recyclable construction debris, and green waste, or similar material, and which is emptied by means of special collection equipment. 
"User" means any person (including a corporate entity), other than an owner, who places, or causes to be placed, a temporary service bin on any public or private property within the City of Port Hueneme. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 6-21-10)  
7252 - Location regulations. 
(a)  Encroachment Permit Required. Except as provided in subsection (b) below, no person shall place, or cause to be placed, a temporary service bin on any public property, including any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, or other public right-of-way within the city without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the City Engineer pursuant to this chapter and other relevant provisions of this Code, and paying the fee set by resolution of the City Council. 
(b)  Temporary service bins may be placed adjacent to curbs in the public right-of-way on collection days. Temporary service bins shall not remain at the collection point after 8:00 p.m. on collection days. 
(c)  When not placed for collection on collection days, temporary service bins are to be placed outside public rights-of-way and when the temporary service bin is to remain at the same location or on the same property for more than thirty (30) days, such temporary service bins shall be placed in a screened and concealed area. 
(d)  It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1100 et seq. of this Code, for any person, other than an authorized representative of the City of Port Hueneme, to place or leave standing a temporary service bin on any public or private property within the City (including within Naval Base Ventura County - Port Hueneme), except that a licensed construction contractor may use bins and drop-off boxes owned by that contractor for site clean-up of that contractor's own demolition and construction projects. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "authorized representative of the City of Port Hueneme" shall include any person holding a franchise, permit, or license for collection of solid wastes, recyclables, or compostables within the City of Port Hueneme, issued in accordance with Section 7218 of this Code for temporary service bins placed on residential properties, or Section 7219 of this Code for temporary service bins placed on commercial properties. 
(e)  Removal of Unlawfully Placed Container. 
(1)  The City Manager or his designee may cause the posting of a notice to remove, as described below, in a conspicuous place on any container placed on any public or private property within the City in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Notices to remove posted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall specify the nature of the violation and shall state that the container must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours or it may be removed and stored by the City, and the contents disposed of, at the expense of the owner thereof. The posting of a notice to remove shall constitute constructive notice to the owner and user of the requirement to remove the container. 
(3)  If the container is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the notice to remove is posted, the City may direct the removal and storage of the container and the disposal of its contents if they consist of solid waste, putrescible matter, medical waste, hazardous waste or qualified household hazardous waste, or if the container together with its contents exceeds applicable weight limits. The contents shall be deemed to consist of solid waste, whether or not some or all of the contents are potentially recyclable, in all cases where the owner of the container, whether acting alone or in concert with others, including any affiliate, agent, broker or subcontractor, has solicited, accepted or arranged for, directly or indirectly, the payment of a fee or other consideration in any form or amount from the customer in exchange for rendering all or any aspect of the service for which the container was supplied. The owner of the container shall be responsible to reimburse the City for the actual cost of removal, storage and disposal. All amounts due to the City for the cost of removal, storage and disposal must be paid before the container may be returned to the owner. Such amounts shall constitute a debt owed by the owner to the City, and the owner shall be liable to the City in an action brought by the City for the recovery of such amounts. 
(A)  The owner may contest the City's claim that the container was illegally placed or left standing by giving notice to the City within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of notification from the City that the container was impounded. Where the owner asserts that the placement or use of the container was for a legitimate activity not proscribed by this Chapter, the owner shall provide the City with information to substantiate that assertion. Said information shall be submitted with the notice from the owner and shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(i)  A description of the materials of value deposited in the container and an estimate of their value; 
(ii)  The address, telephone number and contact person of the facility or facilities with whom the owner has arranged for the contents to be processed or recycled, and proof of that arrangement; 
(iii)  Evidence that the facility or facilities where the contents are destined to be processed or recycled carries all requisite approvals, permits, or other forms of authorization required by any governmental agency having jurisdiction, to conduct processing or recycling activities; 
(iv)  A declaration from the customer receiving service, signed under penalty of perjury, that the customer was charged no fee from the service provider in exchange for service, and that the contents of the container were either donated or sold by the customer to the service provider/owner; 
(v)  The City shall have the right to request such additional information as may be necessary or useful in determining the validity of the owner's contest. 
(B)  If the City, acting through the City Manager or his designee, determines, in the exercise of reasonable discretion, that the owner has supplied evidence sufficient to support its contention that it was engaged in a legitimate recycling activity involving donated or sold materials, the container shall be returned to the owner without any charge for removal or storage of same. 
(4)  If the identity of the owner of a container that has been removed by the City is known to the City Manager or his designee, the City Manager or his designee shall promptly cause notice to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. If the container is not claimed within ninety-five (95) days after removal and notice to the owner, or ninety (90) days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown to the City Manager or his designee, the container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. Where the contents present imminent threat to public health and safety, as determined by the City, they may be processed or disposed of without awaiting the expiration of the ninety (90) day claim period. 
(5)  After a container has once been removed by the City pursuant to a notice to remove, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this chapter, including the prohibition against the placement of unauthorized containers. In the event of a subsequent placement of a container owned by the same owner, or an affiliate of the owner, the City Manager or his designee may immediately, without the posting of a notice to remove, direct the removal and storage of the unlawfully placed container and shall, in such case, give notice to the owner to claim the container. In such event, the owner shall, subject to the provisions of subsection (e)(3) of this section, be responsible to reimburse the City for the actual cost of such removal, storage and disposal, which cost shall be paid by the owner before the container may be returned to the owner. If the container is unclaimed after notice is mailed to the owner and the expiration of the period set forth in subsection (e)(4) of this section, the container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly. The costs incurred by the City for removal, storage and disposal shall constitute a debt owed to the City by the owner, who shall be liable therefore in an action by the City for the recovery of such amounts. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter to the contrary, the City Manager or his designee is authorized to direct the immediate removal, without notice, of any container placed on public or private property within the City in violation of this Chapter where the owner of the container is unidentified and cannot be ascertained by an inspection of the container. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 6-21-10)  
7253 - Administration. 
The City Manager is hereby authorized to adopt regulations as necessary for governing the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 6-21-10)  
7254 - Penalty for violation. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1100 et seq. of this Code for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 6-21-10)  
7255 - Civil remedies unaffected. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of a holder of a franchise issued in accordance with Section 7218 of this Code for temporary service bins placed on residential properties, or Section 7219 of this Code for temporary service bins placed on commercial properties, or the City, to bring a civil action against any person who violates this chapter, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a franchisee or the City. 
(Ord. No. 699, § 1, 6-21-10)  
Chapter 4 - COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES 
Sections:  
Part A. - Community Antenna Television Systems 
 
7301 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of Part A of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
"CATV" means a community antenna television system as hereinafter defined. (See "Community Antenna television system.") 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form and in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form. 
"Community Antenna Television System" means a system of antenna, coaxial cables, wires, wave guides or other conductors, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or used for the purpose of providing television or FM radio service by cable or through its facilities as herein contemplated. 
"Council" means the present governing body of the City or any future board constituting the legislative body of the City. 
"Franchise" means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the City. Any such authorization, in whatever term granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the City in accordance with Article V of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
"Grantee" means Jones Intercable, Inc. or its lawful successor, transferee or assign. 
"Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or subsidy received directly or indirectly by a grantee from subscribers or users in payment for television or FM radio signals or service received within the City. 
"Gross annual receipts" shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any City, State or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
"Property of grantee" means all property owned, installed or used by a grantee in the conduct of a CATV business in the City under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to Part A of this Chapter. 
"State franchisee" means any holder of a State-issued video franchise operating in the City, as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5830(p). 
"Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway or drive, now or hereafter existing as such within the City. 
"Subscriber" means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of the grantee. 
(Ord. 684 § 1, 2007; Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7302 - Exclusive use of telephone facilities. 
When and in the event that the grantee constructs, operates and maintains a CATV system exclusively through telephone company facilities constructed, operated and maintained pursuant to a state-granted telephone franchise and offers satisfactory proof that in no event during the life of such franchise shall the grantee make any use of the streets independently of such telephone company facilities, said grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a licensee and in such event whenever the term "grantee" is used herein it shall be deemed to mean and include licensee. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7303 - Franchise to operate. 
A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within all of the City shall be granted by the Council to grantee. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7304 - Uses permitted by grantee. 
Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of Part A of this Chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a CATV system in the City, and for that purpose, to erect, install, conduct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the City. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7305 - Duration of franchise. 
(a)  The franchise granted by the Council under Part A of this Chapter shall be for a term of fifteen (15) years following the date of acceptance of such franchise by the grantee. 
(b)  Any such franchise granted hereunder may be terminated prior to its date of expiration by the Council in the event that said Council shall have found, after thirty (30) days' notice of any proposed termination and public hearing, that the grantee has failed to comply with any material provision of Part A of this Chapter, or has by act or omission, violated any material term or condition of any franchise or permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7306 - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the City a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the gross annual receipts of the grantee. Such payment by the grantee to the City shall be made annually by delivery of the same to the Director of Finance. 
(b)  The grantee shall file with the City, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of any calendar year or portion thereof during which such franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant, or person otherwise satisfactory to the Council, showing in detail the gross annual receipts, as defined herein, of grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the City, within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing such statements, the sum hereinabove prescribed or any unpaid balance thereof for the calendar year or portion thereof covered by such statements. 
(c)  The City shall have the right to inspect the grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under Part A of this Chapter. No acceptance of any payments shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further or additional sums payable under Part A of this Chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7307 - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  The franchise granted under Part A of this Chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
(b)  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under Part A of this Chapter except those specifically prescribed herein. 
(c)  Any privilege claimed by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
(d)  The franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise without the prior consent of the Council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within thirty (30) days after such transfer or assignment. The said consent of the Council may not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with all provisions of Part A of this Chapter; and provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness. 
(e)  Time shall be of the essence of the franchise granted hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of Part A of this Chapter or by any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance. 
(f)  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department, or board of the City shall be subject to transfer by the City to any other officer, employee, department or board of the City. 
(g)  The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of City ordinances, rules, regulations, and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(h)  The franchise granted hereunder shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the City, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7308 - Rights reserved to the City. 
(a)  There is reserved to the City every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any ordinance of the City, and the grantee, by its acceptance of this franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the City in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established. 
(b)  Neither the granting of any franchise hereunder nor any of the provisions contained herein shall be construed to prevent the City from granting any identical franchise to any other person, firm or corporation within all of the city. 
(c)  There is reserved to the City the power to amend any section or part of Part A of this Chapter so as to require additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part of the grantee. 
(d)  Neither the granting of this franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the City. 
(e)  The Council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Part A of this Chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The City manager is hereby authorized and empowered to adjust, settle, or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the grantee, any subscriber, or nonsubscriber, in the best interests of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the City Manager may appeal the matter to the City Council for hearing and determination. The Council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the City Manager, and the Council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operation of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter. 
(f)  If federal laws or regulations are hereafter amended so as to permit the City to regulate the Grantee's rates and charges for service to subscribers, the City reserves the right and authority to regulate and control such rates and charges to the extent authorized by federal law and to amend this chapter to set forth a procedure for reviewing and approving requests for increases in rates and charges. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7309 - Location of property of grantee. 
(a)  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of the grantee constructed or installed in streets, shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the Public Works Director acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion. 
(b)  The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately owned areas within the City which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the City, except those installed or erected upon public utility facilities now existing, without obtaining the prior written approval of the Public Works Director. 
(c)  In those areas and portions of the City where the transmission or distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electrical service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then the grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, "underground" shall include a partial underground system, e.g., streamlining. Amplifiers in grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housing upon the surface of the ground as approved by the Public Works Director. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7310 - Removal and abandonment of property of grantee. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of grantee's franchise or Part A of this Chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten (10) days' notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the Public Works Director may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition reasonably satisfactory to the Public Works Director. 
(b)  Any property of the grantee remaining in place one hundred twenty (120) days after the termination or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The Public Works Director may extend such time not to exceed an additional one hundred twenty (120) days. 
(c)  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such manner as the Public Works Director shall prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the City, and the grantee shall submit to the Public Works Director an instrument in writing, to be approved by the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of such property. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7311 - Changes required by public improvements. 
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the Public Works Director by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in Section 7310. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A(part)), 1992)  
7312 - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of Part A of this Chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director, the Public Works Director, may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the City the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the Public Works Director to the grantee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7313 - Faithful performance bond. 
(a)  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of and acceptance of award of the franchise granted under Part A of this Chapter, file with the City Clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of such franchise or any renewal thereof, at grantee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond in a company and in a form approved by the City Attorney, in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), renewable annually, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of grantee, and upon the further condition that in the event grantee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the provisions of Part A of this Chapter, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the City as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond; said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of the franchise and any renewal thereof and thereafter until the grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the City that may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise or renewal by the Grantee or from its exercise of any privilege therein granted. The bond shall provide that thirty (30) days' prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material change, be given to the City. 
(b)  Neither the provisions of this Section, nor any bond accepted by the City pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the City thereunder, shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee or limit the liability of the grantee under the franchise issued hereunder or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7314 - Indemnification of city. 
(a)  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of the franchise granted under Part A of this Chapter, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk, and at all times during the existence of the franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a liability insurance policy in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in a company approved by the City Manager and in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, indemnifying and saving harmless the City, its officers and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, and proceedings by others, against all liability to others, including but not limited to any liability for damages by reason of or arising out of any failure by the grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by the grantee's CATV system, and against any loss, cost, expense and damages resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorney's fees, arising out of the exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required hereunder; provided, however, that the Grantee shall not indemnify the City for the negligent or intentional acts of the City, its agents or employees. 
(b)  The grantee shall, concurrently with the filing of an acceptance of award of the franchise granted under Part A of this Chapter, furnish to the City and file with the City Clerk, and at all times during the existence of the franchise granted hereunder, maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the City Manager and a form satisfactory to the City Attorney, protecting the City and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of grantee under such franchise, with minimum liability limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of any one person and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. 
(c)  The policies mentioned in the foregoing subsection shall name the City, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insured and shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of said policy shall be delivered to the City thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof; if such insurance is provided by a policy which also covers grantee or any other entity or person other than those above named, then such policy shall contain the standard cross-liability endorsement. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7315 - Inspection of property and records. 
(a)  At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the City to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the City, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the City, or upon reasonable request made available in the City, and if the Council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate then all reasonable travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
(b)  If requested by the City, the grantee shall prepare and furnish to the City Manager and the Director of Finance at the times and in the form prescribed by either of said officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the City or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
(c)  The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the City full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the City. 
(d)  If requested by the City, the grantee shall file with the City Manager, on or before the last day of June, of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the City. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7316 - Operational standards. 
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with accepted standards of the industry to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible service and to the effect that such installation, operation and maintenance shall not degrade the normal television reception of the nonsubscriber. In determining the satisfactory extent of such standards the following among others shall be considered: 
(a)  That the system be installed using all band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum, and that it have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band; 
(b)  That the system, as installed, be capable of passing standard color TV signals without the introduction of material degradation on color fidelity and integrity; 
(c)  That the system and all equipment be designed and rated for twenty-four (24) hour per day continuous operation; 
(d)  That the system provide a nominal signal level of two thousand (2,000) microvolts at the input terminals of each TV receiver; 
(e)  That the system signal-to-noise ratio is not less than forty (40) decibels; 
(f)  That the hum modulation of picture signal is less than five (5) percent; 
(g)  That the system use components having a VSWR of 1.4 or less; 
(h)  That the system cause no degradation in the normal TV reception of standard broadcast signals by nonsubscribers living in or doing business in the area covered by the franchise. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A(part)), 1992)  
7317 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the City shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(b)  The grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a franchise pursuant to the provisions of Part A of this Chapter. Such payment shall be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses. 
(c)  The grantee shall maintain an office at a location which subscribers may call without incurring added message or toll charges so that CATV maintenance service shall be promptly available to subscribers. 
(d)  No person, firm or corporation in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge; provided further, however, that grantee shall only be obligated to provide service to those areas of the City with a minimum density of forty (40) homes per mile. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7318 - Use of utility poles and facilities—Agreement. 
When any portion of the CATV system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7319 - Franchise renewal. 
The franchise granted hereunder shall be renewed in accordance with the provision of applicable federal law. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7320 - Financial support of Hueneme School District. 
Within thirty (30) days of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this Chapter by the City, grantee agrees to deliver twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to the Hueneme School District (the District) for the District's purchase of studio equipment for the District's use in the classroom. In addition, each year thereafter, the grantee will provide on or before June 30, eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) to the District in order for the District to purchase or upgrade studio equipment or for use in supporting the annual expenses associated with the operation of the District's studio. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7321 - Development units. 
Grantee agrees to make available and negotiate with the owners of multidevelopment units to provide discounted service packages for basic and pay cable (not to include installation or other related fees) in exchange for grantee's one hundred percent penetration of the development. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
7322 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of Part A of this Chapter is for any reason held illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed Part A of this Chapter and each section, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. The invalidity of any portion of Part A of this Chapter shall not abate, reduce or otherwise affect any consideration or other obligation required of the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder. 
(Ord. 578 § 2 (Exh. A (part)), 1992)  
Part B. - Cable Television Systems 
 
7351 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of Part B of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined herein shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. Approvals, consents, agreements, requirements, judgments or satisfactions shall, unless otherwise expressly provided in Part B of this Chapter, not be unreasonably withheld by the person holding the right to approve, consent or agree or make a requirement or judgment or who must be satisfied. 
"Access channel" shall mean a channel dedicated in whole or in part for public, educational or governmental access programming (sometimes referred to as "PEG" or "Access Programming"). 
"Access corporation" shall mean the nonprofit corporation or other entity which may be designated by the City and operated for the purpose of coordinating the provisions of public and educational access programming and providing other services within a franchise area. 
"Access programming" shall mean local programming that is (i) related to a government, public or education purpose, and (ii) produced utilizing funds derived from franchise fees, or other fees or services required to be provided by a cable operator in the City in exchange for its cable television franchise, or (ii) produced primarily for distribution on an access channel by or at the direction of the City, by any franchised cable operator at the direction of the City or pursuant to an obligation contained in its cable franchise, or by an educational institution, access corporation or other person designated by the City. 
"Basic service" shall mean the service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and PEG access channels. 
"Cable services" shall mean the: (i) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service and (ii) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
"Cable system" or "system" shall mean any facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (i) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (ii) a facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; (iii) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of subchapter II of the Communications Act of 1934, except to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (iv) any facilities of an electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
"Channel" shall mean a band of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum, or any other means of transmission (including, without limitation, optical fibers or any other means now available or that may become available), which has the technical capability of carrying a video signal in the National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) or similar format, or in any format devised or approved in the future by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), or an audio signal, a voice signal or data signal. All video channels shall include their vertical blanking intervals, all other video components, all aural components including subcarriers, and all closed captioning intended for general reception by the hearing impaired and others, to the extent required by applicable FCC and copyright rules. 
"City" shall mean the City of Port Hueneme, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form, its City Council, boards, departments, or any other entity of, or acting on behalf of, the City, or any officer, official, employee, or agent thereof, its designee, or any successor thereto. 
"Complaint" shall mean any verbal or written allegation or assertion of dissatisfaction with the cable services, other communications services or operations of the grantee, including but not limited to issues of signal quality and customer billing, made by a person to either the grantee or the City, which requires (i) dispatch of a technician or a service call or (ii) the referral of a complaint to a supervisor or to management. 
"Completion of construction or reconstruction, "complete system construction," "satisfactorily complete" and "fully activate" apply to both initial cable system construction as well as any upgrade or rebuild of an existing cable system and shall mean that in each instance that strand has been put up and all necessary cable (including trunk and feeder cable) has been lashed—or, for underground construction, that all cable has been laid and trenches refilled, all road surfaces restored and, except as prevented by weather conditions or delayed because of seasons, landscaping restored; that all amplifier housings and modules have been installed (including modules for return path signals if required to be activated); that power supplies have been installed and all bonding and grounding has been completed; that construction or reconstruction of the headends or hubs has been completed and all necessary processing equipment has been installed; and that any and all other construction or reconstruction necessary for the cable system to deliver cable service to subscribers has been completed pursuant to the plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the City. The term "completion of construction or reconstruction" does not include marketing and installation of subscriber service. 
"FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission, its successor or such other administrative agency or agencies to which its duties are transferred. 
"FCC rules" shall mean the rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the Federal Communications Commission pursuant to the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or other federal law. 
"FCC technical standards" shall mean the technical standards of the Federal Communications Commission (e.g., as set forth in Part 76, Subpart K (Technical Standards) of the FCC's Rules, 76 C.F.R. Section 76.601 et seq., as from time to time amended). 
"Franchise area" shall mean the area consisting of the territorial limits of the City as the same may be changed from time to time. 
"Franchisee" or "grantee" shall mean GTE Media Ventures Incorporated and its successors and assignees. 
"Gross revenues" shall mean and include, to the extent permitted under federal law, as amended, all amounts which are received, directly or indirectly, by grantee from or in connection with the offering of cable services via the cable system located within the franchise area and utilizing public streets and rights-of-way, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Any revenue received from subscribers for cable service, including but not limited to revenue for basic service, tier service, additional outlets, audio service, commercial service, premium service, pay-per-view service and related per-event services, or for the distribution of any cable service over the system; 
(b)  Any revenue received from subscribers for installation, change in service and reconnection charges and similar fees; 
(c)  Any revenue received from subscribers for converters, remote controls or other equipment leased or rented to subscribers in connection with the delivery of cable services to such subscribers; 
(d)  Any revenue received from subscribers for service charges and late fees attributable to delinquent accounts; and 
(e)  Any revenue received from service-related activities, including but not limited to, revenue received from leased access programmers and other users, and revenue over ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) derived from or equivalent to the fair market value of trades and barters, but not including revenue received from the sale of advertising. Revenues from the sale of advertising shall be included in this definition of gross revenue only if permitted by federal law and only when all other franchised cable operators in the City are also required to include such revenues when determining gross revenues or receipts for the purposes of calculating franchise fees payable to the City. 
There shall be deducted from gross revenues, bad debts written off by grantee in the normal course of its business (provided, however, that bad debt recoveries shall be included in gross revenue) and refunds made to subscribers or other third parties, but only to the extent the revenue related to such bad debts written off or refunds was included in gross revenues. Except as the City may require if permitted under federal law, gross revenues shall not include any franchise fee or tax of general applicability imposed upon a Grantee or upon the Grantee's Subscribers by the City, State, federal or any other governmental entity and required to be collected by the Grantee and passed through to the taxing entity (including, but not limited to, user taxes, franchise fees, service taxes and communications taxes), provided such taxes or fees are identified as a separate line item on subscriber statement. 
"Initial activation of cable service," or "initially providing cable service" shall mean with respect to a particular segment, group of segments or the entire cable system, as the case may be, that all proposed cable services and cable system capabilities as stated in a franchise agreement are available and/or in place, construction or reconstruction has been completed (see above definition of construction) and the completed segment or segments in question or the entire cable system, as the case may be, have been activated pursuant to the plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the City. 
"Ordinance" or "Franchise Ordinance" shall mean the ordinance codified in Part B of this Chapter, together with the appendices thereto, and all amendments, extensions or renewals thereof. 
"Other communications services" shall mean those services provided by the grantee which do not improve the transmission to subscribers of video programming or other cable services, which other communications services shall include, but not be limited to, telephony, voice, data transmission, interactive services and other broadband information services. 
"Person" shall mean an individual, corporation or other entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but not the City. 
"Property of grantee" shall mean all the tangible or intangible property owned, installed, rented, leased or used by a grantee in the conduct of cable system business in the City. 
"Standard service drop" shall mean a cable connection, either aerial or underground, that is made available to all subscribers at a uniform installation fee or hourly service charge. A standard service drop shall require no more than a one hundred fifty (150) foot drop measured from the nearest point of a subscriber's residence or place of business to the nearest active tap on the cable system and shall involve only one outlet and standard materials. A standard drop shall exclude custom installation work, including specific subscriber requested work that requires non-standard inventory or cable routing requiring construction methods exceeding reasonable underground or aerial work. 
"State-of-the-art" shall mean a cable system with technical performance, capacity, equipment, components, construction techniques and service equal to that which has been developed and demonstrated by existing cable television system operators and reputable equipment suppliers to be workable in the field, which is more modern and technologically advanced than generally accepted, which is reasonably available and feasible to install, which is in use by at least some other cable systems in comparable areas of equivalent population, which customers have paid for in at least one other comparable market for at least a year, which is justified by reasonably predictable subscriber demand and a willingness to pay a reasonable rate for such services, which is based on a reasonable projected rate of return on investment derived from the additional or upgraded network capacity, and which investment can be amortized over a period of time which is both reasonable and customary in the cable television industry. 
"Street," "public street" or "public right-of-way" shall mean only a street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, public service easement or drive which is owned by a public entity in fee or to which a public entity has been granted an easement or which has been dedicated for street purposes or other compatible uses, and with respect to which, and to the extent that, the city has a right to grant the use of the surface of, and space above and below, in connection with a franchise for a cable system or other compatible uses. For purposes of this definition, "other compatible uses" shall include easements dedicated for, or utilized in connection with, telephone, communications, electric, gas, water, sewer, cable television and similar purposes. 
"Subscriber" shall mean any customer, consumer or other person lawfully receiving or otherwise utilizing cable services or other communications services delivered over the transmission system of the grantee. 
"Two-way communication" shall mean the transmission of telecommunications signals, including without limitation video, audio, voice and data signals, from subscriber locations or other points throughout the cable system back to the cable system's control center as well as transmission of signals from the control center to subscriber locations. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7352 - Grant of authority to operate. 
(a)  Authorization to Operate a Cable System. The city hereby grants to Grantee the right and authority to engage in the non-exclusive business of operating a cable system and providing cable services in the city, and for that purpose, subject to the city's encroachment and construction permitting process, to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, rebuild, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any public streets or ways such poles, wires, cable, fiber optics, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, bridgers, line extenders, power supplies, optical devices, optoelectronic equipment, taps, pedestals, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary or appurtenant to the cable system; and in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. The grantee shall be authorized to provide cable services within the territorial limits of the city, as from time to time existing. 
(b)  Authorization to Use Public Rights-of-Way. This franchise shall also confer upon the grantee, subject to the City's encroachment and construction permitting process, the right or privilege to enter upon the public rights-of-way and public service easements in City streets and other easements within the scope thereof, and through public rights-or-way and public service easements within the franchise area which have been dedicated to the City for street purposes or are otherwise dedicated to or used for other compatible uses, including but not limited to, easements or rights-of-way dedicated for electric, gas or other utility transmission. Whenever grantee undertakes construction, operation or maintenance using public or public service easements or rights-of-way, grantee shall provide affected residents with reasonable prior notice as provided in Section 7359. 
(c)  Franchise nonexclusive. This grant of authority to operate a cable system in the City and the right to use and occupy the public streets and ways for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive. The city reserves the right, at its discretion, to grant other franchises or franchise renewals to other cable operators; provided that the city shall not authorize or permit another person to construct, operate or maintain a cable system, or otherwise to utilize a public street or public right-of-way for the delivery of cable services or other communications services or grant a renewal of an existing franchise within the service area of grantee (other than de minimus overlaps), on material terms and conditions which are in the aggregate more favorable or less burdensome than those applied to grantee, to the extent that such terms and conditions are within the legal control of the City, and taking into consideration the totality and reasonable proportionality of their respective obligations. 
(d)  Franchise Term. This grant of authority shall run for a term of ten (10) years, beginning upon the acceptance of this franchise (the effective date of the franchise). 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7353 - Franchise Ordinance subject to Communications Act of 1934. 
This Franchise Ordinance is subject to and shall be governed by all requirements of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and other applicable federal, State, local and City laws, ordinances and regulations. Subject to the City's reservation of rights in Section 7354 below, in the event of conflict between the language of this Ordinance and any other local or City law, the terms and conditions of this Ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7354 - Reservation of City's rights. 
(a)  Insofar as it is not preempted by federal or State regulations, the City reserves the right to exercise its lawful police powers to protect the public health, safety or welfare, its powers of taxation or its powers of eminent domain, as well as such powers as may be conferred upon the City by federal or state law independent of this Franchise Ordinance. Grantee reserves its general rights against an impairment of contract or abrogation of contractual rights or obligations of the Grantee protected under federal or State law. Each proposed ordinance or regulation which shall be applicable to grantee, to be adopted by the City from and after the effective date of this Franchise Ordinance, shall be considered in one or more public hearings before the City Council, notice of which shall be provided to the grantee at least ninety (90) days preceding the first such public hearing. The City shall provide the grantee with the opportunity to meet and confer oncoming changes to or modifications of such proposed ordinance or regulation. Additional lawful ordinances or regulations adopted by the City shall be complied with by the grantee within the time period provided for in such ordinances or regulations. Grantee shall promptly and in writing file a request with the City asking for an extension of time in which to comply. The City shall promptly respond and shall grant such requests for additional time if the grantee provides the City with reasonably sufficient information to demonstrate that additional time is reasonably necessary to affect compliance and that grantee is actively and expeditiously attempting to obtain compliance with such regulations. 
(b)  Should there be any change to the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, or to the federal regulations promulgated thereunder, or to any other federal or State law so as to expand the City's discretionary powers pertaining to cable television, which changes should give the City the discretion, but not the unilateral power, to seek modifications of this Ordinance, which modifications fall outside the purview of the City's police power or powers of eminent domain and taxation, grantee will meet at the request of the City and negotiate in good faith concerning any modifications to this Franchise Ordinance which the City may request or be authorized to request or otherwise secure with respect to such change, with the decision to agree to such requested modifications to be left to grantee's reasonable discretion; provided, however, that the exercise of such rights and powers does not otherwise abridge grantee's general rights against an impairment of contract or abrogation of contractual rights or obligations of the grantee protected under federal or State law. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7355 - Grantee's obligations. 
(a)  Diligent Prosecution of Governmental Permits. Grantee shall use its good faith efforts, at its own expense, actively and diligently to conduct the prosecution of all applications to the FCC, other governmental regulatory bodies or private parties necessary to permit construction and operation of its cable system in accordance with this Franchise Ordinance. Grantee is not required to extend its system or construct plant within private rights-of-way for which grantee is unable to secure easements or other rights of access on reasonable terms and conditions after good faith, active and diligent efforts at application for such agreements or rights of access. At City's request, grantee shall provide city with documentation to demonstrate the efforts it has made to gain such rights of access to private rights-of-way. Whenever grantee has refused or failed to grant requests for extension of its system, plant or service to any potential customer, whether such extension required the use of public or private rights-of-way, grantee shall provide that customer with written notice that he or she may contact the city to report such refusal of service, and such notice shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the official designated by the City to receive such reports. 
(b)  Copies of FCC and other Governmental Filings. On request by the City, grantee shall provide to the City Manager copies of all publicly available pleadings, petitions, applications, reports and documents of any kind submitted by the grantee to the FCC or any other federal or state regulatory commissions, agencies or courts having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting the system. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7356 - Technical requirements. 
(a)  System Capacity. Grantee agrees to construct a cable system with a capacity of not less than 550 MHz. Each channel delivered to the Subscriber shall be in NTSC format and shall meet all FCC standards and rules. 
(b)  Minimum Services. Upon completion of construction of its system, grantee agrees to activate and program a minimum of seventy-seven (77) activated and programmed services; provided that grantee may utilize alternative technologies (including compression or servers) to deliver such services. 
(c)  Subsequent Upgrade. On or before December 31, 2001, grantee shall have a cable system in place, or physically rebuild, upgrade or otherwise modify its outside plant system to be capable of transmitting at least seventy-seven (77) video programming choices to subscribers plus an architecture which can support in excess of twenty (20) additional programming options. A rebuild, upgrade or modification in which amplifiers are spaced for, and passive devices rated for no less than, 750 MHz, but active electronics are installed for at least 550 MHz, shall be one means for satisfying this requirement. However, grantee may utilize alternative technologies (including compression or servers) to deliver such programming choices and options. The requirements of this section shall be suspended if the current cable franchise holder within the city does not physically rebuild, upgrade or otherwise modify its outside plant systems to be capable of transmitting at least seventy-seven (77) video programming choices to subscribers plus an architecture which can support in excess of twenty (20) additional programming options within the same time period. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to relieve grantee of its obligations outlined in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Triennial Report on State-of-the-Art. Not more than once every three (3) years following the effective date of this Franchise Ordinance, and with at least three (3) months prior notice, grantee will meet with the City to discuss the extent to which grantee's system and its technology and services are keeping up with the state-of-the-art. In addition, at the time that the City requests such a meeting, the City may also request, and Grantee shall provide no later than one month before such meeting, a brief summary of State-of-the-Art cable services or technologies it has recently incorporated into its cable system and its plans for implementing new state-of-the-art technologies and services into its cable system over the next three (3) years. If other cable operators within the city are making services or technologies available to subscribers which grantee is not, and if grantee does not intend to make such services or technologies available in the city during the next three (3) years, then grantee shall provide an explanation for this position. Grantee shall not be required to make any such state-of-the-art cable services or technologies available over its cable system or take any action with respect thereto, notwithstanding the information contained in this summary. 
(e)  Plans and Specifications Required. After the initial construction of grantee's cable system, if any subsequent major construction or reconstruction plan is undertaken, including system upgrades or rebuilds but not line extensions and related activity, grantee shall submit plans relating to such construction at least ninety (90) days before the start of construction, unless such ninety (90) day time period shall be reasonably shortened by City. The plan shall include construction timetables, equipment specifications and design performance criteria. The grantee shall make reasonable efforts to avoid negative aesthetic impacts in its plan. The grantee shall also submit to the City a map of the entire franchise area which shall clearly delineate the following: 
(1)  Areas within the franchise area where the cable system will be available to subscribers, including a time schedule of construction or reconstruction for each year that construction or reconstruction is proposed; and 
(2)  Areas within the franchise area where extension of the cable system cannot reasonably be done due to lack of present or planned development, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. Such maps, using standard industry designations, shall at a minimum disclose (i) cable routes, (ii) locations and identifications of aerial and above and below ground appurtenances (such as risers, vaults, pedestals and power supplies) and (iii) physical locations and identifications of system components, including but not limited to cables and active and passive electronics. Grantee need not disclose the electrical values of its taps, splitters or directional couplers; however, City shall have the power to review such materials at grantee's office. The City shall have the power to review and approve such plans, to assure that they are consistent with applicable statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations, determinations and rulings governing construction within the public streets of the City, including without limitation the Public Works Code, zoning ordinances and traffic safety standards. Where such plans and specifications are not in compliance with such statutes, ordinances, codes, regulations, determinations and rulings, the grantee shall modify or revise such plans and specifications so as to achieve such compliance. The City shall also have the power to review such plans to avoid negative aesthetic impacts. Where timely requested by City, grantee shall reasonably relocate facilities within technical design constraints where such relocation will not result in material costs. Grantee must comply with the requirements of applicable state and local statutes, ordinances, codes and regulations governing the location of subsurface installations, including without limitation the provisions of Section 4216 et. seq. of the California Government Code, with respect to notification to or from a regional notification center (such as Underground Service Alert) concerning proposed excavation work. If, after construction begins, the City determines that the planned placement of specific equipment by grantee may cause a negative aesthetic impact, then the grantee will make reasonable efforts to minimize such an impact within technical design constraints only where such efforts will not result in material costs. If the grades or lines of any street are changed at any time during the term of this franchise, grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and upon reasonable written notification and request of the grantor, protect or promptly alter or relocate the system, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event that grantee refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the system, grantor shall have the right to break through, remove, alter or relocate all or any part of the system without any liability to grantee or any other person, and grantee shall pay to the grantor the documented costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration or relocation. 
(f)  Two-Way Services. To the extent that grantee chooses to design its cable system for two-way capability, grantee shall use all reasonable efforts to design such two-way capability so as to permit the future implementation of upstream signal carriage without requiring modifications to its design. Grantee shall be required to offer two-way services for subscribers only following satisfaction of each of the following conditions: (1) the offering of such two-way services is permissible under applicable federal and state laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, (2) the grantee has secured all certificates, licenses, authorizations and approvals from federal and state agencies necessary for the offering of such services, provided, however, that grantee shall seek to obtain such approvals in a diligent and timely manner, (3) cable subscribers and/or potential cable subscribers have a demonstrable interest in subscribing to such two-way services, together with a demonstrable willingness to pay a reasonable rate for such services, in each case as evidenced by at least one statistically significant survey, provided, however, that upon the reasonable written request of the City it shall be the grantee's burden to demonstrate to the City's reasonable satisfaction that such subscriber interest is insufficient, and (4) the investment necessary to implement such two-way capability, together with a reasonable rate of return, can be reasonably expected to be recovered from the incremental revenue anticipated from the provision of such services over a period of time which is reasonable and customary in the cable television industry for such investments, and such investment shall not be recovered from subscribers to other or non-two-way services. 
(g)  Home Subscriber Terminal Equipment. Grantee shall, upon construction of the rebuild or upgrade described in Section 7356(c) of this agreement, offer some form of addressable or alternative technology which is commercially available, in use by other systems and easy to use. Such equipment and cable system shall be designed to eliminate subscriber confusion in their attempts to utilize cable-ready television sets, VCRs, cable system converters and remote control units. Addressable subscriber terminal equipment shall (1) permit the grantee to change the level of those services secured by such addressable technology promptly at the subscriber's request and (2) permit a subscriber to order single events (such as first-run movies, sporting events, etc.). The grantee may use alternative technology to secure premium services and/or the delivery of individual events from time to time over the term of the grantee's franchise. 
(h)  Parental Control. Grantee shall provide a parental control option, trap or other device to subscribers requesting the capability of removing objectionable video programming and its audio track from any cable service or any premium or pay-per-view channel that is scrambled or otherwise withheld from any subscriber, which device must, at the subscriber's request and without charge, effectively block both the video and audio portions of the channel. There shall be no continuing charge for use of such parental control option, trap or other device, nor any continuing charge if the option is a feature of an installed device (such as a decoder) for which the subscriber is already paying. 
(i)  Stereo Availability. Grantee shall offer and make available stereo audio as part of the video and audio signals delivered to subscribers, provided that those signals are available for reception as stereo audio signals at the grantee's headend or other signal processing point. 
(j)  Signal Ingress Protection. Grantee shall take all reasonable steps necessary to minimize interference visible to subscribers, which interference is caused by, among other things, signal ingress at the grantee's headend, trunk and distribution system or other facilities from equipment of licensees of the Federal Communications Commission operating in compliance with their authorizations. At the city's request, grantee shall provide City with information explaining what reasonable steps it has taken to minimize such interference. This section shall not require that the grantee eliminate such visible interference, but shall only require that the grantee undertake reasonable efforts to minimize such interference and shall not require that the grantee minimize or eliminate any such visible interference as may be attributable to causes other than the grantee's cable system and beyond grantee's control, including without limitation subscriber equipment. Grantee shall comply with the FCC's Technical Standards applicable to such signal ingress with respect to its Cable System. 
(k)  Underground Construction. Unless waived in writing for specific locations by the City Engineer, grantee shall place all cables and wires underground in areas of the City where such facilities of all other utilities are underground. Otherwise, grantee shall be free to use, at its sole option, either underground or aerial construction methods, grantee agrees to underground previously installed aerial cables and wire, in concert and on a cost-sharing basis with all other utilities, when all of such utilities convert from aerial to underground construction. All underground construction shall be subject to the city's encroachment permitting process. Grantee shall not be required to obtain encroachment permits for aerial construction, so long as grantee is attaching its cable and wire to already existing poles. Unless waived in writing for specific locations by the City Engineer, grantee shall place all pedestals containing passive devices underground (flush mount) in those areas of the City in which any existing cable television system has previously located such passive devices underground. All other pedestals containing passive devices, as well as all active electronic and optical components, including without limitation, amplifiers, bridgers, line extenders, power supplies, lasers, optical equipment and optoelectronic devices, may be located above-grade when cable plant is located underground, provided that the above-grade placement of such components: 
(1)  Complies with the requirements of all State and federal law; 
(2)  Are placed so as not to create a safety hazard for vehicle and/or pedestrian traffic; and 
(3)  Are placed in such locations so as not to be obtrusive or unsightly within the right-of-way (with grantee to provide landscaping as needed to improve any adverse aesthetic impacts). 
(l)  Removal of Replaced Plant. Grantee shall remove or "wreck out" all of its aerial cable plant, together with above-grade pedestals containing passive devices utilized in connection with underground plant, which have been replaced by the grantee in the course of any system rebuild, upgrade and/or modernization and are no longer required for proper operation of the cable system, provided that the grantee need not remove or wreck out such portion of its aerial cable system which has been overlashed with new cable and related facilities in connection with a rebuild or upgrade of its cable system. Such portions of the plant must be removed within thirty (30) days following receipt of written notice from the City, or, if more than thirty (30) days is reasonably required to effect such removal or wreck out, the grantee must promptly commence the work of removal or wreck out within such thirty (30) day period and diligently complete the work thereafter. However, the grantee will not be required to remove or wreck out, and will be permitted to abandon in place, any underground plant which has been rebuilt or replaced, provided that no portion of the abandoned plant is accessible to the public or is capable of causing a safety hazard, that the grantee shall indemnify and defend the City for any harm or damage that is caused by any abandoned plant (except as may be due to the negligent acts or omissions of the City, its employees, contractors or agents), and that the City may require the grantee immediately to remove underground plant which interferes with roadwork or other road construction. 
(m)  Compliance with Technical Testing Standards. Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system consistent with the technical standards of the FCC set forth in Part 76, Subpart K (Technical Standards) of the FCC's Rules, 47 C.F.R. Section 76.601 et seq., including without limitation performance tests, technical standards, signal leakage performance criteria and cable television system monitoring. 
(n)  Line Extension Policy. Grantee shall design and construct its cable system in such a manner as to have the capability to pass by every single-family dwelling unit, multiple-family dwelling unit, agency and business establishment within the franchise area. Services shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the following line extension policies: 
(1)  Grantee shall be required to extend its cable system from any existing lines of the cable system over which services are being provided to any area immediately adjacent thereto within the City which includes residential property having a density of at least thirty (30) single-family residential dwelling units or potential subscriber units per mile, or prorated portion thereof, as measured in linear trench or aerial strand footage from the nearest technically feasible point on the grantee's existing cable system to the end of the proposed line extension. The extension of the distribution system (excluding drops) shall be completed at grantee's cost within ninety (90) days after the requirements of this section become operative and all necessary permits are obtained, provided that: 
(i)  Each such residential unit is, or is anticipated to be, located within a distance of no more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the anticipated location of such extension, or each such residential unit which is in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the anticipated location of such extension agrees to pay and does in fact pay the actual cost of that portion of the extension in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(ii)  The grantee is able to secure all necessary easements or rights-of-way for purposes of locating its system in the area of such extension, including the location of all trunk, distribution and drop cables, on reasonable terms and conditions after good faith efforts to do so. 
(iii)  Each such residential unit is in existence, or is anticipated to be constructed within six (6) months from the date of such extension, provided that the grantee will place conduit in open trench where it exists and where construction will be completed in a period estimated to be longer than six (6) months, but less than twenty-four (24) months, where the area of such extension has been platted with at least thirty (30) single-family residential dwelling units per mile (or prorated portion thereof) as measured in linear trench footage from the nearest technically feasible point of the grantee's activated coaxial distribution system to the end of the proposed line extension. 
(2)  A multiple dwelling unit shall be considered in establishing the minimum density required for a mandatory line extension where the owner of such multiple dwelling unit has agreed to enter into a service contract with the grantee for the units of such complex or has otherwise requested that cable service be furnished directly to the owners or occupants of the units within such complex and, in either such instance, such complex satisfies each of the criteria for extension set forth in this section, including without limitation the grantee securing all necessary easements or rights-of-way to such complex, as well as within such complex, for purposes of constructing its system. Where such a cable service contract has been arranged consistent with the requirements of this section and cable service is to be provided directly to, and all charges for such cable service are the responsibility of, the occupants or owners of individual dwelling units within multi-dwelling unit buildings or the owner of the multi-dwelling unit buildings, such units will be counted separately for purposes of mandatory line extension; where cable service is to be provided indirectly to such occupants through bulk billing services or other discounted rates, units will be counted based on their equivalency to regular rate paying units (e.g., if the grantee receives one-half (½) the normal service charge for twenty (20) units in a multiple dwelling unit complex, this will be deemed to be the equivalent of ten (10) full paying units, and they will only be counted as ten (10) units for purposes of this determination). Extension of cable service to any multiple dwelling unit does not require grantee to wire the multiple dwelling unit at its cost and expense but rather only to extend such service up to such multiple dwelling unit complex in the public right-of-way in closest proximity to such complex. 
(3)  In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of cable service, grantee shall provide, upon the request of one or more potential subscribers desiring cable service, an estimate of the costs required to extend cable service to such subscribers, which estimate shall be reasonably determined by the grantee and shall include labor (wages, benefits and payroll taxes), material and a reasonable allowance for overhead. Grantee shall then extend cable service upon request of said potential subscribers upon payment of cost for such extension and consistent with grantee's labor needs. Grantee may require advance payment or assurance of payment satisfactory to grantee. The amount paid by subscribers for early extension shall be nonrefundable, and in the event the area subsequently reaches the density required for mandatory extension, such payment shall be treated as consideration for early extension. 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement with developers, property owners or residents. 
(5)  Whenever grantee has not extended its cable system or service to any potential residential subscriber requesting such an extension, whether such extension required the use of public or private rights-of-way, grantee shall provide that subscriber with written notice that he or she may contact the City to report such circumstances, and such notice shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the official designated by the City to receive such reports. 
(6)  Grantee shall extend service to commercial, industrial, and nonresidential customers as follows: Within ninety (90) days following a request for service from any potential commercial, industrial or nonresidential customer, grantee shall estimate the costs per customer of supplying services to all the potential contiguous customers within an area reasonably defined by grantee, including the potential customer requesting service. Grantee shall (i) provide the potential customer requesting service with a written estimate of the costs of providing that customer with service, along with a statement that such costs shall only apply if all (or a specified percentage) of the other potential commercial, industrial or nonresidential customers in the service area defined by grantee also request comparable service, and (ii) offer to provide the potential customer requesting service as well as all the other potential contiguous customers, with a list of the names and addresses of all the potential customers in the area defined by grantee. If the potential customer requesting service asks grantee in writing for such a list of names and addresses, grantee shall, at its cost, provide the potential customer requesting service and all the other potential customers in the defined service area with a copy of such written estimate of costs and the names and addresses of all such potential customers in the defined service area, thereby enabling the potential customer requesting service and all the other potential customers in the defined area jointly to agree to obtain service at the lowest possible group rates; provided, however, that grantee shall only be required to provide such a list of names and addresses if a commercial service is reasonably available to provide grantee with such a list. Grantee may require that such customer or customers enter contracts which will reasonably assure adequate revenues to provide grantee with recovery of the full costs and expenses of constructing and operating the line extension, including a reasonable return on investment over the first five (5) years of operation. Grantee shall provide the city with one copy of the written cost estimates and any list of names and addresses of potential customers provided to the potential customer requesting service. 
(7)  Grantee shall be exempt from and the city hereby waives Grantee compliance with the obligations of this subsection (n) of this section for a period of eighteen months following the commencement of construction by grantee of its cable system in the City. 
(o)  Service Drops. Grantee shall make service available to any subscriber within the City upon subscribers request and at the standard connection charge if the connection requires no more than a one hundred fifty (150) foot aerial or underground drop, measured from the new subscriber's residence or place of business to grantee's nearest activated coaxial distribution line, and includes one outlet and standard materials. If making service available requires more than a standard drop (such as a wall fish installation), grantee may, after so informing the subscriber, charge the subscriber (i) the standard connection charge and (ii) an amount equal to the reasonable actual labor (including wages, benefits and payroll taxes), material and other costs incurred by grantee for the additional facilities and work (including a reasonable allowance for overhead); in the alternative, grantee may charge an appropriate hourly service charge for the entire installation. Standard drops shall be accomplished, no less than ninety-five (95) percent the time measured on a quarterly basis under normal operating conditions, within five (5) business days of subscriber's requested installation date; a nonstandard drop shall be accomplished within fifteen (15) calendar days of a subscriber's request and payment. The ability of grantee to extend a drop within such time periods is predicated upon the assumptions that grantee is able to secure all necessary rights-of-way at the location of the drop upon reasonable terms and conditions, that the schedule or preferences of the person requesting the installation have not been responsible for delay, and that all applicable fees and charges have been timely paid and collected. Should grantee or the City receive a valid complaint from any resident of the City that cable service was not installed for that resident within the time periods stated above, grantee shall complete such installation within two (2) business days after notice to grantee of such complaint, subject to the provisions of this paragraph, and that resident shall be charged no installation fee for such installation. Grantee's inability to meet any specific installation in a timely manner shall not be deemed noncompliance if in the aggregate grantee has complied with these standards ninety-five (95) percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis under normal operating conditions. In those situations where extensions of cable systems into new areas or post-wiring of multiple dwelling units is required, installation shall be completed within ninety (90) days following satisfaction of each of the conditions set out above, unless otherwise agreed by grantee and the subscriber(s). Grantee shall notify the City in writing whenever installations, measured on a quarterly basis, exceed the periods specified above. Grantee shall be exempt from and the city hereby waives grantee compliance with the obligations of this subsection for a period of eighteen (18) months following commencement of construction by grantee of its cable system in the City. 
(p)  Cost of Drops in Excess of One Hundred Fifty (150) Feet. With respect to requests for connection requiring an aerial or underground drop line in excess of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the nearest activated distribution lines, grantee must extend and make available cable service to such subscribers at a connection fee not to exceed the greater of grantee's standard connection fee, if any, plus the actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet, or grantee's hourly service charge for the entire installation. Actual installation costs include reasonable actual labor or hourly service charges (including wages, benefits and payroll taxes) and material costs incurred by grantee for the additional work beyond one hundred fifty (150) feet, together with a reasonable charge for overhead. 
(q)  Subscriber-Provided Trenching and Conduit. In the event that a subscriber independently provides for his or her own trenching and conduit (including any necessary boring, backfilling, replacing and/or replanting), which trenching and conduit must comply with the City's and grantee's construction standards, the installation charge shall be the same as for a standard installation, if such an installation is standardized, or at reasonable rate and charges; provided, however, that the subscriber agrees, in writing and in a form acceptable to the grantee and the City, to hold the grantee and the City harmless for any injury, loss or damage caused by or related to the work so undertaken by the subscriber, and that the grantee shall not be responsible for any service problems caused as a result of the work performed by the subscriber. In such case the installation by the grantee will consist of a standard service drop. 
(r)  Construction Timetable. Grantee acknowledges its intent to complete construction of its cable system, as initially designed and submitted to the City within eighteen (18) months after commencing construction within the City and agrees that such construction shall be substantially completed no later than thirty-six (36) months after commencing construction within the City. Grantee shall be excused from its obligation hereunder if it is delayed from completing construction because of street-cutting moratoriums or similar restrictions or a failure by the City to issue encroachment permits in a timely manner. 
(s)  No Discrimination. Grantee shall not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of race or economic status in selecting the residential areas in which it will build its cable network within the City. 
(t)  Location of Trenches. The location of grantee's trenches is subject to approval in the City's normal permitting process, but the City and grantee acknowledge the City's expectation that any trenching done in the paved area of the City's streets will be placed along the concrete gutter line at the side of the affected streets, only when construction of grantee's facilities is within the paved areas of the City's streets shall grantee be required to place its cable plant in conduit. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7357 - Services to be provided subscribers. 
(a)  Basic Service Requirements. Grantee shall provide all access channels on its system on its lowest basic service tier. Grantee shall also provide a variety of broadcast and cable television satellite programming channels, including programming substantially oriented toward news and current events, weather or weather advisory programming, children's programming, cultural programming, educational programming, national and state governmental and public affairs programming, and minority-oriented programming of interest to minority audiences in the franchise area. 
(b)  Programming Guide. Grantee shall, no later than six (6) months following completion of the rebuild or upgrade described in Section 7356(c) of this agreement, establish in its basic tier of channels a programming or menu-driven service which will allow viewers to obtain a continuously updated schedule of programming available on its cable system indicating the channel number, specific program description and the time of day the program can be seen. 
(c)  Billing Practices, Information and Procedures. Grantee shall inform all subscribers and prospective subscribers of complete information respecting billing and collection procedures, procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services and refund and credit policies, upon solicitation of service or concurrently with the consummation of any agreement for installation of service. Such information shall be provided to subscribers in easy-to-understand language. 
(d)  Required Services for Disabled Individuals. If GTE California Incorporated, as the local telephone utility, discontinues the provision of telecommunications devices for the deaf (TDD) or equivalent services, grantee shall provide TDD or equivalent services that will allow such subscribers to contact the grantee for any reason related to the cable system. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7358 - Services to the City. 
(a)  Standard Drop at Each Public Facility. Grantee shall provide a standard service drop from the subscriber network to one point determined by the city in each city building, fire station, community center, library, and other public facilities, as they develop within the City, and to one point determined by each educational institution for each public primary, middle, secondary, higher education and technical school located within the grantee's service areas, including schools constructed subsequent to the effective date of this franchise ordinance, with cable service including the basic service tier containing over-the-air local broadcast stations and all public, educational and governmental access channels required to be carried on basic, together with the immediately subsequent tier of programming (if any) containing basic satellite services (such as CNN, Discovery, ESPN and USA), but excluding any subsequent or higher tier of programming, including ala carte services, premium and related services (such as DMX, Disney, HBO and Showtime) and any pay-per-view or per-event programming (such as Action, Request or Viewer's Choice). Such cable service shall be provided without charge and at no monthly service charge for the first connection or drop, and with additional outlets to be provided to any public facilities at the request of the City Manager at the cost of labor and materials; provided, however, (i) that each such facility be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of grantee's existing activated coaxial distribution system; (ii) that wiring provided for facilities beyond one hundred fifty (150) feet of grantee's activated distribution system be provided for a fee based upon the actual installation costs incurred by the grantee for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet; (iii) that grantee is able (and makes all reasonable attempts) to secure all necessary rights-of-way upon reasonable terms and conditions; (iv) that the location of the outlet provided with basic service is reasonably positioned in relation to the entry point of the drop into the facility; (v) that Grantee not be required to relocate any existing outlet in any public facility now provided with free basic service; (vi) that grantee be required to provide such service to government employees, but not transient members of the public, in police stations providing overnight occupancy; (vii) that grantee be required to provide such service to municipal or public facilities, but not to private for profit or non-profit hospitals or other organizations; and (viii) that wiring provided by grantee for additional outlets, if not installed by the City or the recipient of such additional outlets, shall be provided by grantee on the basis of actual costs for labor and materials, together with a reasonable allowance for overhead not to exceed fifteen (15) percent, and grantee shall provide the recipient of such wiring with a written estimate of such costs in advance of installation. The grantee shall have a period of up to eighteen (18) months from and after the effective date of the franchise within which to provide basic cable service to any municipal or public facility. 
(b)  Emergency Messages. Grantee shall provide, within three (3) months of the provision of commercial cable service in the City, an emergency audio override capability to permit the City to interrupt the audio portion of all video channels carried over the cable system for purposes of providing an audio message on all such channels simultaneously in the event of disaster or public emergency. The procedures governing the use of such emergency alert capability shall include the following: 
(1)  The emergency alert system shall be accessed only in the event of a local emergency as defined in Section 8558(c) of the California Government Code and duly proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of Section 8630 of such Government Code. If possible under the circumstances, the City shall use reasonable efforts to contact the Grantee prior to accessing the emergency alert system. 
(2)  The emergency alert system shall only be accessed by the Mayor or the City Manager or those individuals specifically designated by the City Manager. 
(3)  The City acknowledges that the grantee's cable system services many communities utilizing an integrated technical configuration, not all of which will necessarily be affected by a local emergency affecting the City. If the City utilizes the emergency alert system, all of the grantee's subscribers served by the headend or signal collection point serving the City will be capable of receiving the alert, including subscribers in other communities. Therefore, the City shall exercise due care and diligence with respect to (i) those individuals authorized to access the emergency alert system and (ii) the circumstances in which the emergency alert system is actually used. 
(c)  Interconnection with other Local Cable Systems. Grantee shall promptly interconnect the access channels of its cable system with the access channels of all other local cable systems in order that access programming on such channels can be universally available to all cable subscribers within the City. Grantee shall agree upon the most mutually convenient and cost-effective interconnection point and method with such other operators. If grantee is unable to reach such an agreement within thirty (30) days after sending or receiving a written request to interconnect to or from another local cable operator, the City may assist in mediating such dispute. If no such agreement is reached within an additional thirty (30) days, grantee agrees that the City may designate the place of interconnection. Each cable operator shall pay its own costs to reach the agreed to or designated interconnection point and will share equally all costs of actual interconnection, including but not limited to labor, connectors, equipment, construction or facilities. 
(d)  Transmission of Access Programming. Grantee shall carry and transmit all of the access programming carried upon interconnected cable operators' access channels, so long as the signal for such programming is of high quality and is made reasonably available to grantee at no fee. Grantee shall negotiate in good faith to seek agreement with and between all interconnected local cable operators on the channel numbers to be used to carry this programming so that all cable subscribers within the City can locate such programming on the same channel regardless of their provider of service, subject to technical or capacity limitations. 
(e)  Sharing of Access Programming. To the extent grantee is required by this Franchise Ordinance to provide, maintain or operate any facilities or equipment used to produce access programming, grantee shall do so for the benefit of itself and all interconnected cable operators. Without the City's express written permission to do otherwise, grantee shall not use its brand name or send any promotional or other announcements with respect to grantee's service on any access channel or use such channels in any manner that would make distribution of the access programming on such channels unsuitable for any interconnected cable operator, except as permitted in subsection (f) of this section. 
(f)  Commercial or Promotional Use of Access Channels. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section or elsewhere in this Ordinance, grantee shall have the right to use unused access channel capacity for commercial and promotional purposes. Grantee shall not use any unused access channel capacity for commercial or promotional uses in a manner that would prevent an authorized provider of access programming from distributing its access programming in a timely and reasonable manner on the appropriate access channel. Further, grantee may not distribute any commercial or promotional programming on an access channel without providing a means to signal or warn interconnected cable operators of the presence of such programming, in a timely manner, so that such operators may block such programming or replace it with their own programming. Grantee hereby agrees that it will use all reasonable efforts to block and not distribute any commercial or promotional programming transmitted by interconnected cable operators on any access channel, without the prior written consent of the cable operator distributing such programming. Nothing in this section shall prohibit grantee in any way from distributing access programming on the access channels of its cable system. 
(g)  Cooperation from other System Operators. Grantee shall provide a quality signal at no fee to interconnected cable operators for all of the access programming carried upon grantee's access channels. The City shall cause all other cable operators providing interconnection or carriage of access programming to agree to obligations similar to these contained in this section in any renewal or extension of an existing franchise agreement or in any agreement granting a new franchise. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7359 - Construction of cable system. 
(a)  Permits and Fees. Grantee's construction and operation of its cable system shall conform with all applicable State, federal and City laws and regulations. Grantee shall obtain encroachment permits or other required permits for all underground construction to be performed within the public right-of-way, or within the public utility easements or public service easements located on private property. At the City's option, grantee shall pay the City's normal permit fees associated with the construction of its cable system, or in lieu of such fees, grantee shall reimburse the City all direct labor and supervisory costs, including customary and reasonable overheads, incurred by the City in connection with the construction including, plan checking, testing, inspections, water used for construction, supervision and overhead. The City shall provide, at the request of grantee, supporting documentation for such costs, such as time cards, vendor/contractor invoices and other accounting records. 
(b)  Construction Plan and Schedule. Either prior to or not less than within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Ordinance, and from time to time thereafter, Grantee shall file with the City Manager or other designated employees of the City, a general construction plan for its cable system, including areas to be served, an estimated time schedule for such construction and a twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch general engineering map in a format acceptable to the City. Grantee shall have the right to modify the general construction plan at any time in its sole discretion upon notice to the City. The City shall promptly, and in no case longer than fifteen (15) business days following receipt of the general construction plan or any changes thereto, review and notify grantee in writing of any reasonable objection with regard to the general construction plan or the prompt of processing of permits. The process described in this section is not intended to replace or modify the City's normal encroachment permitting process. 
(c)  Access to Grantee's Trenches by other Utilities. During cable system construction or rebuilding, grantee shall permit the City and other public utilities, to install and maintain compatible facilities in trenches constructed or controlled by grantee, while they are open, provided that grantee is the permittee as authorized by the City Engineer and that grantee determines, in the exercise of its reasonable good faith discretion, that no undue interference with its use or occupancy of such trenches, or undue delay in its construction, will result or that such compatible facilities will not be used in any way to provide cable services or other telecommunications services. 
(1)  Grantee may require other users of such trenches, as a condition to the occupancy of those trenches, to enter into a written agreement with grantee to bear their pro rata share of the costs of constructing such trenches, including design, redesign, permits, approvals, and all additional costs of providing wider or deeper trenches or other modifications to accommodate such users, and to represent and warrant to grantee that the facilities being placed in such trenches will not be used to provide cable services or other telecommunications services. 
(2)  Written notice of any intended co-location in grantee's trenches shall be given to the grantee by the City, or any other potential co-located user of such trenches, not less than thirty (30) days after submission of grantee's general construction plan as provided in subsection 7359(c)(1) of this section. Such notice shall include such user's planned system design and requirements. If grantee fails to receive timely written notice or if grantee is not able to negotiate a written agreement with any potential user requesting co-location within thirty (30) days after grantee's receipt of such notice, grantee shall be permitted to proceed with construction without the participation of such potential user. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in subsection (c) of this section, grantee shall negotiate in good faith with potential co-located users of grantee's trenches which desire to use such co-located facilities to provide cable services or other telecommunications services, only to allow co-location of such facilities in grantee's trenches to be dug in the paved area of the City's streets. Grantee's obligation pursuant to subsection (c)(3) of this section is subject to the limitations contained in subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) and to such potential co-located user's agreement, in addition to those terms required in subsection (c)(1) of this section, to grantee's placement or construction of any such co-located facilities on behalf of such user and to the prompt reimbursement of grantee for all fully-allocated costs (including overhead allocations) associated with such facilities and construction. 
(d)  Notice of Construction/Repair to Residents. Grantee shall notify the City and residents or business owners on affected streets of any material construction, including rebuilds, upgrades, line extensions or substantial repair and maintenance activities, resulting in material interference with the use of local rights-of-way, or major repairs including any which require street or sidewalk trenching, but excluding routine repair and maintenance activities which do not cause material interference with the use of local rights-of-way, at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to commencement of such work. Notification may be provided on a phase-in basis to notify residents or business owners in areas immediately affected rather than to all residents or business owners generally. Grantee shall provide such notification, by either leaving one appropriate notice (e.g., a door hanger notice) at each affected residence or place of business or by sending one appropriate notice by first-class mail, whichever form of notification, in the reasonable judgment of Grantee, is more likely to reach all affected persons with adequate advance notice at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to work commencement. Such notice shall include a local or toll-free telephone number of grantee where such affected persons may call for further information. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7360 - Access channels and programming. 
Grantee shall provide to its subscribers in the City access to the public, educational and governmental access channels and access programming provided to subscribers to its cable system in the City of Oxnard. Grantee shall be deemed to have satisfied the obligation described in this section, if such channels are accessible by not less than ninety (90) percent of homes passed by grantee's cable system in the City. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7361 - Grants for access programming, equipment and facilities. 
Grantee shall provide financial support for the production of access programming as follows: 
(a)  One-Time Grant. Grantee shall provide a one-time grant to the city in the amount of seventeen thousand dollars ($17,000.00) to be used exclusively by the City, as it may determine after consultation with the grantee, to support the production of access programming and/or to reimburse the City for the actual and reasonable costs incurred in connection with the awarding of this franchise, including, but not limited to, all costs for legal services, outside consultants, extra staff time, administrative overhead and publication costs. The payment shall be delivered to the City within sixty (60) days after the effective date of the franchise. The City shall provide an accounting to grantee for the use of such funds. 
(b)  Educational Programming Grant. Grantee shall provide an ongoing annual grant to the City to be used exclusively to support the production of educational access programming. This grant shall be in lieu of or may be replaced by any payments that may be required of local cable operators pursuant to any federal, State or local law, to support educational programming or other education-related telecommunications activities. The grant provided by grantee hereunder shall be the sum of one dollar and sixty cents ($1.60) times the average number of subscribers in the City to grantee's cable system's basic service tier for the immediately preceding year up to a maximum amount of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) for any one year. The payment, along with a brief summary of the subscriber information upon which it is based, shall be delivered to the City within sixty (60) days after each year of this agreement. For the purposes of determining the average number of subscribers in this section, the number of subscribers in multiple dwelling units shall be determined in the same manner described in Section 7356(n) for determining the number of homes for tine extension purposes. The City must use such funds to offset the costs of its incumbent cable operator, or its successors, transferees or assigns, incurred under its current franchise obligation to provide an annual grant to the Port Hueneme School District of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00). If the City's incumbent cable operator, or its successors, transferees or assigns, goes out of business or otherwise does not fulfill its franchise obligation to provide its annual grant to the Port Hueneme School District, the City shall forward the funds granted by grantee hereunder directly to the school district. In addition, during the period of this franchise or the period that the Hueneme School District is a member of the consortium of school districts in the Oxnard area (the "Joint Powers Authority"), whichever is shorter, the Hueneme School District schools located in the City shall be entitled to the benefits described in Section 3 of Appendix B of the Franchise Agreement between grantee and the City of Oxnard. 
(c)  Grants not Part of Franchise Fees. The grants provided for hereunder shall not be considered as credits against grantee's franchise fee. The City shall provide to grantee a complete accounting annually for the use of funds granted pursuant to this section. Because the grants provided for hereunder by grantee will be used to meet capital and operating funding costs of access programming services, facilities and production, grantee may, to the extent appropriate under local or federal rate regulations, recover all of such capital contributions as incremental "externals." Capital costs required to be expended at any time during the first two (2) years may be amortized and recovered over no less than the first eight (8) quarters of this franchise, following the construction of grantee's cable system. Ongoing operational expenses and capital costs expended after the first two (2) years may be recovered as they are incurred. City agrees that it such externals, when accurately calculated, amount to no more than fifty-one cents ($0.51) per subscriber per month, the pass through of such externals may begin thirty (30) days after notice and submission of FCC Form 1210 (or equivalent form) to the City for its review, and the City shall not toll, delay or reject such pass through of such externals. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7362 - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Five (5) Percent Franchise Fee. During the term of the franchise, grantee shall pay the City an annual franchise fee to compensate the City for the grantee's use of the public rights of way in which its cable system is located. Such franchise fee shall be an amount equal to five (5) percent of grantee's gross revenues for the immediately preceding year. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Ordinance, the franchise fee set forth in this section shall not be increased, during the initial term of this franchise, above five (5) percent, notwithstanding any change in federal or State law permitting a municipality to assess a franchise fee in excess of five (5) percent. 
(b)  Revenues for Other Communications Services. For the purposes of this Ordinance, gross revenues shall not include any revenue received by the grantee from the delivery of other communications services over its cable system, including without limitation, telephony, data transmission, interactive services and other broadband information services. If at any time during the term of the franchise, the City should gain the right to assess franchise fees under federal or State law with respect to other telecommunications services such as telephony, data transmission, interactive services and other broadband information services, grantee shall pay the City a franchise fee on the gross revenues associated with such other telecommunications services based on a percentage that does not exceed the percentage paid to the City as franchise fees for such services by all other providers of such services in the City. 
(c)  Reports. The grantee shall file a complete, accurate and certified statement of all collected gross revenues within the City during the period for which such payment covers, and such payment shall be made to the City Treasurer not later than sixty (60) days after the end of each year. 
(d)  Right to Audit. The City shall have the right to inspect and examine all of the grantee's books of account, income records and other records and documents relevant to an accurate determination of the total amount of gross revenues derived by the grantee from the provision of cable services within the City, including such income and subscriber records as may be necessary to determine the accuracy of the grantee's pro rata allocation of revenue to the franchise. The City shall have the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be payable under this Franchise Ordinance; provided, however, that such audit shall commence within thirty-six (36) months following the close of each of the grantee's fiscal years (unless subsequent information indicates fraud or improper withholding of information, in which case the thirty-six (36) month limitation shall not apply), and that the City shall not conduct such an audit more frequently than twice in one year, with each audit relating to a different time period. The grantee shall make such records available to the City within fourteen (14) days of request. Such records shall be available for inspection by the City upon reasonable notice during normal business hours and shall be retained by the grantee for a period of three (3) years. The City will bear the cost of any such audit; provided, however, that if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of ten (10) percent or more of the amount due, grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such audit and pay such costs at such time as any proceedings contesting the City's audit are completed. Any additional amount due to the City as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the city, and said notice shall include a copy of the audit report. The grantee has the right to contest, by appropriate proceedings, the results of any audit conducted by the City, in which case the grantee shall not be required to pay the City such additional franchise fee as is determined to be due and owing until such proceedings have become final. The grantee shall not be entitled to claim a refund for franchise fee overpayment with respect to payments made more than thirty-six (36) months prior to the date on which such a claim is made, unless such claim for refund is based upon a change in federal laws or regulations. 
(e)  No Accord and Satisfaction. No acceptance by the City of any payment from grantee shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim City may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this Ordinance or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by City. However, if the City requires grantee to conduct an audit, or the City conducts its own audit, and the results of such an audit have become final under the provisions of this Ordinance, there shall be an accord and satisfaction with respect to any sums paid by grantee arising with respect to the period subject to audit. Moreover, there shall be an accord and satisfaction with respect to any payment not subject to audit within thirty-six (36) months following the close of the fiscal year to which such payment relates, unless there is subsequent evidence that grantee has engaged in fraud or has improperly withheld relevant records which relate to such payments. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7363 - Insurance. 
Grantee shall, during the entire term of such franchise, maintain in full force and effect at its own expense, an insurance policy or policies which shall insure grantee and provide primary coverage for the City, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees, against loss or liability for personal injury, death, property damage (both automobile and nonautomobile cause), or other damages. Such policy or policies shall include insurance against damages from copyright infringement (common law or statutory) and a failure of grantee to secure trademark rights, occasioned by any activity or operation of grantee under a cable television franchise, and regardless of any claimed or actual activities of City, its officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees. The City Attorney may waive the requirement for insurance from one or more perils mentioned in the last preceding sentence upon a finding that such insurance cannot be procured or cannot be procured at a reasonable cost, and in connection therewith may reduce the otherwise required limits on coverage hereafter set forth. However, if such insurance cannot be procured, the grantee's insurance broker or agent must document its unavailability by showing a good faith effort to obtain such insurance. Such policy shall contain a cross-liability endorsement. Such policy or policies shall be issued by a company authorized to transact insurance business in California and shall have a rating of A or better as set forth in the most current edition of Bests Insurance Guide, with minimum combined single limits of liability coverage in the amount of three million dollars ($3,000,000.00) per occurrence, for bodily injury and property damage, including coverage for comprehensive general liability, contractual liability, owned automobiles, non-owned automobiles, and for-hire automobiles. Such limits of coverage may be subject to reasonable deductibles. The policy or policies shall name the city, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees as additional insureds and contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation, modification that relates to a diminution in the scope of coverage under this section or reduction in the limits of coverage of such policy shall be delivered to the City Clerk thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date thereof. The Grantee shall provide the City Attorney with certificates of insurance and any and all amendments thereto, including but not limited to all endorsements, exclusions and provisos. The City Attorney shall review such certificates of insurance and shall approve the same if the terms and conditions of the insurance represented thereby are consistent with the requirements of this section. If any such certificates of insurance and amendments, endorsements, exclusions and provisos thereto fail to evidence the coverage required under this section, the grantee shall take such action as shall be necessary to secure such coverage within ten (10) business days following receipt of notice thereof from the City. Upon the effective date of the franchise, and annually thereafter, grantee shall provide the City with evidence that it has in effect employer liability insurance or worker's compensation coverage and/or has undertaken self-insurance in accordance with Section 3700 et seq. of the California Labor Code and is maintaining a policy or policies of employers' liability insurance with minimum limits as prescribed by State law. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7364 - General performance bond. 
Grantee shall furnish to and maintain with the City, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, a nonrevocable, performance and payment bond or bonds in the following amounts: 
One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) 	Year 1 of franchise 
Seventy-five Thousand Dollars ($75,000.00) 	Year 2 of franchise 
Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) 	Year 3 of franchise 
Twenty-five Thousand Dollars ($25,000.00) 	Year 4 of franchise and thereafter 
 
Such amounts are to ensure the faithful performance of all provisions of the Franchise Ordinance, including without limitation the payment of grantee's franchise fees to the City. The City shall have the right to obtain payment under such bond or bonds after providing grantee with prior notice and opportunity to cure the failure to perform any such obligation as provided in the Franchise Ordinance, or, if no such notice and opportunity to cure is provided for in the Ordinance, after at least seven (7) days' notice and opportunity to cure following grantee's receipt of notice from the City by U.S. Certified Mail. No defense against the City shall be asserted by a company or companies issuing performance and payment bonds with regards to the payment of any franchise fee due under this Ordinance. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7365 - Consumer service requirements and standards. 
Grantee shall comply with the following consumer service and refund standards: 
(a)  Telephone Access. Grantee shall provide a local or a toll-free telephone number and adequately trained customer service representatives to receive and act upon requests for repairs and consumer complaints. Such telephone numbers shall be so operated that calls can be received and responded to on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, seven (7) days a week, including weekends and holidays. When a regular customer service representative is not on duty, an adequately trained answering service or automated response unit shall take the name, address and telephone number of each caller to report back to the grantee. For purposes of this section "adequately trained" includes the capability to provide for the dispatch of technical personnel and information as to business hours and appropriate telephone numbers for business hour contacts. 
(b)  Referrals to Supervisors. If a subscriber states that he or she is unsatisfied with the response of a customer service representative, or asks to speak with a customer service supervisor or any qualified supervisor, the matter shall be immediately referred to a qualified supervisor for resolution. If no customer service supervisor or other qualified supervisor is available, the customer service representative must record the pertinent information and a qualified supervisor shall return the telephone call within eight (8) business hours. If that call does not achieve contact with the subscriber, the supervisor must utilize reasonable efforts to do so, including, without limitation, calling periodically, leaving a telephone message or writing the subscriber to give a direct dial or extension number to reach the supervisor directly. If a subscriber remains dissatisfied with the resolution of his or her complaint following review by a qualified supervisor, the subscriber shall be referred to the manager or director of customer service for final resolution. 
(c)  Name of Customer Service Representatives. A customer service representative, manager or director must give his or her true name, or first name, or grantee-sanctioned pseudonym or identification number when so requested by a subscriber. 
(d)  Telephone System Standards. Grantee shall obtain and maintain sufficient telephone lines and staffing so as not to delay unreasonably the answering of all telephone calls. Trained customer service representatives shall be available to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours, defined as not less than nine (9) hours per business day Monday through Friday and four (4) hours on Saturday. Grantee shall connect a telephone caller within thirty (30) seconds after the caller dials and ringing begins. This standard shall be deemed satisfied when a connection is made either to an automated attendant, an automatic response unit, or a customer service representative capable of responding to the subscriber's inquiry. Under normal operating conditions, the caller will receive a busy signal less than five (5) percent of the time. If the call needs to be transferred, if the caller needs to be placed on hold, or if the caller wishes to be transferred, such transfer or hold time shall not exceed sixty (60) seconds. Each of the standards set forth in this paragraph shall be met no less than ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis, under normal operating conditions; in which case failure to meet the standard with respect to any particular call shall not be deemed noncompliance. During the hours when a customer service representative of grantee is not on duty to receive calls, a qualified employee or contractor shall either be available to an adequately trained answering service by a paging system or shall call the dispatcher or answering service not less frequently than once every four (4) hours to receive and act upon subscriber calls to correct service interruptions or technical deficiencies in cable service as provided in this subsection. 
(e)  Traffic Study. If the City Manager, or a designee, reviews the telephone usage complaints against a grantee and finds them to reflect a significant failure to comply with the standards of subsection (d) of this section, the City Manager, or a designee, shall direct the grantee to provide to the City Manager, at the grantee's cost, an industry acceptable traffic study which shall identify the grantee's compliance with the requirements of subsection (d) of this section and propose remedies to correct any deficiencies in compliance. This study shall be delivered to the City within one hundred twenty (120) days following receipt of written notice from the City specifying the need for such study. The study shall be conducted over a period of ninety (90) days so as to determine whether the standards set forth in Section 7365(d) have been satisfied no less than ninety (90) percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis, under normal operating conditions. In the event that the City Manager reasonably determines that the grantee has failed to meet the standards set out in subsection (d) of this section based upon such study, the Grantee shall have ninety (90) days from written notification of such noncompliance by the City Manager to cure the same. 
(f)  Training of Customer Service Representatives. Customer service representatives shall be kept fully informed of subscriber options for service, and shall be required to advise subscribers of those options, where reasonably appropriate, when subscribers telephone or otherwise contact grantee's customer service representatives, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Advising subscribers, whenever applicable, that they may either schedule converter boxes for at-home pickup or exchange by grantee's personnel or may themselves bring converter boxes to the grantee's business office; 
(2)  Advising subscribers, whenever applicable, that programming promotions are currently being, or may be within a week, offered at discounted rates or prices; 
(3)  Advising subscribers, whenever applicable, that known or planned service outages may affect subscribers' cable reception, provided, however, that in lieu of this grantee may use a character generator to disclose such information on an appropriate and convenient channel. 
(g)  Written Inquiries. Grantee shall respond to written subscriber inquiries and complaints received by the grantee at any of its office addresses. 
(h)  Notice of Customer Requirements. Customers requesting installation and/or service shall be informed of all service delivery performance requirements at the time of requesting service, including the need to be at home (if applicable) or provide cash payment (if applicable for installations, connections or reconnections). 
(i)  Prompt Response Required. Grantee shall respond to requests for service and complaints promptly. Grantee may respond to a service request or complaint by telephone where the service request or complaint does not reasonably require dispatching an employee or contractor to address or resolve such request or complaint. When a telephonic response is insufficient and a service call is necessary, the grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service when a qualified employee or contractor arrives at the subscriber's location or other location where necessary to address the complaint and begins work, provided that the employee or contractor continues such work without cessation to completion where practicable. If a work interruption is reasonably necessary (for example, to obtain unforeseeable but necessary permits, tools, materials, equipment or additional personnel), the employee or contractor shall complete such work at the earliest reasonable date that is convenient to the customer. If a subscriber is not at home when the employee or contractor arrives, the employee or contractor shall attempt to repair any problems which can be reasonably repaired from outside the customer's premises (for example, a repair to a cable drop between the front of customer's residence and the street). If such a repair is not possible, the employee or contractor shall leave a door hanger at the customer's location which shall notify the customer that a repair was attempted and ask the customer to call the grantee to reschedule another mutually convenient service call. 
(j)  Adequate Personnel. Grantee shall maintain a repair force of service and maintenance personnel capable of responding to subscriber requests for service and complaints under normal operating conditions within the following time frames (unless a subscriber requests a different date that is more convenient to the subscriber and that is beyond the following performance standards): 
(1)  System service interruption. Within four (4) hours, including weekends and holidays, of receiving subscriber calls which by number identify a service interruption of sound or picture of all services affecting three (3) or more subscribers in a related geographic area. 
(2)  Isolated service interruption. Within one business day, excluding weekends and holidays, of receiving requests for service identifying an individual service interruption. 
(3)  Inferior reception quality; defective converter. Within two (2) business days, excluding weekends and holidays, of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality, or requesting exchange of defective converter. 
(k)  Written Records. Grantee shall maintain for one year a written record (or an equivalent stored on magnetic, electronic or optical media capable of reproduction in printed form by the grantee) of all requests for cable installations, and cable service which require a service call (a truck roll) to a subscriber's residence, place of business or other location, and their disposition, whether such requests are made by telephone, in writing, in person, or otherwise, including the name of the person requesting installation or service, the date and time of the request, the nature of the request, the date and time of the grantee's response, and a brief description of the response or the service problem reported and resolved. Such written, electronic or optical record shall be made available to the City Manager upon request. 
(l)  Identification. All personnel, agents and representatives of grantee, including subcontractors, that have occasion to deal in their official capacity directly with subscribers or members of the public at their residences or places of business shall wear photo identification badges, when acting on behalf of the grantee, except in cases of emergency provided it is impracticable to do so. 
(m)  Subcontractors. Grantee shall accept full responsibility and liability for the actions of its contractors and subcontractors and shall not advise any subscriber with a contractor- or subcontractor- related problem that it is up to the subscriber to deal with the contractor or subcontractor directly. 
(n)  Approvals and Authorizations. Grantee must obtain approvals or authorizations for the use or occupancy of private property or private rights-of-way from their owners prior to such use or occupancy, unless otherwise provided under existing easements, licenses, rights of occupancy or other authorizations or as otherwise may be provided by applicable law. 
(o)  Subscriber Notice. Grantee shall notify subscribers of the expected time of visits for installations, service or other activities, and shall offer to schedule such visits either at a specific time or, at maximum, within a four (4) hour time block during normal business hours. Grantee may also schedule such visits outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. Grantee shall offer subscribers a choice of either morning visits, afternoon visits or, if grantee makes service calls later into the evening, visits up to the close of service. In each case, the subscriber shall be advised of the time block during which the service representative is scheduled to arrive. If a subscriber requesting service on a given day cannot be scheduled within a specific time period and is advised that the grantee's service personnel may arrive at any point during the business day, the subscriber may request the grantee to make an appointment for service on the next business day in which such time periods are available. If, under circumstances which depart from normal operating conditions, a grantee is unable to keep a scheduled appointment, grantee shall attempt to make prompt contact with subscriber to inform the subscriber of the delay and to reschedule the service visit at a time meeting the subscriber's convenience. 
(p)  Disconnection or Termination of Service. Grantee shall only disconnect or terminate a subscriber's service for good and just cause. The grantee shall not disconnect service for nonpayment until the grantee has provided the subscriber with written notice, provided on or after the due date of the subscriber's billing and separately from that billing, at least ten (10) calendar days in advance of the disconnection. Such notice shall specify: 
(1)  Proposed date subject to disconnection; 
(2)  Total payment required to avoid disconnection, with an itemization of component charges if such itemization has not previously been supplied to the subscriber; 
(3)  Total amount in arrears if that amount differs from above; 
(4)  Telephone numbers and office hours to contact a customer service representative. 
In no event shall involuntary disconnection or termination for nonpayment occur less than fourteen (14) calendar days alter the end of any billing period for which charges are delinquent. Where grantee has improperly discontinued service, it shall provide free reconnection within twenty four (24) hours of being made aware of improper disconnection. 
(q)  Refunds for Disconnection. In the event a refund is due to a subscriber at the time of service disconnection, such refund must be made to the subscriber within thirty (30) business days. 
(r)  Right to Cancel. Grantee shall afford subscribers with a right to cancel or rescind any contract or agreement for cable services by midnight of the third business day, excluding Sundays, after the day on which the subscriber enters such an agreement, except that such right of rescission shall end upon initiation of installation of service whether physically or electronically on the subscriber's premises. 
(s)  Termination of Promotional Offers. Grantee shall automatically terminate the subscriber's reception of any promotional no-cost or discounted premium channel offering at the end of the established or extended promotional period, and shall not continue to assess or collect a charge for such service offering, unless the subscriber affirmatively and specifically elects, either orally, in writing or by telephone, to continue that service for the applicable charge(s). This election may be made by the subscriber at any time prior to the imposition of the applicable charge, including at any time prior to first receiving the service for no charge. This provision does not apply to the addition of any service to an existing package, tier or service offering or to any restructuring or retiering of any package, tier or service offering, provided that the subscriber is receiving the package, tier or service offering at the time of the addition, restructuring or retiering. 
(t)  Written Customer Service Standards. Before or concurrently with providing initial cable service to each subscriber, and at least annually thereafter, a grantee shall provide each subscriber with a copy of its written customer service standards and shall advise each subscriber, in writing, either in its written customer service standards or a current rate card or otherwise, of: 
(1)  The availability of the signal control device or parental control option (lock box) required by Section 624(d)(2)(A) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended; 
(2)  All cable service offerings and options, the fees, charges, deposits, and associated terms and conditions which apply to all cable services then being distributed over the system which the subscriber may elect to receive; 
(3)  Procedures for ordering changes in or termination of services, as well as grantee's obligation to provide subscribers with thirty (30) days prior written notice of any changes in such services, fees, charges, deposits, procedures, policies or associated terms and conditions, excluding temporary marketing and sales discounts on offers and adjustments in rates for pay-per-view and similar per-event programming; 
(4)  All refund and credit policies, including but not limited to subscribers right to a credit or pro rata refund of monthly subscription fees for any loss or interruption of cable service and to a refund of all fees, deposits or pro rata payments to which the subscriber is entitled; 
(5)  Grantee's practices and procedures for protecting subscriber privacy as required by federal, State and local law, including, but not limited to, Section 631 of the Communications Act of 1934, in the form of a separate, written statement to each subscriber which clearly and conspicuously informs the subscriber of his or her rights to privacy; 
(6)  Grantee's procedures for the receipt and resolution of subscriber complaints; 
(7)  The address, telephone number and business hours of the grantee's office to which complaints may be reported; 
(8)  The responsibility of the City Manager's Office for assistance in resolving cable complaints, together with the City's address and normal business hours and the title and telephone number of the person designated to receive such complaints; 
(9)  A general description of broadcast channel syndicated exclusivity, network nonduplication and sports blackout requirements which may affect subscribers' viewing of the grantee's cable services. 
This notice and each other notice required under this agreement to be sent to all subscribers shall either be included in the subscriber's monthly billing statement, or provided separately without inclusion with any other materials, by U.S. Mail or such other timely method of delivery as shall be appropriate. Where cable service is provided to a multiple dwelling unit complex under a bulk-billed arrangement, the grantee shall make available to the owner, manager or agent of such complex copies of each such notice in sufficient numbers for distribution to the occupant of each unit within that complex by such owner, manager or agent. One copy of each such notice shall also be sent to the City Manager. 
(u)  Copies to City. Grantee shall supply the City with one copy of all current written materials, including promotional materials and a copy of all new and periodically updated materials, which it distributes to subscribers concurrently upon their distribution to subscribers. 
(v)  System Outages. Upon being notified of an unplanned system outage affecting at least ten (10) percent of its subscribers, grantee shall devise some reasonable method, such as an automated recording immediately to be placed on its incoming telephone lines, to advise subscribers of the nature and expected duration of the service interruption. If a recording is used, it shall also provide subscribers calling on other matters with the option of either obtaining information on such other matters through an automated response unit or choosing to speak with a live representative of grantee including, if outside normal business hours, grantee's answering service. Grantee shall, where practicable, also notify the City Manager's Office by telephone or facsimile as soon as such an outage is identified and promptly after it is repaired. 
(w)  Blackouts. With respect to syndicated exclusivity and network nonduplication blackouts, grantee shall either substitute another signal to avoid transmitting a blank screen on the blackout channel frequency or, by use of some reasonable device, such as a continuous character-generated notice, otherwise avoid transmitting a blank screen on the blocked-out channel frequency or otherwise conveying the impression that the channel is not working properly. With respect to blackouts of selected sports events, grantee shall prepare a character-generated notice to be superimposed on the affected channel, advising subscribers of the TV blackout of the particular sports event. 
(x)  Quarterly Reports to City. Grantee shall report to the City on a quarterly basis regarding its compliance with its customer service standards. A report form shall be developed in consultation between the City Manager and grantee that will provide the detail necessary to monitor grantee's compliance with these standards, and such report shall include, but not be limited to, a summary of subscriber complaints by type of complaint. Grantee shall comply with all procedures established by the city and the grantee regarding the handling of all complaints received directly by the City from City residents regarding cable television service. 
(y)  Annual Reports to City. Once a year, grantee shall provide the City with: (1) call service summaries, summaries of subscriber complaints received by the City and provided to the grantee in writing, summaries of subscriber complaints received by the grantee, and telephone access statistics, all for the preceding year; and (2) a review of the grantee's overall compliance with the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement. 
(z)  Uniform Billing. Grantee shall bill all subscribers to its cable services in a uniform, nondiscriminatory manner, regardless of the subscriber's level of service. In no case shall any subscriber be required (i) to pay for services more than thirty (30) days in advance of the start of the period of service for which the subscriber is being billed or (ii) to pay for more than thirty (30) days of such services at any one time, provided, however, that the subscriber may be required to pay for more than thirty (30) days of service if the account is or has been past due. Grantee shall clearly disclose on the billing statement both the date on which the payment is due and the date on which a delinquent fee may begin to accrue if payment has not been received. There shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) days from the date of the postmark on billing statements to the payment due date, and there shall be a minimum of forty five (45) days from the date of the postmark on the first billing statement to the imposition of a late fee. 
(aa)  Content of Bills. Grantee shall provide all subscribers with an itemized monthly bill that contains, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  A list of each service or package received for that billing period showing individual charges for the lowest basic tier, satellite tier, each pay-per-view usage, each premium service subscribed to on an a la carte (but not on a package) basis, and each remote control or other devices; 
(2)  The period of time over which such services are billed; 
(3)  The total charges due for the monthly period, separate from any previous balance due; 
(4)  A specific date by which payment is required: and 
(5)  Specific information on complaint procedures that are available to subscribers, or a local or toll-free telephone number that can be called to obtain copies of grantee's billing and complaint procedures. 
(bb)  Billing inquiries. Grantee shall clearly and conspicuously provide on all subscriber bills (1) a listing of grantee's business office address and telephone number and (2) a statement that customers shall direct any complaints to grantee's office, not to grantee's billing address (if the business office and billing addresses are different). 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7366 - Rates. 
Grantee acknowledges that to the extent permitted by federal and state law, the City may regulate the grantee's rates for Cable Service. The grantee shall maintain a copy of its current rate schedule on file with the City. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7367 - Defense and indemnification. 
(a)  Indemnification by Grantee. Grantee shall protect, indemnify and hold harmless the City, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same, arising out of or related to, and to the extent proximately caused by, the acts or omissions of the grantee, its employees, contractors, volunteers or agents. This indemnification shall include, without affecting the scope of the foregoing, and without being limited to the following: claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments advising in tort, contracts, infringements of constitutional rights, unfair competition, any infringement or violation, or alleged infringement or violation of any copyright, whether common law or statutory, violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations or failure of grantee to secure consents from owners, authorizing distributors or licensees of programs to be delivered by grantee's cable system. The City shall make reasonable efforts to provide grantee with written notice within ten (10), but within not later than twenty (20), days after being served with any lawsuit for which indemnification may be sought under this section. 
Grantee shall, upon demand of the City or any other such indemnitee, appear in and defend the City, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, or other legal proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative or otherwise, of every kind and nature and regardless of the merit of the same, advising out of or related to and to the extent proximately caused by the acts of omissions of the grantee, its employees, contractors, volunteers or agents, regardless of any claimed or actual negligence or conduct of the City or any such indemnitee. Where grantee has assumed the defense in any such proceeding, it may control the proceedings at issue, and the City may participate in such proceedings with counsel of its own choosing, provided that the City will be responsible for all costs and expenses of such counsel, as well as such counsel's accounting fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, and travel and living expenses. Should the grantee fail to undertake the defense of such claim following demand of the City or any other such indemnitee, the City may undertake the defense of such claim, in which case the grantee shall reimburse the City and any other indemnitee for any costs and expenses incurred in defending against such claim or demand or action, including any attorneys' fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses, and travel and living expenses. The foregoing obligations shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other security required hereunder. Grantee may settle, compromise, adjust or otherwise dispose of any such claim, provided that grantee shall not settle, compromise, adjust or dispose of any such claim which would impose any obligation upon the City, its elected officials, officers, boards and board members, commissions and commission members, agents, consultants, volunteers and employees without the City's prior written consent, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Should the grantee fail to defend any such claim, the City may settle, compromise, adjust or otherwise dispose of such claim on such terms as it may deem appropriate. Grantee shall promptly reimburse the City for the amount of all settlement payments and expenses, legal and otherwise, incurred by the City in connection with the defense or settlement of such claim. If no settlement of such claim is made, then the grantee shall satisfy any judgment rendered with respect to such claim before the City is required to do so, and pay all expense, legal or otherwise, incurred by the City in the defense of such claim. Except as specifically set forth above, the City shall not have the right to settle, compromise, adjust or dispose of any claim without the approval of the grantee, provided that if the grantee disapproves of such settlement, then it must assume the defense of such claim and reimburse the City for all expenses of the City to the date of assumption. If the City enters into any settlement, compromise, adjustment or other disposition of a claim for which indemnification is sought under the provisions of this section and has not complied with the provisions of this section for seeking grantee's approval of such settlement, grantee will be discharged from its obligations of indemnification under this Section. The party proposing a settlement, compromise, adjustment or other disposition of a claim shall give the other ten (10) days prior written notice of the proposed settlement, compromise, adjustment or other disposition for which indemnification is sought by the City under the provisions of this section. The party to whom such notice is given shall be required to accept, reject or modify the proposed settlement within such ten (10) day period. 
(b)  Indemnification by City. The City shall indemnify, defend and hold the grantee, its affiliates and their respective officers, directors, shareholders and employees (the indemnitees) harmless from and against any and all liabilities and obligations asserted or other claims, actions, judgments, assessments, taxes, performance rights fees, residuals, charges, fines, penalties, damages, costs and expenses (including legal fees and disbursements) arising from or in any manner related to this franchise or the grantee's cable system to the extent caused by the acts or omissions of the City, its officers, employees, agencies, commissions, boards, contractors or agents, including without limitation any claim arising from or in any manner related to such acts or omissions involving the City's use of the grantee's cable system (including without limitation the use of the grantee's poles, conduit, towers or other property of the grantee), the use of the emergency alert system by or on behalf of the City (excluding any claim arising out of a physical or operational defect in the grantee's physical plant) and the City's use of access channels providing public, educational or governmental programming, provided that such public, educational or governmental channels are under the control of the City, including without limitation (1) the City's administration and operation of any such channels, (2) programming of the City carried on such channels and (3) the act or omission of any City officer, employee, agency, commission, board, contractor or agent or person involved in the administration, operation, programming or use of such channels, which obligation of indemnity shall include, without limitation, the solicitation, production, content, selection, rejection, scheduling, funding or presentation of such programming, as well as such liability as may arise from claims of libel, slander, defamation, invasion of privacy or infringement of copyright, musical performing rights or any other right of any other person. 
(1)  Upon the occurrence of any event which may give rise to an obligation for which the City is or may be liable under this section (any such event, a "claim"), the indemnitees shall promptly, after knowledge thereof, notify the City in writing and give the City a reasonable opportunity to attempt to defend or settle such claim, provided that the City shall not settle any claim which would impose any obligation upon the indemnitees without the indemnitees' prior written consent, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(2)  Any indemnittee may, at its election and expense, participate in any attempt by the City to settle or defend any such claim subject to the understanding that control of the defense of any such claim remains with the City and its counsel. 
(3)  With respect to any claim which is ultimately determined to be an obligation for which the City is required to indemnify the indemnitees, in the event that the City fails to defend the indemnitees or employ counsel for the indemnitees for such purpose, then the indemnitees may defend against such claim in such manner as they deem appropriate and the indemnitees may settle such claim on such terms as they may deem appropriate. The City shall promptly reimburse the indemnitees for the amount of all settlement payments and expenses, legal and otherwise, incurred by the indemnitees in connection with the defense or settlement of such claim. If no settlement of such claim is made, then the City shall satisfy any judgment rendered with respect to such claim before the indemnitees are required to do so, and pay all expenses, legal or otherwise, incurred by the indemnitees in the defense against such claim. 
(4)  Except as set forth above, the indemnitees shall not have the right to settle any claim without the approval of the City, provided that if the City disapproves of such settlement, then it must assume the defense of such claim and reimburse the indemnitees for all expenses of the indemnitees to the date of assumption. The failure of the City to assume such defense and to pay such reimbursement shall give the indemnitees the right to settle such claim on such terms as they consider appropriate. In such event, every expense of any attempt to settle or defend a claim, including without limitation expenses of proceedings, negotiations, investigations, settlements or suits (such as attorneys' fees, accountant fees, expert witness or consultant fees, court costs, per diem expenses and travel and living expenses), shall be borne solely by the City. Notwithstanding any such attempt or the outcome thereof, the obligations of the City to the indemnitees under this section shall not be relieved, reduced or otherwise affected. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7368 - Construction bond. 
Grantee shall be exempt from and the City hereby waives grantee's compliance with any requirement to furnish or maintain a construction bond to the City for any construction by grantee of its cable system. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7369 - Liquidated damages. 
(a)  Failure to Comply. Grantee's failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in this Franchise Ordinance, following notice and an opportunity to cure such event of noncompliance, will result in damage to the City, and it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance; therefore, grantee shall be subject to liquidated damages specified below. Liquidated damages may only be assessed following notice to grantee and an opportunity to cure as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Liquidated damages will not be assessed if grantee's failure to comply with a requirement of this Franchise Ordinance is caused by an event of force majeure. Liquidated damages will be assessed on a daily basis for each breach or series of related breaches under this Franchise Ordinance but may not exceed the ceilings prescribed by State law (e.g., California Government Code, 53088.2(q)). 
The following amounts may be chargeable against the Performance Bond provided for in Section 7364 for the following concerns: 
(1)  Failure to complete system construction, unless the City Council by resolution specifically approves the delay or provisions of force majeure apply; grantee shall pay five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, the delinquency continues; 
(2)  Failure to provide, upon written request, data, documents, reports or information required to be supplied under this Franchise Ordinance; grantee shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that each violation occurs or continues; 
(3)  Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system as required herein; grantee shall pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues; 
(4)  Failure to provide in a continuing manner the types of services set forth in Sections 7357, 7358, 7359 and 7360, of this Franchise Ordinance, unless the City Council specifically approves a delay or change or the grantee has obtained modification of its obligation, or provisions of force majeure apply; the grantee shall pay five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that each noncompliance continues; 
(5)  Thirty (30) days following adoption of a resolution by the City Council determining a failure of the grantee to comply with system-wide operation, maintenance or technical standards, grantee shall pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day, or part thereof, that grantee violates such operation, maintenance or technical standards for portions of its system; 
(6)  For breach of any consumer service standard, as set forth in Section 7365 of this Franchise Ordinance above, Grantee shall pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues. A breach shall be interpreted to mean that the City has evidence of the failure by Grantee to comply with its obligations under this Franchise Ordinance in the nature of (i) either a single material breach or (ii) repetitive (three or more) minor breaches occurring within three (3) calendar months; 
(7)  For any other breach not listed in this section, the grantee shall pay one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day, or part thereof, that each violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  Access to Performance Bond. If grantee has failed to perform any of its obligations under this Franchise Ordinance, and such failure has not been remedied following notice and opportunity to cure within ten (10) days after receipt of written notice from the City, the City Manager may issue to grantee by certified mail a notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. The notice shall set forth the basis of the assessment, and shall inform the grantee that liquidated damages will be assessed from the date of the notice, unless the assessment notice is appealed for hearing before the City Council and the City Council rules that the failure has been corrected, or that an extension of the time or other relief should be granted. If Grantee desires a hearing before the City Council, it shall file a written notice of appeal by certified mail to the City Clerk within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages. After the hearing, if the City Council sustains in whole or in part the City Manager's assessment of liquidated damages, the City Manager may draw upon the performance bond required by Section 7364 of this Ordinance. Unless the City Council indicates to the contrary, such liquidated damages shall be assessed beginning with the date of the notice of intention to assess liquidated damages and continuing thereafter until such time as the violation ceases, as determined by the City Manager. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7370 - Termination, Revocation, Cancellation. 
(a)  Termination by City. In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the City, the City reserves the right to terminate, revoke or cancel this franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee in the event of a material breach of its terms and conditions which breach has not been remedied following notice and opportunity to cure as provided in Section 7369(b). 
(b)  Termination by Grantee upon Change in Law. Grantee may terminate this franchise and all of its obligations under this Ordinance at any time following sixty (60) days' prior written notice to the City (or such shorter prior written notice as may be required under an applicable FCC or federal court order) if, pursuant to an applicable final order by the FCC or a federal court, grantee determines in the exercise of its good faith legal judgment that it is prohibited by federal or State law from constructing or operating a cable system within the City. In such event, grantee shall have the right to lease or transfer ownership of its cable system to its affiliated telecommunications company, GTE California Incorporated, who shall be entitled to utilize such network in any manner permissible by federal and State law, including, but not limited to, the offering of an open video system or a substantially similar service. 
If grantee or GTE California Incorporated does provide an Open Video System or a substantially similar service as provided hereunder in this subsection, or provides any other substantially similar form of service which requires the filing of a tariff for such service, it shall include in its tariff or operating procedures for such service, or to the extent that no such tariff is required it shall nonetheless agree to sign in favor of the City, to the extent permitted by federal and State law, an agreement containing, provisions substantially similar to the provisions contained in this Ordinance covering the following: (1) providing to the City access to the number of PEG channels and ongoing financial support for development of PEG programming as described in this Ordinance, (2) paying to the City franchise-like fees not in excess of five (5) percent of its gross revenues from video programmers or cooperating with the City in charging and collecting from video programmers utilizing GTE's open video system franchise-like fees not in excess of five (5) percent of the gross revenues of such video programmers, and (3) constructing its network in accordance with the technical and construction requirements and permitting procedures set forth in this Ordinance. 
(c)  Conversion to Open Video System. Following sixty (60) days' prior written notice to the City, grantee may terminate this franchise and all obligations under this Ordinance at any time and lease or transfer ownership of its cable system to its affiliated telecommunications company, GTE California Incorporated, to utilize such network to provide an open video system or a substantially similar service, if it determines in the exercise of its good faith legal judgment that GTE California Incorporated will be permitted to include under federal and State law, and in fact does include, in its tariff or operating procedures for such service, or to the extent that no such tariff is required it is willing nonetheless to sign in favor of the City an agreement containing provisions substantially similar to the provisions contained in this Ordinance covering the following: (1) providing to the City access to the number of PEG channels and ongoing financial support for development of PEG programming as described in this Ordinance, (2) paying to the City franchise-like fees not in excess of five (5) percent of its gross revenues from video programmers or cooperating with the City in charging and collecting from video programmers utilizing GTE's open video service franchise-like fees not in excess of five (5) percent of the gross revenues of such video programmers, and (3) constructing its network in accordance with the technical and construction requirements and permitting procedures set forth in this Ordinance. 
(d)  Continuity of Obligations. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, if grantee terminates this franchise pursuant to subsections (b) or (c) of this section and transfers its cable system or the network assets of such system to one of its telecommunications affiliates, such as GTE California Incorporated, and if such affiliate then offers an open video system or a substantially similar service over such cable system or network assets, then such affiliate shall negotiate an agreement in good faith with the City within a period of three (3) months after such termination that complies with subsections (b) and (c) of this section and, to the extent possible, with the other terms and conditions of this Ordinance, to the extent that such compliance is not inconsistent with provisions of federal or State law and is consistent with the permissible operating business parameters of the new mode of grantee's operations (e.g., open video system). Such agreement shall have a term equivalent to the unexpired term of grantee's franchise at the time it is terminated pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(e)  Failure to Succeed in Market. Grantee shall have the right to terminate this franchise and all obligations under this franchise within ninety (90) days after the end of five (5) years from the effective date of this Ordinance, if at the end of such five (5) year period grantee does not then have subscribers on all of its cable systems served by its headend facilities in the City of Thousand Oaks, California, equal to at least ten (10) percent of the total homes passed and capable of receiving service from such cable system. Notice to terminate under this provision shall be given to the city in writing, with such termination to take effect no sooner than one hundred and twenty (120) days after giving such notice. Grantee shall also be required to give its then current subscribers not less than ninety (90) days prior written notice of its intent to cease operations. After termination, grantee shall be permitted to transfer its network assets to a telecommunications affiliate, such as GTE California Incorporated, to use for any lawful purpose, provided that such affiliate shall not be permitted to use such network assets to provide an open video system or a substantially similar service for a period of time equivalent to the unexpired term of grantee's franchise at the time cable service is terminated pursuant to this subsection. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7371 - Failure of City to enforce franchise obligations. 
Grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this Franchise Ordinance by any failure of the City upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7372 - Cumulative remedies. 
The rights and remedies of the parties pursuant to this Franchise Ordinance are cumulative, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, and shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any other rights or remedies which the parties may have with respect to the subject matter of this Ordinance. A waiver of any right or remedy by a party at one time shall not affect the exercise of such right or remedy or any other right or other remedy by such party at any other time. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7373 - Headings and captions. 
The headings contained in the this Franchise Ordinance are to facilitate reference only, and do not form a part of this Ordinance, and shall not in any way affect the construction or interpretation thereof. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7374 - Filing requirements. 
When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the City shall be filed with City Manager and with the office of the City Clerk. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7375 - Force majeure. 
In the event the grantee's performance of the terms, conditions or obligations required of it under this Franchise Ordinance is prevented by any cause or event not reasonably foreseeable and avoidable or otherwise not within the grantee's control, such inability to perform shall be excused and no penalties or sanctions of any nature shall be imposed upon the grantee as a result thereof. Causes or events not within the control of the grantee include, without limitation, strikes, labor strife, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, actions of any governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, severe or unusual weather conditions, natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires, power or communication failures, embargoes, quotas, rationing, material shortages, inability to secure materials, services or equipment from normal sources of supply following diligent efforts to do so and inability to secure approvals, consents or authorizations from any person upon such terms and conditions as are reasonably satisfactory to the grantee after diligent efforts to do so. The period of grantee's performance shall be extended by the period of any such delay. The grantee shall provide the City with written notice promptly following the grantee's knowledge of any such cause or event. Economic hardship or misfeasance or malfeasance of the grantee's shareholders, partners, directors, officers or employees shall not be deemed to be causes or events not within the control of the grantee. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7376 - Modification. 
Because the regulations and limitations applicable to cable television, multichannel video programming distributors, telephone companies and franchising are in transition, and no one is able to reasonably foresee the economic impact of changes in such rules or the terms and conditions under which other persons, including local exchange companies, will be authorized to provide video services within the city, should another person construct, operate or maintain a cable system, or otherwise utilize a public street or public right-of-way for the delivery of cable services or other communications services within grantee's service area (other than de minimus overlaps), on material terms and conditions which are in the aggregate significantly more favorable or less burdensome than those applied to grantee, taking into consideration the totality and reasonable proportionality of their respective obligations, but which are outside of the legal control of the City, such a development shall be deemed to be a change in conditions which is beyond the control of the grantee and the nonoccurrence of which was a basic assumption on which the requirements of this franchise was based, and grantee shall have the right under Section 625 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, to obtain modification of requirements for services, facilities, equipment, financial support, services relating to public, educational or governmental access, and other provisions of this Franchise if the cable operator demonstrates that (i) it is commercially impracticable for grantee to comply with such requirement, and (ii) the proposal by grantee for modification of such requirement is appropriate because of commercial impracticability. Any final decision by City under this subsection shall be made in a public proceeding. Such decision shall be made within one hundred twenty (120) days after receipt of such request by City, unless such one hundred twenty (120) day period is extended by mutual agreement of grantee and City. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7377 - Ordinance supersedes prior ordinances, resolutions and agreements. 
This Ordinance shall supersede, with respect to the terms and conditions of grantee's franchise and operations, all prior ordinances, resolutions, agreements and understandings. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7378 - Governing law provisions. 
The validity, construction and enforceability of this Ordinance shall be governed in all respects by the laws of the State of California applicable to agreements negotiated, executed and performed there, together with applicable federal law, including without limitation the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, and the Rules and Regulations of the FCC pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7379 - Business and calendar days defined. 
For purposes of this Ordinance, whenever reference is made to a number of days without qualification as to business or calendar days, such number of days shall be deemed to be calendar days. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7380 - Notice provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Franchise Ordinance, any notice, approval, consent, waiver or other communication required or permitted to be given or to be served upon any person in connection with this Franchise Ordinance shall be in writing. Such notice shall be personally served, sent by facsimile or telegram, or sent by first class, registered or certified U.S. mail (first-class, postage prepaid, with return receipt requested from the addressee only) and shall be deemed given (i) if personally served, when delivered to the person to whom such notice is addressed, (ii) if given by facsimile or telegram, when sent, or (iii) if given by mail, upon receipt by the addressee or upon the date of attempted delivery if not delivered to the addressee. Receipt of any notice given by facsimile or telegram shall be confirmed in writing sent by registered or certified mail in the manner prescribed by this section within forty-eight (48) hours after sent. Such notices shall be addressed to the party to whom such notice is to be given as follows: if to the grantee, at the administrative offices of the grantee, with a copy to the Legal Department of such parent company as is designated by notice from grantee to City; if to the City, to the City Manager, City of Port Hueneme, California. Either party may change the address to which notice is to be given by providing written notice to the other party in the manner provided in this section. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7381 - Acceptance and effective date of franchise. 
This franchise shall not become effective unless and until grantee has filed with the City Manager and the City Clerk its written acceptance of this franchise. Such acceptance shall be in a form satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7382 - Severability. 
If any section or provision of this Franchise Ordinance or any ordinance, law or document incorporated herein by reference is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unconstitutional or unenforceable, such holding shall be confined in its operation to the section or provision directly involved in the controversy in which such holding shall have been rendered and shall not in any way affect the validity of any other section or provision hereof. Under such a circumstance, the grantee shall, upon the City's request, meet and confer with the City to consider amendments to the Franchise Ordinance to meet the original intent of the parties, as the circumstances warrant and unless prohibited by law, provided, however, that the grantee, in its sole and exclusive discretion, is not required to enter an agreement with the City concerning such an amendment. Both the City and the grantee agree to be bound by all terms and conditions of this franchise except as may be finally determined to be unenforceable by a court of competent and appropriate jurisdiction with proper venue over this franchise, provided that the City or the grantee need not comply with any term or condition of this Franchise Ordinance which it is contesting in good faith by appropriate proceedings. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
7383 - Assignability. 
Grantee shall have the right to transfer the franchise granted by this Ordinance, subject to all terms and conditions of the franchise, to any entity, directly or indirectly owned or controlled by GTE Corporation, without requiring the consent of the City. Any other assignment by grantee, subject to all terms and conditions of the franchise, shall require the written consent of the City, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. 614 (part), 1997)  
Part C. - State Video Franchisees 
 
7384 - PEG fee established. 
In accord with Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n), any grantee of a franchise, or State franchisee, must pay to the City a fee for the support of public, education, and government programming (PEG) on network facilities or other uses allowed by law. 
(a)  The maximum amount of the PEG fee established by this Section 7384 is one (1) percent of gross revenues, as defined in this Code, the applicable City-issued franchise, or Public Utilities Code Section 5860(d). 
(b)  The PEG fee will be imposed upon thirty (30) calendar days written notice by the City Manager to the franchise, or State franchisee, that the PEG fee to support a PEG channel is activated and identifying the amount of the PEG fee. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7385 - Franchise fee established. 
For any State franchisee, the amount of the franchise fee imposed by Public Utilities Code Section 5840(q) shall be five (5) percent of gross revenues, as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5860(d). 
(a)  In accord with Public Utilities Code Section 5860(a), the City Manager will prepare and provide to State franchisees all necessary documentation supporting the percentage franchise fee paid by the incumbent cable operator serving the City. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7386 - Notices from State franchisees. 
Any notice a State franchisee is required to deliver to the City by five thousand eight hundred forty (5,840)(m) must be delivered to the City Manager. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7387 - City franchise—Limitation. 
Nothing in this Chapter is intended to limit or restrict in any way the imposition of any existing or future generally applicable, nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral tax, fee, or charge to a State franchisee, City franchisee or the services the franchisees provide. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7388 - Customer service provisions for State franchisees. 
(a)  All State franchisees must comply with all applicable State and federal laws and regulations regarding customer service and customer protection. 
(b)  The City Manager may review the performance of State franchisees for compliance with the customer service requirements specified in Public Utilities Code Section 5900 (the "Customer Service Standards"). 
(c)  If the City believes a material breach of the customer service standards has occurred, the City Manager must give the State franchisee written notice of any alleged material breach(es). The State franchisee must remedy the specified material breach(es) no later than thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice. 
(d)  If the State franchisee fails to remedy the specified material breach(es) within thirty (30) days, the City Manager may impose monetary penalties on the following schedule: 
(1)  Up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) for each occurrence of a material breach. 
(2)  For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(3)  For a third or further material breach of the same nature within twelve (12) months, up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of each material breach, not to exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) for each occurrence of the material breach. 
(e)  Any monetary penalty imposed under this section may be appealed by the State franchisee to the City Council. Appeals must be received in writing by the City Clerk within sixty (60) days of imposition of the penalty. The State franchisee may present any relevant written or oral evidence of its choice. The City Council may uphold or reverse, in whole or in part, the imposition of the monetary penalties. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7389 - PEG transmissions, content and programming. 
The City Manager shall ensure PEG transmissions, content, and programming provided by the City to a State franchisee is in a format compatible with the State franchisee's system. In the alternative, the transmissions, content, and programming may be provided in an industry standard format, in accord with Public Utilities Code Section 5870(g)(1). 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7390 - PEG channel facilities. 
For the duration of any City-issued franchise, if that franchisee has existing unsatisfied obligations under the franchise to pay to the City any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, educational, and government access channel facilities or institutional networks, the fee payable by each City and State franchisee shall be the franchisee's pro rata per subscriber share of the cash payment required to be paid by the City franchisee to the City for the costs of PEG channel facilities. 
(a)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the notice required by Public Utilities Code Section 5840(n), each City and State franchisee must provide to the City Manager a written statement of the number of its subscribers within the franchisee's service area in the City. 
(b)  Within forty-five (45) days of receipt all franchisee subscriber number statements, the City Manager must calculate the division of the cash payments among all City and State franchisees, and provide written notice to each franchisee of the franchisee's share of the cash payment. This amount may be expressed as a percentage of gross revenue or as an amount per subscriber, per month, or otherwise. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
7391 - Interconnection. 
To properly serve the City's interest in PEG programming, each State franchisee and City franchisee must comply with the PEG system interconnection requirements of Public Utility Code Section 5870. The City Manager, or City Manager's designee, may make any interconnection determinations of the City under Public Utility Code Section 5870, including requiring interconnection where the City franchisee and State franchisee fail to reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement. 
(Ord. 684 § 2 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5 - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS 
Sections: 
 
7401 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this Chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(a)  Commission means the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California. 
(b)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated services. 
(c)  Underground Utility District or District means an area in the City which is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited. 
(d)  Utility shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated services by means of electrical materials or devices.  
7402 - Public hearing by council. 
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. Prior to holding such public hearing, the Director of Public Works shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.  
7403 - Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.  
7404 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associate overhead structures therein as provided in Section 7403 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as said overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 7409 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove said facilities after said work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this Chapter.  
7405 - Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter, poles, overhead facilities and associate overhead structures may be installed and maintained in a District with the approval of the City Manager in order to provide emergency or temporary service.  
7406 - Other exceptions. 
Any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7403 hereof shall not apply to any of the following types of facilities, unless otherwise provided in such resolution: 
(a)  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director; 
(b)  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
(c)  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
(d)  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts; 
(e)  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street or alley; 
(f)  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication service; 
(g)  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts; 
(h)  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.  
7407 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7403 hereof, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the District created by said resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7403 hereof, together with a copy of this Chapter, to affected property owners as are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.  
7408 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7403 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under it applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.  
7409 - Responsibility of property owners. 
(a)  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 7408 and the termination facility on or within said building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. 
(b)  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a) of this Section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 7403 hereof, the Director of Public Works shall post written notice on the property being served and, thirty (30) days thereafter, may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to said property.  
7410 - Responsibility of city. 
City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 7403.  
7411 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this Chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 7403 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.  
Chapter 6 - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 
 
7450 - Purpose and intent. 
This Chapter implements the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251—1387 (sometimes referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act) and the California Water Code by prohibiting the discharge of any pollutant in the City to waters of the United States from a point source unless the discharge is authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) required by CWA § 402, 33 U.S.C. § 1342 and prohibits non-storm water discharges into the MS4. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7451 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by the regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Clean Water Act § 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions in an applicable permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board—Los Angeles, as such permits may be amended from time to time. 
Automotive repair shop" means a facility in any or one or more of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534 or 7536-7539. 
"Best management practices (BMPs)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants in discharges. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage, public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper clean-out of catch basins and proper waste handling and disposal. 
"City" means the City of Port Hueneme. 
"Development" means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial; commercial; retail; and other non-residential projects, including public agency projects; and mass grading for future construction. 
"Director" means the Public Works Director of the City and persons designated by and under the Director's instruction and supervision. 
"Discharge" when used without qualification means the discharge of a pollutant. 
"Discharge of a pollutant" means any addition of any pollutant to waters of the United States, to the City's MS4, or any addition of any pollutant to waters of the contiguous zone from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. Discharge of a pollutant also means additions of pollutants into waters of the United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man; discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a State, municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works. 
"EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
"Hazardous substances" means those substances designated as hazardous substances under Section 311(b)(2)(A) of the Clean Water Act, and listed in the table at 40 C.F.R. § 116.4. 
"Hearing Officer" means the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, who shall preside at administrative hearings authorized by this Chapter and issue final decisions on matters raised therein. 
"Illicit connection" means any man-made conveyance, device or artifice, that is connected to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, without a permit, through or by which an illicit discharge may be discharged. 
"Illicit discharge" means any discharge to the MS4 or directly to the waters of the United States that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit and discharges which are exempt or conditionally exempt in accordance with any applicable order of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region (RWQCB-LA). Illicit discharge includes, but is not limited to: 
(a)  Discharges of wash waters resulting from the hosing or cleaning of gas stations, automotive repair shops or other similar automotive services facilities in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534 or 7536-7539; 
(b)  Discharges if wash water from mobile auto washing and detailing; steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other similar mobile commercial and industrial operations; 
(c)  Discharges of runoff from areas where machinery or equipment which is leaking oil, other fluids or coolant; 
(d)  Discharges of runoff from storage areas of material containing grease, oil, or hazardous substances; 
(e)  Discharges of swimming pool water, including swimming pool backwash water, containing chlorine or biocides; 
(f)  Discharges of untreated runoff from the washing or hosing down of hazardous substances; 
(g)  Discharges of untreated runoff from the washing or hosing down of impervious surfaces in industrial or commercial areas including parking lots, streets, sidewalks, driveways, patios, plazas, work yards, and outdoor eating areas, unless required by state or local health and safety codes; 
(h)  Discharge from the washing out or hosing down of concrete trucks, pumps, tools or equipment; 
(i)  Discharges of litter, vegetation clippings, landscaping waste (green waste) sediment, and construction and demolition waste; 
(j)  Discharge of any fungicide, insecticide, herbicide or rodenticide banned under federal or state law; 
(k)  Discharges of food and food-related wastes, including, but not limited to grease, restaurant kitchen mat wash and rinse water, and trash container wash and rinse water; and 
(l)  Discharges to the City's MS4 or waters of the United States or the State which would cause or contribute to the violation of water quality standards receiving waters. 
The term illicit discharge shall not include the following types of non-storm water discharges, unless the RWQCB-LA determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limit violations: 
(a)  Flows from riparian habitats or wetlands; 
(b)  Diverted stream flows; 
(c)  Natural springs; 
(d)  Rising ground waters; 
(e)  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)]; 
(f)  Water line flushing; 
(g)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(h)  Foundation drains; 
(i)  Footing drains; 
(j)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(k)  Water from crawl space pumps; 
(l)  Reclaimed and potable irrigation water; 
(m)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(n)  Individual residential car washing; 
(o)  Sidewalk washing; or 
(p)  Discharges or flows from emergency fire fighting activities; 
"Invoice for costs" means the actual costs and expenses of the City, including, but not limited to administrative overhead, salaries, attorneys fees and costs and other expenses recoverable under law, incurred during any inspection or investigation or subsequent proceeding in which a notice of violation, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under this Chapter is utilized to obtain compliance with this Chapter. 
"Municipal separate storm sewer system" or "MS4" or "City's storm drain system" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels or storm drains) owned by City designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, into waters of the United States and which is not a combined sewer or part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit" means an authorization, license or equivalent control document issued by the US EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board or a Regional Water Quality Control Board, and includes a State General Permit and the permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board - Los Angeles Region, and entitled "WASTE DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF DISCHARGES WITHIN VENTURA COUNTY FLOOD CON-TROL DISTRICT, COUNTY OF VENTURA, AND THE CITIES OF VENTURA COUNTY," Order No. 00-108, (NPDES No. CAS 004002), or subsequent permits. 
"Person" means any individual firm, association, partnership, corporation, partnership, consortium, local, state or federal government agency, political subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above. 
"Pollutant" means a "pollutant" as defined in § 502(6) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1362(6) or incorporated into California Water Code § 13373, discharged into water. "Pollutant" shall not mean uncontaminated storm water, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility, or any substance, the discharge of which into the MS4, through best management practices, has been reduced to the maximum extent practicable, and shall not include those non-storm water discharges excluded from the definition of illicit discharge," unless the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limit violations. 
"Private Property" means any real property, irrespective of ownership. 
"Responsible party" means the person(s) identified in and responsible for compliance with the provisions of a storm water pollution prevention plan, storm water pollution control plan, State General Permit or National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit and includes the owner and operator of the property to which the plan relates. 
"State General Permit" means either the State General Industrial Activities Storm Water Permit or the State General Construction Activity Storm Water Permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the EPA revokes the in-lieu permit-ting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, then the term State General Permit shall also refer to any EPA-administered storm water control program for industrial and construction activities. 
"Storm water" means runoff from rain or storm activity, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
"Storm water pollution control plan" or "SWPCP" means a plan required by the City pursuant to this Chapter and in implementation of an applicable NPDES Permit. 
"Storm water pollution prevention plan" means a plan as required by a State General Permit. 
"Storm water quality management plan" means the Ventura Countywide Storm Water Quality Management Plan, as it may be amended from time to time. 
"Watercourse" means any natural or artificial channel for passage of water including, but not limited to, the VCFCD jurisdictional channels, (as described in the List of Channels within the Comprehensive Plan of the VCFCD as of October 4, 1993, and its amendments). 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 694, § 2, 11-16-09)  
7452 - Prohibition of illicit connections and illicit discharges. 
(a)  The discharge of pollutants to the City's storm drain system (MS4) is prohibited. All discharges of material other than storm water must be in compliance with a NPDES permit issued by the State of California or the U.S. EPA. 
(b)  No Person shall: 
(1)  Construct, use, maintain, operate and/or continue to utilize an illicit connection; 
(2)  Cause, allow or facilitate an illicit discharge; 
(3)  Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee, or independent contractor, to construct, main-tain, operate or utilize an illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate an illicit discharge; 
(4)  Use the City's storm drain system (MS4) or watercourses for the discharge/disposal of wastes including, but not limited to litter, landscape debris, construction and demolition waste; any fungicide, insecticide, herbicide or rodenticide banned under federal or state law; food and food-related wastes, including, but not limited to grease, restaurant kitchen mat wash and rinse water; and trash container wash and rinse water; or 
(5)  Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, kept, or maintained, in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk or other component of the City's storm drain system (MS4), any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets immediately prior to and for the purposes of collection are exempt from this prohibition. 
(c)  The prohibition on illicit connections in subsection (b), above, expressly includes, without limitation, all illicit connections regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(d)  Requirement to Eliminate Illicit Discharges. The City may require a person responsible for an illicit discharge to discontinue the illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, and, if necessary, to take measures to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illicit discharges. 
(e)  Requirement to Eliminate or Secure Approval for Illicit Connections. The City by written notice may require a person responsible for an Illicit Connection to the City's storm drain system (MS4) to eliminate or secure approval for the illicit connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this Chapter. If subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this Chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illicit discharge will no longer occur, said person may request City approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the City's discretion and shall be subject to such conditions as the City may determine; such reconnection or reinstallation shall be at the responsible person's expense. 
(f)  Requirement to Remediate. Whenever the City finds that an illicit discharge of pollutants is taking place or has occurred the City, by written notice to the responsible person may require that the illicit discharge cease, be remediated, and the affected property restored within a specified time, along with all other remedies available to the City. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7453 - Control of pollutants from sites of industrial and construction activity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this Chapter for any person or entity required under federal or state law to have a NPDES Permit for a facility or activity in the City to operate such a facility or activity in the City which discharges to the City's MS4 or waters of the United States or the State without a NPDES Permit. 
(b)  Any person or entity in the City required to have a NPDES Permit for a facility or activity in the City which discharges to the City's MS4 or waters of the United States or the State shall retain at such facility or activity the following documents which evidence compliance with permit requirements: 
(1)  A copy of the notice of intent to comply with the Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity or Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, where appropriate; 
(2)  A waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB where appropriate; 
(3)  A storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP), (iv) any storm water quality data; and 
(4)  A plan containing urban runoff mitigation features where appropriate. Any person or entity required to comply with the Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity or Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity for a facility in the City shall provide a copy of the notice of intent to comply, and undertake all other activities required by any NPDES General Permit applicable to such discharges. Copies of such notification shall be provided to the City when notice is provided to the State Water Resources Control Board. 
(c)  Any person or entity in the City required to have a NPDES Storm Water Permit for a facility or activity in the City which discharges to the City's MS4 or waters of the United States or the State, upon request from a duly authorized officer of the City, shall make available to the City all of the documents described in subsection (b) of this Section during any City storm water-related educational or enforcement program and to demonstrate compliance with such NPDES Storm Water Permit, including but not limited to the adequacy of and compliance with any SWPPP required thereunder. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7454 - Planning and land development. 
(a)  On and after January 27, 2001, all development within the City shall be undertaken in accordance with: 
(1)  Any conditions and requirements established by an applicable NPDES permit which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of the discharge of pollutants in storm water from the project site; 
(2)  A storm water pollution prevention plan, which shall be prepared in accordance with a State-wide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity or Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, if applicable; 
(3)  A storm water pollution control plan (SWPCP) if required by an applicable NPDES Storm Water Permit; 
(4)  Any condition and/or requirements established by the City to protect specific watersheds or drainage basins. 
(5)  Any applicable requirement of a Storm Water Quality Urban Impact Mitigation Plan (SQUIMP) required by an NPDES Permit or this Code. 
(b)  Proof of compliance with any applicable Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity or Statewide General NPDES Permit for Storm Water Discharges Associated with Construction Activity, may be required in a form acceptable to the City prior to or as a condition of approval of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(c)  Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a SWPCP shall not exempt any person from the requirement to comply independently with all applicable provisions of this Chapter. 
(d)  Each SWPCP shall include the rationale for selecting or rejecting BMPs, and shall be signed by the project architect, or engineer of record, in the form set forth in the applicable NPDES Storm Water Permit. Each SWPCP shall include a signed certification from the land owner in the form set forth in the applicable NPDES Storm Water Permit. 
(e)  The owners of a development and their successors and assigns shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved SWPCP. Each failure by an owner of the property, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of an approved SWPCP shall constitute a violation of this Chapter. 
(f)  The costs and expenses of the City incurred in the review, approval, or revision of any SWPCP or other development requirements (or in the approval or revision of any such) shall be assessed to the property owner or responsible party and shall be due and payable to the City. The City may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the property owner or Responsible Party. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7455 - Best management practices and requirements. 
(a)  A storm water pollution control plan (SWPCP) required under this Chapter shall include appropriate best management practices (BMPs) referred to in any applicable NPDES Storm Water Permit. The City may adopt requirements identifying appropriate best management practices (BMPs) for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of the City's storm drain system (MS4). If a relevant BMP has been promulgated by the City or any federal, State of California, and/or Regional agency, for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of Pollutants to the City's storm drain system (MS4) or watercourses, every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such BMP. 
(b)  Responsibility to Implement Best Management Practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to this Chapter, any person engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property, which will or may result in pollutants entering the City's storm drain system (MS4) shall implement best management practices to the extent they are technologically and economically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7456 - Inspections. 
(a)  Right to Inspect. Prior to commencing any inspection as herein below authorized, the Director shall obtain the consent of the owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of the property or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. 
(b)  Entry to Inspect. The Director may enter public or private property to investigate the source or potential source of an illicit discharge to the City's storm drain system (MS4) or watercourses located within the City at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance. In the event the owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the Director is empowered to seek assistance from the City Attorney in obtaining such entry. 
(c)  Compliance Assessments. The Director may inspect public or private property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this Chapter, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property; 
(2)  Identifying point(s) of discharge of all waste-water, process water systems and pollutants; 
(3)  Investigating the natural slope at the location, the runoff coefficient, drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems (including roads with drainage systems, catch basin, curbs, gutters, man-made channels and storm drains); 
(4)  Establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a City's storm drain system (MS4); 
(5)  Locating any illicit connection or the source of any illicit discharge; 
(6)  Evaluating compliance with any storm water pollution control plan; and 
(7)  Evaluating compliance with any storm water permit. 
(d)  Records Review. The Director may conduct such inspection as is necessary to determine compliance with prohibitions against illicit discharges 
(e)  Sample and Test. The Director may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the City's storm drain system (MS4). The Director may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including but not limited to smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The Director may photograph or videotape, make measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property. 
(f)  Monitoring. The Director may undertake monitoring and analysis including both the construction and maintenance of monitoring devices, or require the owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of the property to undertake construction and maintenance of devices, at their own expense, for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the City's storm drain system (MS4). 
(g)  Test Results The owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of property subject to inspection shall provide copies of test results to the City and on submission of a written request to the Director, shall be entitled to copy test results conducted by the Director. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7457 - Administrative remedies. 
(a)  Notice of Violation. The Director shall review, and, if appropriate, may issue and serve a notice of violation on the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property, as to which an illicit connection or illicit discharge exists. The notice of violation shall: 
(1)  Identify the provision(s) of this Chapter, the applicable storm water pollution prevention plan, storm water pollution control plan or NPDES or other permit alleged to have been violated; 
(2)  State that continued noncompliance may result in civil, criminal or administrative enforcement actions against the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations; 
(3)  State a compliance date that must be met by the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations; 
(4)  Describe the abatement required; and 
(5)  Order remediation work. 
(b)  The notice of violation, where deemed applicable by the Director, may include the following terms and requirements: 
(1)  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent threatened or future unauthorized illicit discharges, including but not limited to, the threat of an illicit discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area; 
(2)  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent; 
(3)  Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection; 
(4)  Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact storm water runoff; 
(5)  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent continued or threatened violations of this Chapter including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with BMPs guidance documents promulgated by any federal agency, the State of California or the City; and 
(6)  Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the storm water quality management plan, a storm water pollution prevention plan, storm water pollution control plan or NPDES permit or this Chapter. 
(c)  Cease and Desist Orders. 
(1)  The Director shall review, and, if the Director determines it to be appropriate, may issue a cease and desist order where the public health and safety requires the same, directing the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property and/or any other person responsible for a violation of this Chapter to: 
(A)  Immediately discontinue any Illicit Connection or Illicit Discharge to the storm drain system; 
(B)  Immediately contain or divert any flow of non-storm water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this Chapter or other law; 
(C)  Immediately discontinue any other violation of this Chapter; 
(D)  Clean up the area affected by the violation. 
(2)  The Director may direct by cease and desist order that the owner or other person in charge of day-to-day operations or any permittee under any applicable permit, immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable plan, permit or this Chapter. 
(d)  Recovery of Costs. The Director shall serve an invoice for costs upon the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property, or any other responsible person who is subject to a notice of violation or a cease and desist order. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City. If any owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations, permittee or responsible party, or any other person fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with this Chapter, then the City may institute collection proceedings. 
(e)  Service of Notices. Any notice of violation, cease and desist order or invoice for costs (collectively, "order") served pursuant to this Chapter shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Each order shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in this Chapter. 
(2)  The order shall include the address of the affected property and be addressed to the owner and the person in charge of day-to-day operations of the property as shown on the most recently issued equalized assessment roll or as may otherwise appear in the current records of the City. 
(3)  If the owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of affected property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the Director, the order shall be deemed served ten (10) business days after posting on the property. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7458 - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an order may appeal from the issuance of such order in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Any such appeal shall be filed within fifteen (15) days of the date of service of the order; 
(2)  No such appeal shall be valid for any purpose unless it is timely filed and unless a filing and processing fee is paid contemporaneously with the filing thereof in an amount as set by city council resolution; 
(3)  That upon the timely filing of such an appeal, the hearing officer shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal as expeditiously as is possible; 
(4)  At the time of such hearing, the hearing officer shall permit any interested person to present any relevant testimony bearing on the matters involved in the issuance of the order which is the subject of the appeal. The hearing officer need not follow the strict provisions of the rules of evidence as utilized in a judicial proceeding but shall follow the substance of such rules to the end that the decision rendered is based upon reliable relevant evidentiary material. The hearing officer's decision shall be final and con-elusive and subject only to judicial review. 
(b)  The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this Chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this Chapter shall file such action within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7459 - Public nuisances. 
Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this Chapter, including but not limited to the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any illicit discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance pursuant to and may be abated and punished as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7460 - Non-exclusive remedies. 
Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this Chapter shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7461 - Violation of other laws. 
Any person in violation of this Chapter also may be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act or the Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil and criminal liability. Accordingly, the City is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to federal Clean Water Act Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The City may notify EPA Region IX, the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this Chapter (Ord 638 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 7 - STANDARD WATER QUALITY URBAN IMPACT MITIGATION PLAN IMPLEMENTATION 
Sections: 
 
7480 - Limits of Chapter. 
Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to: 
(a)  Infringe any right or power guaranteed by the California Constitution, including any vested property right; or, 
(b)  Require any action inconsistent with any applicable and lawfully adopted General Plan, Specific Plan, Plan Amendment, or Building Code that conforms to the laws of the State of California and the requirements of this Chapter; or, 
(c)  Restrict otherwise lawful land use except as authorized by the laws of the State of California, subject to the limitations of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 636 § 1(part), 2001)  
7481 - Scope of Chapter. 
This Chapter shall apply only to the City's approval of discretionary projects (within the meaning of the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code § 21000 et seq.) for new development or redevelopment in the categories below which have not received development/planning permit approval or been deemed complete for processing prior to July 27, 2000: 
(a)  Single-family hillside residences on graded hillside sites; 
(b)  100,000 square foot commercial development; 
(c)  Automotive repair shops (SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, 7536-7539); 
(d)  Retail gasoline outlets; 
(e)  Restaurants (SIC code 5812); 
(f)  Home Subdivisions often (10) or more dwelling units; 
(g)  Location within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to an environmentally sensitive area; 
(h)  Parking lots with five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious parking or access surfaces or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces and potentially exposed to storm water runoff, as defined in this Chapter. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7482 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this Chapter, unless clearly inapplicable. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this Chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by the regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Clean Water Act § 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions in "WASTE DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF DISCHARGES WITHIN VENTURA COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT, COUNTY OF VENTURA AND THE CITIES OF VENTURA COUNTY," Regional Board Order No. 00-108, (NPDES No. CAS 004002), or subsequently-issued permit issued to the City by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board—Los Angeles, as such permits may be amended from time to time. 
"100,000 square foot commercial development" means any commercial development that creates at least 100,000 square feet of impermeable area, including, but not limited to parking areas. (See "Commercial development" as defined below.) 
"Automotive Repair Shop" means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539. 
"Best Management Practice" (BMP) means any schedule of activities, prohibition of practices, maintenance procedure, program, technology, process, siting criteria, operational methods or measures, or other management practices or engineered systems, which when implemented, prevent, control, remove, or reduce pollution. 
"Commercial development" means any development on private land that is not residential or a site of an industrial activity, as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14). "Commercial development" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, multi-apartment buildings, car wash facilities, mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes not within the scope of 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14). 
"Directly Adjacent" means situated within two hundred (200) feet of the contiguous zone required for the maintenance, function, or structural stability of an environmentally sensitive area. 
"Directly Connected Impervious Area" (DCIA) means area covered by a building, impermeable pavement and/or other impervious surfaces which drains directly into a storm drain without first flowing across permeable land area (e.g., a lawn). 
"Discharger" means the Ventura County Flood Control District (VCFCD), the County of Ventura and the Cities of Camarillo, Fillmore, Moorpark, Ojai, Oxnard, Port Hueneme, San Buenaventura, Santa Paula, Simi Valley and Thousand Oaks, when referred to jointly; 
"Environmentally sensitive area" means an area "in which plant or animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which would be easily disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments" (California Public Resources Code § 30107.5). Areas subject to storm water mitigation requirements are: areas designated as an Area of Special Biological Significance (ASBS) by the State Water Resources Control Board, an area designated as a significant natural resource by the California Resources Agency, or an area identified by the Discharger as environmentally sensitive for water quality purposes., based on the Regional Board Basin Plan and Clean Water Act Section 303(d) Impaired Waterbodies List for the County of Ventura. 
"Hillside" means a parcel in an area with known erosive soil conditions, where the development will require grading on any natural slope which is twenty-five percent (25%) or greater and cut or fill slopes. 
"New development" means the subdivision of land, or the construction of structures, or other impervious surfaces, or both. 
"Parking lot" means an area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally or for business or commerce, which contains five thousand (5,000) square feet, or more, or twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces, and which is potentially exposed to storm water. 
"Permit" means, unless the context indicates reference to another permit, the "WASTE DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL STORM WATER AND URBAN RUNOFF DISCHARGES WITHIN VENTURA COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT, COUNTY OF VENTURA AND THE CITIES OF VENTURA COUNTY," Regional Board Order No. 00-108, (NPDES No. CAS 004002), or subsequent permit issued to the City by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board—Los Angeles, as such permits may be amended from time to time. 
"Redevelopment" means, on an already developed site, the creation or addition of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious surfaces. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint or addition or replacement of a structure; structural development including an increase in gross floor area and/or exterior construction or remodeling; replacement of impervious surface that is not part of a routine maintenance activity; and land disturbing activities related with structural or impervious surfaces. Where Redevelopment results in an increase of less than fifty percent (50%) of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to these SQUIMPs, the design standards apply only to the addition, and not to the entire development. 
"Restaurant" means a stand-alone facility where prepared food and drinks are sold for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshments stands selling prepared food and drinks for immediate consumption. (See SIC Code 5812). ("Restaurant" does not include co-located stalls or food counters in general purpose establishments such as markets and grocery stores.) 
"Retail gasoline outlet" means any facility where gasoline and lubricating oils are sold. 
"Source control BMP" means any schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices, or operational practices that aim to prevent storm water pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. 
"Storm event" means a rainfall event that produces more than 0.1 inch of precipitation separated from the previous storm event by at least seventy-two (72) hours of dry weather. 
"Structural control BMP" means any structural facility designed and constructed to mitigate the adverse impacts of urban runoff pollution (e.g., a canopy or a structural enclosure). This category may include both treatment control BMPs and source control BMPs. 
"Treatment" means the use of physical, chemical, or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include, but are not limited to filtration, gravity settling, media absorption, biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation, and UV radiation. 
"Treatment control BMP" means any engineered system designed to remove pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration, biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological, or chemical process. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7483 - Rate of discharge. 
No new development shall increase the peak rate of discharge of storm water from the developed site if this increase would make downstream erosion more probable. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7484 - Subdivision design. 
Unless inconsistent with vested rights, the site design for all subdivisions subject to this Chapter, to the maximum extent practicable, shall: 
(a)  Concentrate or cluster new development on portions of the site while leaving the remaining land in a natural undisturbed condition; 
(b)  Limit clearing and grading of native vegetation to the minimum extent practicable, consistent with the construction of lots, and to allow access and provide fire protection; 
(c)  Maximize the use of trees and other vegetation by adding vegetation, clustering tree areas and promoting the use of native and/or drought tolerant plants; 
(d)  Promote natural vegetation by the use of parking lot islands and other landscaped areas; and 
(e)  Preserve riparian areas and wetlands. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7485 - Best management practices (BMPs). 
(a)  On the date this Chapter takes effect, those best management practices which are listed in the Storm Water Quality Urban Impact Mitigation Plan, Appendix A of the Permit, as it may be amended or reissued, shall be incorporated by reference into this Code and shall remain in effect until the City Council shall adopt by Resolution a guidebook prepared or recommended by the City Manager, categorizing development and best management practices for each category. 
(b)  The City Manager from time to time may revise the guidebook, and the City Council may adopt these revisions by Resolution. 
(c)  No best management practice other than a structural or treatment control best management practice shall be used in any development regulated under this Chapter, unless the permit or the guidebook refers to or recommends that practice. 
(d)  No structural or treatment control best management practice may be used in any development regulated under this Chapter unless the permit or the guidebook refers to or recommends that practice. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7486 - Control of erosion of slopes and channels. 
Best management practices shall be used on slopes or channels in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter and shall: 
(a)  Convey runoff from tops of slopes and stabilize disturbed slopes; 
(b)  Eliminate or reduce flow to natural drainage systems, and, for flows which cannot be eliminated, utilize natural drainage systems, rather than artificial drainage systems, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(c)  Stabilize soil at permanent channel crossings; 
(d)  Vegetate slopes with native or drought tolerant species known to control erosion, when practicable; and, 
(e)  Dissipate concentrated flows before they enter unlined channels (Ord 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7487 - Signage of storm drains. 
In the project area of new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter, a notice that dumping in storm drains and catch basins is illegal shall be: 
(a)  Stenciled in paint or other permanent means at all storm drain inlets and catch basins within the project area; 
(b)  Posted at all known public accesses to natural or artificial drainage channels within the project area; and, 
(c)  Maintained to preserve the sign. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7488 - Outdoor storage of materials. 
(a)  All materials stored outdoors in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter which, if exposed to storm water, may reasonably be expected to add pollutants to it, shall be thoroughly isolated from contact: 
(1)  With storm water, by enclosure in a structure; or, 
(2)  With storm water, by a surrounding curb or other containment structure. 
(b)  The storage area must be completely covered: 
(1)  By impermeable paving; and, 
(2)  Any structure, by an overhead covering that adequately diverts precipitation away from the ground between the material and the surrounding containment structure. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7489 - Outdoor trash storage areas. 
Except where they serve only single-family residences, solid waste containers in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter shall be stored in areas that: 
(a)  Are isolated from contact with storm water originating outside the storage area; and, 
(b)  Are surrounded with a barrier sufficient to prevent trash from being transported out of the storage area, except during collection. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7490 - Maintenance of Best Management Practices. 
(a)  Every person applying to the City for approval of any new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter, as part of that application, in a signed writing, shall agree to maintain any structural or treatment control best management practice required by the permit or this Chapter to be implemented in that development through means such as a covenant running with the land (such as covenants, conditions and restrictions, commonly known as CC&Rs), CEQA mitigation measures, conditional use permit, or other legal agreement (collectively "Agreement"). 
(b)  The Agreement described in subsection (a) of this section shall remain in force until ownership of the developed property has been entirely transferred, and upon transfer, shall be binding on the new owner(s). 
(Ord. 636 § I (part), 2001)  
7491 - Design standards for Structural or Treatment Control Best Management Practices. 
Except as this Chapter may specifically exempt, every structural or treatment control best management practice implemented pursuant to this Chapter in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter, for the area contributing to that practice: 
(a)  Shall be adequate to protect from flooding those parts of the contributing area adjacent to drainage channels, according to design criteria the (City Public Works or Engineering Agency) may establish; 
(b)  Volume-Based post-construction structural or treatment control BMPs shall be adequate to mitigate (infiltrate or treat): 
(1)  For the volume of storm water that, as determined by the formula recommended in 'Urban Run-off Quality Management, WEF Manual of Practice No. 23/ASCE Manual of Practice No. 87 (1998), may be collected from the contributing area during a twenty-four hour period in which the total storm water runoff exceeds eighty-five percent (85%) of all runoff volumes that have been measured for twenty-four hour periods for that same area; or, 
(2)  To treat, by the method recommended in California Storm Water Best Management Practices Handbook—Industrial/Commercial (1993), or the Ventura Countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program Land Development Guidelines and as determined there, eighty percent (80%) or more volume treatment of the annual volume of storm water runoff from the contributing area; or, 
(3)  For the volume of storm water runoff from the contributing area produced by a storm event of 0.75 inches. 
(c)  Flow-based post-construction structural or treatment control BMPs shall be sized to handle the flow from: 
(1)  Ten percent (10%) of the fifty-year design flow rate, or 
(2)  A flow that would result in the treatment of the same percentage of runoff if treated using volumetric standards, set forth in subsection (b), above; or 
(3)  A Storm Event equal to or greater than .2? per hour intensity; or 
(4)  A Storm Event equal to or greater than twice the eighty-fifth percentile hourly rainfall intensity for Ventura County. 
(d)  Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply to any land area of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet being developed or redeveloped for use by any restaurant, or any retail gasoline outlet. 
(e)  Where redevelopment results in an increase of less than fifty percent (50%) of the impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing development was not subject to these SQUIMPs, the design standards apply only to the addition, and not to the entire development. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7492 - Loading docks. 
In any 100,000 square foot commercial development or in any automotive repair shop, the design of any outdoor loading dock area in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter shall: 
(a)  Use an overhead covering that prevents the entry of storm water; or, 
(b)  Prevent the entry of storm water by diverting it away; and, 
(c)  Not permit the flow of storm water from any truck well into a storm drain system. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7493 - Repair and maintenance bays. 
In any 100,000 square foot commercial development or in any automotive repair shop, in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter, the design of any repair or maintenance bay shall: 
(a)  Prevent the entry of storm water by diverting it away or by locating such bays indoors; and, 
(b)  Use a drainage system that collects all water from washing and from leaks or spills to a sump for collection and disposal; and, 
(c)  Does not conduct storm water from the bay to a storm drain system. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7494 - Wash areas. 
The design of any wash area for motor vehicles or equipment in new development or redevelopment subject to this Chapter shall include: 
(a)  An adequate overhead covering: and, 
(b)  A device that clarifies or otherwise pretreats all wash water; and, 
(c)  A drain conducting all treated wash water to a sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7495 - Restaurants. 
The design of any restaurant subject to this Chapter shall include an area for the washing or cleaning of equipment, which: 
(a)  If indoors, shall: 
(1)  Be self-contained; 
(2)  Use a grease trap; and, 
(3)  Use a drain conducting all waste water to a sanitary sewer; and, 
(b)  If outdoors, shall: 
(1)  Use an overhead covering adequate to prevent contact with storm water; 
(2)  Be covered with impermeable paving; 
(3)  Be surrounded by a curb or other containment; and, 
(4)  Use a drain conducting all wastewater to a sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7496 - Retail gasoline outlets. 
All fuel dispensing areas in any retail gasoline outlet subject to this Chapter shall: 
(a)  Be covered by a structure that: 
(1)  Extends outward at least as far as the grade break at all points; and, 
(2)  Diverts all storm water away from the fueling area. 
(b)  Be paved with a material, other than asphaltic concrete, that is impermeable to water and has a smooth surface with a slope of not less than two percent (2%) but not more than four percent (4%); 
(c)  Be separated from the rest of the site by a grade break that, to the maximum extent practical, prevents storm water from entering the fueling area; 
(d)  Extend at least six and one-half (6 ½) feet from the outermost corner of any fuel dispenser, or one (1) foot more than the combined length of the dispensing hose and nozzle, whichever distance is less. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7497 - Parking lots. 
To the maximum extent practical, all parking lots subject to this Chapter shall minimize offsite transport of pollutants by using the following design criteria and BMPs: 
(a)  Minimizing impervious land coverage; 
(b)  Providing for effective treatment or infiltration of storm water before it is discharged into storm drains; and, 
(c)  Use of operational and maintenance measures to remove heavy metals, oil and grease, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7498 - Violations and penalties—Nuisances—Remedies. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with this Code, to violate any provision of this Chapter. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this Chapter shall also be and constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare and is declared and deemed a public nuisance pursuant to and may be abated and punished as provided in this Code. 
(b)  Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this Chapter shall be nonexclusive and it is within the discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation. 
(c)  Any person in violation of this Chapter also may be in violation of the federal Clean Water Act, the Porter-Cologne Act or other laws and may be subject to sanctions including civil and criminal liability. Accordingly, the City is authorized to file a citizen's suit pursuant to the Clean Water Act, to pursue other remedies, and to report an alleged violation to the US EPA the Regional Water Quality Control Board, or any other appropriate Federal, State or local agency of any alleged violation of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7499 - Inspections. 
(a)  The City Manager and such officers as the City Manager may designate shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
(b)  As necessary, these officers may, at a reasonable time and in a manner authorized by the laws of California, enter and make inspections on any property regulated under this Chapter. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7500 - Fees. 
The City Council may establish and fix by Resolution the amount of fees for services provided under this Chapter, as authorized under Sections 66016 and 66018 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
7501 - Waiver. 
(a)  Any person required under this Chapter to implement a Structural or Treatment Control Best Management Practice may petition to the City Council to waive that requirement as impractical, provided the petitioner in good faith has considered and rejected as not feasible all such practices available. 
(b)  The City Council may waive a Structural or Treatment Control Best Management Practice as impractical if: 
(1)  Inadequate space for treatment exists on a redevelopment project; or, 
(2)  Soil conditions disfavor the use of infiltration; or, 
(3)  The natural land surface where the BMP would be located lies: 
(A)  Above a known unconfined aquifer; or, 
(B)  Less than ten (10) feet above an existing or potential source of drinking water. 
(c)  Any petition for waiver not falling within the foregoing categories shall be forwarded to the Regional Board for consideration. 
(d)  If a waiver is granted under subsection (b), above, the waiver shall be conditioned on the petitioner's payment into a storm water mitigation fund of an amount equal to the petitioner's savings as a result of the grant of the waiver, without subtracting the cost to the petitioner of applying for the waiver. 
(Ord. 636 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 8 - LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS 
Sections: 
 
7600 - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the City of Port Hueneme to promote water conservation. These Landscape Water Conservation Standards are intended to promote water conservation while allowing the maximum possible flexibility in designing healthy, attractive, and cost effective water efficient landscapes. 
These Landscape Water Conservation Standards must be used in conjunction with the City of Port Hueneme Land Development Provisions for Landscaping commencing with §10302. Where conflicts in language may exist between these Landscape Water Conservation Standards and the City's Land Development Provisions for Landscaping, the more restrictive water conserving language prevails. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7601 - Applicability. 
Compliance with these Landscape Water Conservation Standards is mandatory for all new or altered landscaping proposed as a part of a development project that is subject to discretionary review by the City of Port Hueneme. These standards are not mandatory for local, state, or federal historical sites; ecological restoration projects; public botanical or arboretum collections; or individual private rear yards, enclosed by a wall/fence of single-family residences, planned residential groups, and other individual and multi-family residences with a private walled/fenced yard or patio areas, unless required by a discretionary permit. 
Cemeteries are exempt from compliance with all provisions of this Chapter, except § 7603(D). 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7602 - Definitions. 
A.  Landscape Area: All planting areas where new or altered landscaping is proposed as a part of a new development proposal. 
B.  ET: Evapotranspiration is the approximate summation of water losses through evaporation from soil and transpiration from the plants during a specified period of time. 
C.  ETo: Reference Evapotranspiration is the approximation of water loss expressed in inches per year from a field of four (4) to seven (7) inch tall cool season grass that is not water stressed. 
D.  ET Adjustment Factor: A factor used to set an efficiency goal, that when applied to ETo adjusts for plant factor and irrigation efficiency, two (2) of the major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to a landscape. 
E.  Plant Factor: A factor that when multiplied by the ETo, estimates the amount of water used by a given plant species. 
F.  Water Wise Plants: Those plants that are evaluated as needing "moderate" (40-60% of ETo), "low" (10-30% of ETo) and "very low" (< 10% of ETo) amounts of water as defined and listed by Water Use Classifications of Landscape Species (WUCOLS) available at: 
Department of Water Resources 
Bulletins and Reports 
P.O. Box 942836 
Sacramento, California 94236-0001 
Other sources of water wise plant classifications may be used if approved by the City's Director of Community Development. 
G.  Turf: A groundcover surface of mowed grass with an irrigation water need of greater than 30% of the ETo. 
H.  Weather Based Irrigation Controller: An irrigation controller that automatically adjusts the irrigation schedule based on changes in the weather. 
I.  Landscape Plan: Design plans with a planting plan, irrigation plan, and plans with supporting detail sheets to include notes and/or specifications. 
J.  Water Budget Calculation: The Maximum Annual Applied Water Allowance must be calculated using this formula: 
MAWA 	= 	(ETo) (0.62) [0.70 x LA + 0.30 x SLA] 
MAWA 	= 	Maximum Applied Water Allowance (maximum gallons per year available for the project). 
ETo 	= 	Reference Evapotranspiration (43.5 inches per year for Port Hueneme). 
0.62 	= 	Conversion Factor (inches to gallons). 
0.70 	= 	ET Adjustment Factor (as designated by the State of California). 
LA 	= 	Landscape Area (square feet, including SLA). 
SLA 	= 	Special Landscape Area (square feet). 
0.30 	= 	The additional ET Adjustment Factor for the Special Landscape Area. 
 
K.  Special Landscape Area: Including park and recreational areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ET adjustment factor not to exceed 1.0. 
L.  New Development: Means a new building on a vacant site, an addition to an existing building on a site, a new building on a developed site, or a change in land use type any of which requires a discretionary permit from the City. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7603 - Compliance requirements. 
Applicants for New Development proposing new or altered landscaping shall comply with each of the following requirements in the design, installation, and maintenance of the landscaped area unless an exception is granted pursuant to § 7604. 
A.  Landscape Plan: Applicants must submit a detailed Landscape Plan together with the New Development construction and engineering plans including a horticultural soils report based upon soil samples from the Landscape Site with laboratory recommendations for all soil preparation and maintenance fertilization. The Landscape Plan must incorporate recommendations of the soil analysis report and depict the landscaped area and all existing landscaping to remain on the lot as determined by the Department of Community Development. Any plant may be selected providing that the Landscape Area be designed to be irrigated at no more than 0.70 of the reference evapotranspiration (ETo) and cannot exceed the MAWA. The City reserves the right to modify plans in quantity and quality of the landscape to meet the Landscape Water Conservation Standards requirements. 
B.  Use of Turf and Water Wise Plants: 
1.  The landscape area of projects proposing exclusively commercial or industrial uses must be designed without the use of turf and with one hundred percent (100%) water wise plants. The exception to this is where a turf type is specified for any required bio-swale or bio-filter systems or areas adjacent to pedestrian traffic where walking travel or crossings are expected such as at corner lot locations or linear areas located along pedestrian routes. 
2.  Turf is the appropriate choice in parkways where vehicle parking is permitted adjacent to the parkway curb. The term "Parkway" is defined in § 6040(c). The parkway may include one (1) or a maximum of two (2) non-permanent hardscape areas per lot frontage where space permits. The non-permanent hardscape area can be pervious pavers, decomposed granite, brick on sand, concrete pavers, or other materials approved by the Director of Public Works and may serve as a pedestrian landing between the parkway curb and the sidewalk. Each non-permanent hardscape area may be no larger than 4'-0? in width and be installed and sized in such a manner that it can be easily removed should the City or utility company need to do work in the parkway in the future. The pedestrian landing area must be a minimum of 5'-0? away from any street tree and 3'-0? away from any meter boxes, cable boxes, transformers, street lights, or other objects that may be in the parkway. 
3.  Where parking is not permitted adjacent to the parkway curb, the parkway must be designed using one hundred percent (100%) water wise plants. 
4.  The landscape area of single family residential, multi-family residential, mixed use, and institutional type of projects shall be designed with no more than forty percent (40%) of the landscaped area in turf or plants that are not water wise plants. In the case of single family residences and other residences with a rear yard that is enclosed by a wall/fence separate from any other residence's rear yard or common area, the area to be used in the calculation of "landscape area" shall only include the front yards and any side yard outside the individual dwelling unit's privacy area (typically, a fenced or walled area). Approved turf parkways are not a part of the forty percent (40%) turf limitation. 
5.  Turf is not permitted in medians or parking lot landscape finger planters. 
6.  Turf shall not be used on slopes of twenty percent (20%) (5:1) or greater within the landscape area. 
7.  Notwithstanding requirements 1 and 2 above, additional turf areas may be approved by the City of Port Hueneme for areas designed and used for outdoor sporting and recreational activities or for an approved functional use. Approved turf areas may be watered at 1.0 of the reference evapotranspiration (ETo). 
C. Mulch: The landscape area, except those portions of the landscaped area planted in turf, must be covered with mulch material to an average thickness of at least three (3) inches throughout. In areas with groundcovers planted from flats, mulch shall be installed to an average thickness of one and one-half (1½) inches. Additional mulch material shall be added from time to time as necessary in order to maintain the required depth of mulch. 
D. Irrigation: All new or altered irrigation systems proposed as part of a development proposal must incorporate the following requirements in their design, installation, and maintenance: 
1.  Irrigation systems must be designed and installed to avoid overspray and runoff. Valves shall be separated for individual hydrozones based on plant water needs and sun/shade requirements. 
2.  Water Budget Calculations set forth in § 7602(J) above must be shown on Irrigation Plans. 
3.  An automatic irrigation system is required and must include a weather based irrigation controller with a rain shut off sensor. 
4.  Areas less than eight (8) feet wide are a particular challenge and must be irrigated with appropriately selected equipment that provides the proper amount of water coverage without causing overspray on to paved surfaces. 
5.  All sprinklers must have matched precipitation rates within each valve and circuit. All irrigation systems must be designed to include optimum distribution uniformity, head to head spacing, and setbacks from walkways and pavement. 
6.  All irrigation systems must provide check valves at the low end of irrigation lines to prevent unwanted draining of irrigation lines. 
7.  Pressure regulators may be required on the irrigation system as determined by the Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7604 - Exceptions. 
Exceptions to these Landscape Water Conservation Standards may be granted by the Community Development Director upon finding that the exceptions will promote equivalent or greater water conservation than is provided for in these standards. Requests for exceptions must be in writing and submitted to the Community Development Director at the time the application is submitted to the City for review. Requests for exceptions must be accompanied by documentation demonstrating that the finding of equivalent or greater water conservation can be made. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7605 - Submittals. 
A.  Applicants must provide all relevant information on the landscape plan including botanical names for plants and turf species; container sizes; percentage calculations of allowable areas of turf; low, medium or high water use plants and water-wise plants; water budget calculations; monthly irrigation schedule; and specific requests for any exceptions to the requirements of these Landscape Water Conservation Standards. Areas of existing landscaping to remain unaltered must be indicated on the landscape plan. 
B.  The landscape plan must be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the California Business and Professions Code relating to the practice of landscape architecture (Business and Professional Code §§ 5641. et seq.). 
C.  The landscape plan must include a "Statement of Compliance" in a form approved by the Community Development Director certifying that the landscape design complies with the mandatory elements of these Landscape Water Conservation Standards. The person who prepared the plans must sign the Statement of Compliance. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7606 - Determination of conforming installation. 
The person who prepared the landscape plan must inspect the installation of the landscaping and any irrigation system included in the plan and certify in writing to the Department of Community Development that the installation substantially conforms to the approved Landscape Plan before a final City landscape inspection or occupancy being requested. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
7607 - Compliance verification. 
Verification of compliance with the Landscape Water Conservation Standards, as applicable, must be made by the Community Development Department in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  No building permit can be issued unless the Statement of Compliance required by §7605(C) is included on the final landscape plan submitted for plan check approval. 
B.  No building permit can be given a final landscape inspection or issued a permanent certificate of occupancy until the Department of Community Development receives a written determination of conforming installation as required by § 7606 above. 
(Ord. No. 696, § 1, 12-7-09)  
Article VIII - BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Ordinance 637 in its entirety, codified in Chapters 1—7, 11, 12 of this Article, is on file and available for inspection at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Port Hueneme. 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
8001 - Title. 
This Article shall be known as the "City of Port Hueneme Building Regulations," and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as the "Building Regulations." 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8002 - Purpose. 
The Council expressly finds that the purpose of these Building Regulations is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property, and public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use of occupancy, location, relocation, and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the City and certain equipment specifically regulated herein. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8003 - Applicability within city. 
These Building Regulations shall apply within all incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8004 - Conflict of provisions. 
Whenever there are conflicts and whenever there appears to be conflicts between the provisions of this Article and the separate codes adopted by reference hereby, or between different sections of the same such Uniform Code, the provisions which are more strict or which set the higher or highest standards shall prevail. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8005 - Applicability. 
The City Council intends to establish minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. These Building Regulations shall not be construed to establish standards of performance, strength, or durability other than those specified. Neither these Building Regulations nor any services rendered in connection with or pursuant to their terms by City officers, inspectors, agents, or employees, is intended nor shall be construed as the basis for any express or implied warranties or guarantees to any person relative to or concerning any structure or part, portion, or appurtenance thereto or thereof constructed, erected, altered, enlarged, repaired, moved, replaced, or removed pursuant to these Building Regulations or any permits granted hereunder. No cause of action shall arise in favor of any person against the City or any of its officers, inspectors, agents, or employees because any structure or portion thereof constructed, erected, altered, enlarged, repaired, moved, replaced, or removed, or any appliances installed, maintained, repaired or replaced hereunder does not meet the standards prescribed herein, or does not meet any other standards prescribed elsewhere as to performance, strength, durability or other characteristics. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8006 - Powers and duties of the Building Official. 
(a)  General. The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all the provisions of these Building Regulations and of the uniform codes adopted by reference hereby. The decision of the Building Official in enforcing the provisions of these Building Regulations or of the uniform codes adopted by reference, or in interpreting the provisions thereof, or in exercising the authority delegated thereby shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in these Building Regulations. 
Whenever in these Building Regulations or in any of the uniform codes adopted by reference hereby, another code or publication of standards or of rules or regulations is referred to, any language to the contrary notwithstanding, such reference shall not incorporate by reference such other codes, standards, or rules or regulations as part of these Building Regulations or of any of the uniform codes adopted by reference hereby unless set out in full herein, but they shall be considered and may be used by the Building Official as guidelines to assist in determining whether or not there has been compliance with the provisions of these Building Regulations. The Building Official shall not be bound by the provisions of any such other codes, standards, or rules or regulations not expressly adopted by reference in these Building Regulations in determining such compliance. 
(b)  Reports and Records. The Building Official shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all fees and other monies collected and received under these Building Regulations, including the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate. 
(c)  Stop Orders. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of these Building Regulations, or in violation of applicable Ordinances, the Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work. 
Whenever the Building Official finds that a building or structure for which a permit has been issued may be flooded or is subject to erosion hazard if the work is completed in the manner proposed, or that the completion of such work will cause the flooding of other buildings or structures, the Building Official may order all work stopped and refer the matter to the Public Works Director for a determination as to such danger. If the Public Works Director reports that substantial danger exists, the Building Official shall order work stopped until plans to alleviate such danger have been reviewed and approved by the Public Works Director. 
Failure to order work stopped or to make such referral or both shall not be construed as a representation that danger of flooding or erosion does not or will not exist if the work is completed in the manner proposed. 
(d)  Occupancy Violations. Whenever any building or structure or equipment therein regulated by these Building Regulations, being used contrary to the provisions of these Building Regulations, the Building Official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within the time prescribed by the Building Official after receipt of such notice or make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of these Building Regulations; provided, however, that in the event of an unsafe building, Section 102 in the California Building Code shall apply. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 712, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-4-13)  
8007 - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and methods of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of these Building Regulations, the City Council shall appoint a board of appeals pursuant to Section 105 of the California Building Code. 
(b)  Appeals Hearing Fee. A fee in an amount established by resolution of the Council shall accompany each application for a hearing before the appeals board established under the provisions of these Building Regulations. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8008 - Permits. 
(a)  Permits Required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining the necessary permit for each such Building or structure from the Building Official. The terms "erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair" etc. as used above shall be deemed to include any and all electrical, plumbing, mechanical, grading, or other work regulated by these Building Regulations. 
Emergency repairs to plumbing, electrical, and mechanical installations may be initiated prior to obtaining the required permits, provided that such work was urgently necessary and it was impractical to obtain the permits prior to commencement of the work. Permits for all such work shall be obtained as soon as it is practical to do so. 
(b)  Annual Maintenance Permits. The Building Official may, upon receipt of the required fee, issue an annual maintenance permit to any authorized person, firm, or corporation regularly engaged in the repair, replacement, alteration, or maintenance of electrical, plumbing, or mechanical systems regulated by these Building Regulations. The annual maintenance permit shall cover maintenance work which is performed on the premises of a person, firm or corporation and shall entitle the holder to be issued permits for said work on a monthly basis in lieu of obtaining individual permit prior to each installation or alteration of electrical wiring, plumbing, or mechanical equipment. 
The holder of an annual maintenance permit shall report all work done under the permit on a form furnished for the purpose not more than fifteen (15) days following the end of each calendar month, or as otherwise approved by the Building Official. Each such report shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees as required by these Building Regulations and by resolution of the Council. 
(c)  Pre-Permit Inspection. A code compliance inspection, as described in Section 8503 of this Article, shall be required as a condition requisite to the issuance of permits for the following types of construction: 
(1)  Any new building or structure involving property on which there is an existing building or structure;* 
(2)  Any addition to an existing building or structure, including, but not limited to, room additions and patio covers; 
(3)  Any alteration in floor space of an existing building or structure; 
(4)  Any replacement or upgrade of space heating systems or components thereof; 
(5)  Any partial or complete reroof;** 
(6)  Any other type of construction, addition or alteration that the Building Official deems necessary in order to ascertain compliance with applicable building regulations. *** 
* Sec. 8008(C)(1) amended by Ord. 572, 9/18/91 
** Sec. 8008(C)(5) added by Ord. 572, 9/18/91 
*** Sec 8008(C)(6) added by 572, 9/18/91 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8009 - Application. 
To obtain a permit the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall: 
(a)  Give such information as reasonably may be required by the Building Official; 
(b)  Be accompanied by such plans, specifications, and schedules as may be necessary to determine whether the work as described will be in conformity with the requirements of these Building Regulations. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8010 - Plans and specifications. 
Plans and specifications, calculations, and other data shall be submitted with each application for a permit when required by the Building Official for enforcement of any provisions of these Building Regulations. The Building Official may require plans, computations and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer or architect licensed by the State to practice as such. 
(a)  The Building Official may waive the submission of plans and supplemental information if he finds the nature of the work proposed is such that plan review is not necessary to obtain compliance with these Building Regulations. 
(b)  Plans and specifications shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of these Building Regulations and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Computations, diagrams, schedules, soil reports, geological reports, and other data sufficient to show the correctness and adequacy of the plans shall be submitted when required by the Building Official. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8011 - Inspections. 
All work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official to assure compliance with this Code. 
(a)  The owner or person doing work authorized by a permit is responsible for notifying the Building Official, orally or in writing, when said work is ready for inspection. Such notification shall be given at least twenty-four (24) hours before the work is to be inspected. 
(b)  The inspection shall represent the condition of the property on the day of the inspection, as can reasonably be established by the City given time and staff limitations, and shall not include an assessment of quality or workmanship of the residential building nor the working condition of its plumbing, electrical or mechanical systems. 
The inspection of the property shall determine the accuracy of City records and the corrective work needed to meet minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and public welfare. 
Unless a hazard to health and safety exists, construction previously approved under prior permits and inspections will not be required to be brought up to current Building Regulations standards. 
Except as otherwise may be indicated, items identified in the inspection report as being in violation of Codes shall be corrected within thirty (30) days of receipt of the report. 
The City shall make no determination as to who shall be responsible for payment of corrective work but shall give notice to the "owner of record" regarding code violations. 
Permits shall be obtained for all corrective work necessary to bring the building into compliance with the Codes and ordinances. Permit fees, as established by the Council, shall be charged to cover the costs of reinspection of the property. 
A report clearance shall be issued upon correction of all violations as noted in the inspection report. 
(c)  Waiver of Permit. The Building Official may, by administrative order, waive permit requirements for work which is not inimical to the public health, safety or welfare, or which because of its temporary nature or special purpose, does not fall within the purview or intention of these Building Regulations. The Building Official may waive permit requirements for a free-standing fence of six (6) feet or less in height or a retaining wall (not supporting a surcharge load) less than three (3) feet in height. Further, authority to waive permit requirements for minor projects shall extend to, but not be limited to, a child's playhouse or tree house, or a equipment shed or utility building for a residence provided that such structure meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The structure is accessory to a dwelling unit; 
(2)  It does not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area nor eight (8) feet in overall height from floor to roof; 
(3)  The ceiling height as established by door height or plate line does not exceed six (6) feet; 
(4)  It contains no plumbing or electrical installations; 
(5)  Its location is not in violation of any planning regulations (especially regulations for front, side, or rear yard setbacks); and 
(6)  It is separated by more than ten (10) feet from any similar accessory structure and from the dwelling unit. 
(d)  Permit Issuance—Restrictions. The issuance of permits shall be restricted to those applicants or their authorized representatives who are entitled by the regulations and the exemptions in the State Contractor's License Law and other applicable statutes to perform work regulated by these Building Regulations. 
(e)  Expiration of Permit—Extensions. Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of these Building Regulations shall expire by limitation and become null and void, if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance of such permit or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half of the amount required for a new permit for such work providing no changes have been made or will be made in the original plan and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. 
Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building Official may, without requiring payment of an additional permit fee, extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. No permit shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee shall pay a new full permit fee. 
(f)  Suspension or Revocation of Permit. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of these Building Regulations whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of these Building Regulations or for just cause. 
(g)  Permits Transferable. Permits required by these Building Regulations may be transferred from the original permittee to second parties when legal requirements have been satisfied, when approved by the Building Official, and when applicable fees have been paid. 
(h)  Concealed Work. No portion of any building, structure, wiring, plumbing, or equipment which is required to be inspected shall be permanently covered or concealed without approval of the Building Official. 
The Building Official shall have authority to remove or require the removal of any obstruction which presents the required inspection of any portion of a building, structure, wiring, plumbing, electrical, or mechanical equipment. 
(i)  Any employee charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against the Building Official or employee because of such act or omission performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Chapter shall be defended by the City until final termination of such proceedings, any judgment resulting therefrom shall be assumed by the City. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8012 - Fees. 
(a)  General. Fees for permits and services rendered pursuant to these Building Regulations shall be paid to the Building Official as set forth in schedules established by Resolution of the City Council. The value to be used in computing the fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. 
(b)  Civil Penalty Any person, firm or corporation who shall proceed with or commence work for which a permit is required by these Building Regulations without first having obtained such permit shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit therefor, pay double the fee fixed for such work. The original permit fee shall be for issuance of the permit and the balance shall be a civil penalty. This provision shall not apply to emergency work when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Building Official that such work was urgently necessary and that it was not practical to obtain a permit before commencement of the work. In all such cases a permit must be secured as soon as it is practicable to do so, and if there is an unreasonable delay in securing the required permit, the civil penalty as provided herein shall be charged. In no event shall such civil penalty exceed the permit fee plus five hundred ($500.00) dollars. The civil penalty provided in this section shall be in addition to any other fines and remedies prescribed elsewhere in the Code. The payment of such fee and fine shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of these Building Regulations in the execution of the work. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8013 - Fee refunds. 
The Building Official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee except upon written application by the original permittee; nor shall he authorize the refunding of any fee for which the total amount paid was twenty-five ($25.00) dollars or less except as specified below. 
The Building Official may authorize the refunding of fees in the amounts and under the conditions specified herein. 
(a)  Permit Fee. Fifty percent (50%) of the permit fee may be refunded provided that no work shall have commenced on the project for which the permit was issued and that the permit is canceled by the owner or holder thereon in writing within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance; and 
(b)  Plan Checking Fee. Fifty percent (50%) of the plan checking fee may be refunded provided the plans have not been checked or have not caused an expenditure of staff time beyond the preliminary processing time. A subsequent reapplication for plan checking will require the payment of a full plan cheek fee. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8014 - Section numbering and cross-referencing system for building regulations amendments. 
Reserved.  
8015 - Definitions. 
Whenever in these Building Regulations or in any of the uniform codes adopted hereby the following names or terms are used, they shall have the meanings set out herein. 
"Apartment house" means all community apartment, condominium, townhouse and similar structures having three or more dwelling units in a single building or connected buildings for the purpose of determining the applicable requirements of this Code. 
"Building Official" means the person appointed by the City Manager to administer this Code and the duly authorized deputies, assistants and inspectors. 
Except for purposes of administering Chapter 33 of the California Building Code, Excavation and Grading, where the term "Building Official" is used, "Director" means the Director of Public Works. 
"Chief Electrical Inspector," "Administrative Authority" and all other terms and designations indicating the person authorized and directed to carry out, enforce, and exercise governmental rights, privileges and duties, unless expressly indicated otherwise, means the Building Official and the duly authorized deputies, assistants, and inspectors. 
"Fire Department" means the Ventura County Fire Protection District or the fire service agency having jurisdiction. 
"Minor structure" or "minor building" means any structure or building not customarily used by human beings and which is less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. 
"Use or occupancy." Occupancy is the purpose for which a building is used or intended to be used. The term shall also include the building or room housing such use. Change of occupancy is intended to include change of tenants or proprietors. No building or structure in Groups A to R, inclusive, shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has issued a Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 2 - CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE (CBC) 
Sections: 
 
8050 - Adoption. 
The building codes known as the "California Building Code", the "California Residential Building Code", and the "California Green Building Standards Code", 2013 Editions, as published in Part 2, Part 2.5, and Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, the purpose and subject matter of which, among other things, is to regulate the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of all buildings or structures in the City of Port Hueneme; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; providing for penalties for the violation thereof, and to protect the public health and safety, are hereby adopted and enacted as the primary building codes of the City and made a part of these Building Regulations by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
At least one (1) copy of these codes has been deposited in the Office of the City Clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 680 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part) 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10; Ord. No. 712, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-4-13)  
8051 - Building permit fees. 
All references in the California Building Code(s) to fees, fee schedules, or similar fee Table(s) shall mean the permit fee schedule as established by Resolution of the City Council in accordance with Section 8012 herein. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10)  
8052 - Plan review fees. 
When a plan is required to be submitted by Section 8010 of these Building Regulations or the California Building Code, a plan review fee must be paid to the Building Official as the City's designated official to collect the same at the time of submission of plans and specifications. Plan review fees are a fixed percentage of the building permit fees as established by Resolution of the City Council in accordance with Section 8012 herein. 
When plans are incomplete or are changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at a rate established by the Building Official but not to exceed one-half (½) the initial plan review fee. The Building Official may waive such fee for minor additional plan reviews on incomplete or changed plans. 
Corrected plans which are resubmitted to the Division of Building and Safety for approval subsequent to an initial plan review shall not be subject to an additional plan review fee. 
(a)  Plan Check Fee—Two (2) or More Buildings on Same Parcel. When two (2) or more buildings are to be erected on the same parcel and all of the buildings are shown on one set of plans, the plan checking fee shall be indicated for the sum of the values of all the separate buildings. 
(b)  Plan Check Fee—Two (2) or More Identical Buildings. When two (2) or more buildings are to be erected from identical plans and specifications, the plan check shall be the fee indicated for the sum of the values of all separate buildings. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10)  
8053 - Fee refunds. 
All references in the California Building Code(s) to fee refunds are superseded by Section 8013 of these Building Regulations. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10)  
Chapter 3 - UNIFORM CODE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS (DBC) 
 
8100 - Adoption. 
That code known as the "Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings," 1997 Edition, (DBC) promulgated and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90501, the purpose and subject matter of which among other things is to protect the public health and safety as set out in Section 102 of said uniform code, is hereby adopted and enacted as the Dangerous Buildings Code for abatement of dangerous buildings in the City and made part of these Building Regulations by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein with specific modifications as indicated below. Such modified uniform code will be referred to herein as the Dangerous Buildings Code. 
At least one (1) copy of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for us and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8101 - Section DBC 205—Appeals board. 
The Appeals Board for the purpose of the Dangerous Buildings Code shall be the General Board of Appeals as set forth in Section 8007. Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 501 in the DBC. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8102 - Section DBC 501(b)—Processing of appeal. 
Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to Section 501 in the DBC, the Building Official shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of the Board of Appeals. The Building Official may, under the applicable procedures set forth in these Building Regulations, request and initiate a hearing before the Board of Appeals on any matter related to a dangerous building or the premises on which it is located. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8103 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code (CBC Section 103). Violations and violation penalties are subject to Sections 1100 and 1102 of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 4 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE (UHC) 
 
8150 - Adoption. 
That housing code known as the "Uniform Housing Code," 1997 Edition, (UHC), promulgated and published by the International Conference of Building Officials, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, California 90601, the purpose and subject matter of which, among other things, is to protect the public health and safety as set out in Section 102 of said Code, as adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary housing code of the City and made a part of these Building Regulations by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein with specific modifications as indicated below. 
At least one (1) copy of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk, and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8151 - Section UHC 203—Appeals board. 
The Housing Advisory and Appeals Board for the purposes of this Housing Code, shall be the General Board of Appeals as set forth in Section 8007 of these Building Regulations. 
Appeals to the board shall be processed in accordance with the provisions contained in Section 1201 in the UHC. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8152 - Section UHC 302—Fees. 
Section 302 in the UHC is hereby superseded by Section 8012 of these Building Regulations, expressly incorporated herein by reference. All references in the Uniform Housing Code to fees, fee schedules, or fee tables shall mean the fee schedule as established by Resolution of the City Council in accordance with Section 8012 herein. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8153 - Section UHC 1201.1—Processing of appeal. 
Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to UHC Section 1201, the Building Official shall present it at the next regular or special meeting of the Board of Appeals. 
The Building Official may, under the applicable procedures set forth in these Building Regulations, request and initiate a hearing before the Board of Appeals on any matter related to a substandard building or the premises on which it is located. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8154 - Section UHC 204—Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure, or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code. Violations and violation penalties are subject to Sections 1100 and 1102 of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 5 - CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE (CEC) 
 
8200 - Adoption. 
That electrical code known as the California Electrical Code, 2013 Edition ("CEC"), as published in Title 24, Part 3 of the California Code of Regulations, the purpose and subject matter of which, among other things, is to provide minimum standards for the installation, maintenance, and use of electrical wiring and electrical apparatus in order to safeguard persons and property from electrical hazards, as adopted by the State of California, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary electrical code of the City and made a part of these Building Regulations by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
At least one (1) copy of this Code has been deposited in the Office of the City Clerk, and must be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 680 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-1; Ord. No. 712, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-4-13)  
8201 - Violations and penalties. 
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this Code is guilty of a misdemeanor and such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 6 - CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE (CPC) 
 
8250 - Adoption. 
That plumbing code known as the California Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition ("CPC"), as published in Title 24, Part 5 of the California Code of Regulations, the purpose and subject matter of which is to protect public health and safety by establishing minimum regulations for the installation, alteration, or repair of plumbing and drainage systems, as adopted by the State of California, is adopted and enacted as the primary plumbing code of the City and made a part of these Building Regulations by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
At least one (1) copy of this Code has been deposited in the Office of the City Clerk, and must be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 680 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10; Ord. No. 712, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-4-13)  
8251 - Violations and penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code. Violations and violation penalties are subject to Sections 1100 and 1102 of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 7 - CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE (CMC) 
 
8300 - Adoption. 
That mechanical code known as the California Mechanical Code, 2013 Edition ("CMC"), as published in Title 24, Part 4 of the California Code of Regulations, the purpose and subject matter of which, among other things, is to protect public health and safety by providing requirements for the installation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, and refrigeration systems, as adopted by the State of California, is adopted and enacted as the primary mechanical code of the City and made part of these Building Regulations by reference, with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
At least one (1) copy of this Code has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk, and must be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 680 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10; Ord. No. 712, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-4-13)  
8301 - Fees. 
All references in the California Mechanical Code to fees, fee schedules, or fee tables shall mean the fee schedules as established by Resolution of the City Council in accordance with Section 8012 herein. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10)  
8302 - Section CMC 115.6—Fee refunds. 
Sections 8012 and 8013 are expressly incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8303 - Section CMC 111—Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code. Violations and violation penalties are subject to Sections 1100 and 1102 of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 10 - EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
8450 - Purpose. 
This chapter implements the Solar Rights Act as codified at Government Code § 65850.5 to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3, 7-20-15)  
8451 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter. Words and phrases not defined by this chapter have the meaning set forth in this Code, the Act, or regulations promulgated in accordance with applicable law. 
"Act" means the Solar Rights Act as codified at Government Code § 65850.5. 
"Director" means the City Manager, or designee. In the absence of a different designation by the City Manager, the Community Development Director, or designee, is the Director. 
"Electronic submittal" means utilization of office equipment and software used for communicating including, without limitation, telephone, facsimile machine, office automation equipment (computer terminals or personal computers, including laptops) and communications software applications such as electronic mail and Internet browsers. 
"Information technologies" or "IT" means any system, device, hardware, software, or other equipment designed and used for transmitting or receiving communications by any form of electronic mail (e-mail) or any network of interconnected computers, including, without limitation, the Internet, as used for such purposes. 
"Internet" or "world wide web" means a global network connecting multiple information technologies from schools, libraries, businesses, or private homes, using a common set of communication protocols. 
"Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
"Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
(1)  For Water Heater Systems or Solar Swimming Pool Heating Systems: An amount exceeding ten (10) percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten (10) percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
(2)  For Photovoltaic Systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten (10) percent as originally specified and proposed. 
"Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
(1)  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal. 
(2)  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and local health and safety standards. 
(3)  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
(4)  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
"Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
(1)  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
(2)  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3, 7-20-15)  
8452 - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. 
(b)  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted before the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements do not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3, 7-20-15)  
8453 - Solar energy system requirements. 
(a)  All solar energy systems must meet applicable legal health and safety standards and requirements. 
(b)  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications must be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code, as adopted by this Code. 
(c)  Solar energy systems for producing electricity must meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3, 7-20-15)  
8454 - Duties of the Director. 
(a)  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application must be made available on the Internet. 
(b)  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by information technologies is available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. All forms, applications, and other documents may be signed electronically in accordance with Government Code § 16.5. 
(c)  The Director must develop a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
(d)  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) must substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
(e)  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with Government Code §§ 65850.55, 66015, and 66016; along with Health and Safety Code § 17951. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3, 7-20-15)  
8455 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
(a)  The Director must implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The Director must issue a ministerial building permit within three (3) business days, upon receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The Director may require an applicant to apply for an administrative use permit if the Director finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions must be in writing and may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with this Code. 
(b)  Review of the application is limited to whether the application meets applicable law. 
(c)  If an administrative use permit is required, the Director may deny an application for the use permit if the Director makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings must include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission in accordance with this Code. 
(d)  Any condition imposed on an application must be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
(e)  The Director cannot condition approval of an application by requiring information of an association. 
(f)  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for issuing an expedited permit must be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
(g)  Only one (1) inspection is required and must be performed by the Director for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
(h)  The inspection must be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. 
(i)  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 3, 7-20-15)  
Chapter 11 - RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL BUILDING RECORDS 
Sections: 
 
8500 - Intent. 
Pursuant to Article 6.5 (commencing with Section 38700), Chapter 10, Part 2, Division 3, Title 4 of the Government Code of the State of California, it is the intent of the Council to assure that the grantee of a residential building or commercial building within the City is furnished a report of matters of City record pertaining to the authorized use, occupancy, and zoning classification of real property prior to sale or exchange. It is further intended to protect the unwary buyer of residential or commercial property against undisclosed restrictions on the use of the property. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8501 - Definitions. 
(a)  "Owner" shall mean any person, partner or partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property. 
(b)  "Residential building" shall mean any improved real property designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes or commercial purposes, situated within the City, and shall include the building or structures located on said improved real property. 
(c)  "Agreement of sale or exchange" shall mean any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to any property shall thereafter be transferred from one owner to another owner. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8502 - Report required. 
At the time of entering into an agreement of sale or exchange of any residential building or commercial building, the owner or his authorized representative shall inform the purchaser of the purchaser's right to compel the owner to obtain from the City a report of the residential or commercial building record prior to the consummation of the sale, showing the regularly authorized use, occupancy, and zoning classification of such property. Said report shall be valid on the day of issuance. Said report may be waived by the purchaser by a written instrument acknowledging the purchaser's understanding that he is entitled to such a report, but does not want one and waives this right to have such a report presented to him prior to the close of the transaction. No owner shall cause an escrow to close until a receipt for such report or waiver in the form set forth in this section is filed with the escrow holder and the Division of Building and Safety of the City. Where an escrow is not used, the receipt or waiver shall be filed with the Department of Building and Safety. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8503 - Code compliance inspection. 
Concurrent with obtaining a report of the residential or commercial building records pursuant to Section 8502, a code compliance inspection may also be requested. Such inspection, if requested, shall furnish information as to the condition of the property on the day of the inspection as can reasonably be established by the Building Official. Furthermore, the inspection shall be used as a means of verifying City records on file and the corrective work, if any, needed to meet minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare. The inspection shall not, however, include an assessment of quality or workmanship of any building nor the working conditions of its plumbing, electrical or mechanical systems. 
Unless a serious hazard to health or safety exists, nonconforming construction previously approved under prior permits and inspections will not be required to be brought into compliance with current standards prescribed in this Code. Except as otherwise may be indicated, items identified in the inspection as being in violation of this Code shall be erected within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of the report of building records. In such event, the Building Official shall make no determination as to who is responsible for correcting the violations; rather, such matters shall be deferred to the owner and purchaser. Where violations are noted, permits shall be obtained for all corrective work as may be required by this Article. Upon completion of such corrective work and payment of a reinspection fee of an amount established by resolution of the Council, the Building Official shall reinspect the property and, upon determining compliance, shall issue a written clearance for placement in the building file as a matter of record. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8504 - Application. 
Upon application of the owner or his authorized agent and payment of applicable fees as established by resolution of the Council, the Building Official shall review pertinent City records, conduct an inspection of the premises (if requested pursuant to Section 8503), and deliver within seven (7) days from the date of receipt of written application therefor or as soon as possible thereafter, to the applicant, a report of residential or commercial building records which shall contain the following information insofar as it is available: 
(a)  The street address and legal description of the subject property; 
(b)  The zone classification and authorized use as set forth in this Code; 
(e)  The occupancy as indicated and established by permits of record; 
(d)  Variances, special use permits, exceptions, and other zoning requirements; 
(e)  Any special restrictions in use or development which may apply to the subject property; and 
(f)  Findings of the Building Official as to the results of physical inspection of the premises, if such inspection is requested pursuant to Section 8503. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8505 - Delivery of report. 
If the residential or commercial building report is not waived in accordance with the provisions of Section 8502 of this Chapter, the owner or his authorized representative shall deliver the residential or commercial building record report or cause the residential or commercial building record report to be delivered to the purchaser of the property prior to the close of escrow, or if there be no escrow, prior to the consummation of the sale or exchange. The purchaser shall execute a receipt for such report or a waiver in the form set forth in Section 8502 of this Chapter and said receipt for such report or waiver shall be filed by the owner with the Division of Building and Safety as evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8506 - Change of status. 
In the event the owner or the purchaser wishes a previously rendered report undated to reflect a change of any reported item prior to the close of escrow, the owner shall obtain a supplemental report that will present current record. A supplemental report may be obtained only within a period of six (6) months from the date of issuance of the original report upon the payment of the prescribed fee. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8507 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the first sale of a residential or commercial building located in a subdivision whose final map has been approved and recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act not more than two years prior to the first sale. None of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to impose any duties, obligations, liabilities, or responsibilities on the part of any escrow holder to any owner, purchaser, transferee, or seller of any residential or commercial building. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8508 - Penalties. 
Any person convicted of knowingly violating the provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and punished in accordance with this Code. However, no sale or exchange of residential or commercial property shall be invalidated solely because of the failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this Chapter unless such failure is an act or omission which would be a valid ground for rescission of such sale or exchange in the absence of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8509 - Rental/lease housing inspection. 
Every person engaged in the business of operating or renting four (4) or more dwelling units, with or without kitchen facilities, for residential or commercial uses of either a temporary or permanent nature, contained within one or more structures situated on one or more parcels, shall obtain a Housing Code Compliance Certificate every four (4) years. Applicable uses include, but are not limited to, apartment houses, motels, hotels, residential care facilities or rooming houses. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 12 - CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE (CAC)*[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Editor's Note: The title of Ch. 12 of Art. VIII was amended by Ord. 680 § 2. 
 
8700 - Adoption. 
That code known as the California Building Standards Administrative Code, 2013 Edition, as published in Part 1 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, the purpose and subject matter of which, among other things, is to protect public health and safety is adopted and enacted and made part of these Building Regulations by reference, with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. 
At least one (1) copy of the California Administrative Code, 2013 Edition, has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk, and must be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. 
(Ord. 680 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 702, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-15-10; Ord. No. 712, § 3 (Exh. A), 11-4-13)  
8701 - Notice of noncompliance. 
Whenever the Building Official determines that work has been done without the required permit, or has not been completed in accordance with the requirements of this Code, the Building Official may record a Notice of Noncompliance with the office of the County Recorder and shall notify the owner of the property of such action. The Notice of Noncompliance shall describe the property, shall set forth the noncomplying conditions, and shall state that the property owner has been so notified. 
The Building Official shall submit a Release of Noncompliance Notice to the County Recorder when it is determined that noncomplying conditions have been corrected or removed. A fee as established by City Council Resolution may be charged to the property owner for submittal of a Release of Noncompliance Notice. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
8710 - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this Code. Violations and violation penalties are subject to Sections 1100 and 1102 of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 637 § 5 Exh. A (part), 2001)  
Chapter 13 - ENFORCEMENT OF CODE 
Sections: 
 
8800 - Violation. 
No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements, of this Code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Code, shall be guilty of an infraction except for those provisions of this Code, the violation of which is expressly declared to be a misdemeanor filing. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of any provision of this Code, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the City or County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 680 § 5 (part), 2007)  
8801 - Separate offenses. 
A person violating any provision of this Code, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every calendar day during which such violation continues regardless of whether a citation has been issued or a complaint filed. 
(Ord. 680 § 5 (part), 2007)  
8802 - Violation penalties. 
Unless other wise specified in this Code, any person who violates any provision of this Code, the violation of which is expressly declared to be an infraction, shall be punished therefore as follows: 
(a)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; 
(b)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same Code provision within one (1) calendar year; 
(c)  Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor if a defendant had been cited for the same violation two (2) or more times within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense; and 
(d)  A fourth violation of the same Code provision regardless of the time of occurrence shall be treated as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 680 § 5 (part), 2007)  
Article IX - SUBDIVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - SUBDIVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
9000 - Name. 
This Chapter shall be referred to as "the City of Port Hueneme Subdivision Regulations."  
9001 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act for the purpose of regulating the design and improvement of divisions of land within the city.  
9002 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, certain words and phrases are defined and shall be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
(a)  "Advisory Agency." 
The Development Review Committee, established pursuant to Section 10351 of this Code, is designated as the Advisory Agency for the purpose of this Article; 
1.  As to tract maps and parcel maps which are filed in conjunction with zone variance applications or conditional use permit applications, the Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency; 
2.  As to parcel and tract maps which are filed in conjunction with zone change applications, the Planning Commission is hereby designated as the Advisory Agency, but shall only be empowered to recommend approval, conditional approval or denial, to the Council, which body shall finally act upon such maps. 
(b)  "Appeal Board." The Council is designated as the Appeal Board. 
(c)  "Environmental Analysis" means an analysis conducted pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, Section 21000 et seq., of the Public Resources Code. 
(d)  "Final Tract Map" means a final map showing a subdivision of five or more parcels prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and in a manner to be filed in the office of the county recorder. 
(e)  "Parcel Map" means a map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and in a manner to be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(f)  "Subdivision Map Act ('Act')" means Section 66410 et seq., of the Government Code of California. 
(g)  "Tentative Map" means a map showing the design and improvements of a proposed division of land and the existing conditions in and around it. 
(h)  "Zoning Regulations" means the Zoning Regulations of the City as set forth in Article X. 
(Ord. 579 § 5 (1), 1992)  
9003 - Application. 
No person shall divide any real property for the purpose of sale, lease or financing except in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and/or the Act. 
This Chapter shall apply to all divisions of land, except those exempted by Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and 66412.5 of the Act. In the event of divisions of land which are not subject to this Chapter and/or the Subdivision Map Act, a Certificate of Compliance shall be issued therefor in a form prescribed by the Director of Community Development.  
9004 - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Advisory Agency. The Advisory Agency shall have the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property and imposing requirements and conditions thereon, and shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove parcel maps and tentative maps, except that as to parcel and tract filed in conjunction with zone change applications, the Council shall finally approve or conditionally approve, or disapprove such a map. 
(b)  Appeal Board. The Appeal Board shall hear and determine appeals from decisions of the Advisory Agency with respect to parcel maps and tentative maps. 
(c)  Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications; 
(2)  Accepting tentative maps for approval and distributing tentative maps to appropriate agencies and City divisions; 
(3)  Determining whether proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this Chapter and the Subdivision Map Act; 
(4)  Processing and certifying final maps, reversion to acreage maps and amended maps; 
(5)  Processing and approving subdivision improvement plans, boundary line adjustments, mergers and certificates of compliance; 
(6)  Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map; 
(7)  Inspecting and approving of subdivision improvements; 
(8)  Accepting dedications and improvements for subdivisions of less than five (5) parcels; 
(9)  Certifying completion of private improvements not to be maintained by the City. 
(d)  Director of Community Development. The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the General Plan, applicable specific plans and Zoning Regulations of the City and reviewing tentative maps with the Public Works Director; and 
(2)  Conducting environmental analyses related to proposed subdivisions pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. 579 § 5 (2), 1992)  
9005 - Improvements and design. 
(a)  Improvements. No subdivision shall be approved unless those on-site and off-site improvements which are found by the Public Works Director to be reasonably necessary to service the lots being created, are constructed or guaranteed to be constructed by the subdivider, which include, but not limited to, the following improvements: 
(1)  An adequate domestic water distribution system designed and constructed to service each lot proposed to be created; and 
(2)  An adequate sewage system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created; and 
(3)  An adequate storm water drainage system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created; and 
(4)  An adequate public and/or private street and/or alley system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created; and 
(5)  Adequate systems designed, and constructed to provide all necessary utilities to each lot proposed to be created, including, but not limited to, facilities for water, natural gas, electricity, CATV and telephone services; and 
(6)  An adequate traffic regulatory system including necessary traffic signals, signs, pavement markings and strippings; and 
(7)  Any and all other improvements found necessary by the Advisory Agency and/or the Appeal Board to provide all services to each lot proposed to be created. 
(b)  Design. The design of the subdivision shall conform to this Code, generally accepted engineering standards and to such standards as required by the Advisory Agency and/or the Appeal Board, including, but not limited to, plans for grading and erosion control. 
(c)  Reimbursement for Supplemental Improvements. The City may require that improvements installed by a subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity or number for benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. If improvements containing supplemental size, capacity or number are required to be installed, the City shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. Any such reimbursement agreement shall be funded, exclusively, in the manner described and contemplated in the Act. 
(d)  Time for Construction of Improvements on Subdivisions of Less Than Five Parcels and Designated Remainder Parcels. The time of fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements for subdivisions of less than five parcels and on designated remainder parcels as defined in Section 66424.6 of the Government Code may be established by agreement between the City and the subdivider. In the absence of such an agreement, fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development is issued by the City, or within a reasonable time following approval of the final parcel map or tract map and prior to the issuance of a permit and other grant of approval for development upon a finding by the City that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for the public health and safety or is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.  
9006 - Tentative parcel maps and tract maps. 
A tentative map shall be submitted for subdivisions for which a parcel map or Tract Map is required by the Act. The following requirements shall apply to all applications for tentative parcel and tract maps: 
(a)  Application Request. The Director of Community Development shall prepare suitable application forms. An application shall be accepted for filing by the Director of Public Works only upon payment by the applicant of a filing and processing fee in a sum set by Resolution. An applicant may, in writing, withdraw the application at any time during the processing of the same; provided, however, that there shall be no refund of any of the filing and processing fees paid in connection therewith. 
(b)  Submission of Tentative Maps. 
(1)  Submission of a tentative map shall not constitute filing with the City until all attachments and required statements, instructions, environmental forms and clearances, and a completed application form with appropriate fees are deposited with the Public Works Director and a written receipt therefor is provided to the applicant. 
(2)  The subdivider shall file with the Public Works Director the number of tentative maps the Public Works Director shall deem necessary, together with evidence as to the ownership of the land proposed to be divided. 
(3)  Failure to submit all materials and statements required by this Chapter shall constitute grounds for rejection of the application. 
(4)  Upon accepting a complete tentative map application, the Public Works Director immediately shall forward copies of such application to all affected agencies and City divisions for review and comment. 
(c)  Environmental Review. The California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 shall be lawfully satisfied prior to any application being accepted for filing by the Director of Community Development. 
(d)  Advisory Agency Action. The Advisory Agency shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove a parcel map or tentative map pursuant to Section 10352(F) of this Code's Zoning Regulations. The Advisory Agency shall hold a noticed public hearing on such a map; notice of such public hearings shall be given in the manner required by the Act. In the absence of a timely filed written appeal, the decision of the Advisory Agency shall be final and conclusive. 
(e)  Appeal to Appeal Board. The subdivider or a tenant of the subject property in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, a community apartment or stock cooperative project, who is dissatisfied with a decision by the Advisory Agency, may appeal such decision to the Appeal Board. Any such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk, as secretary of the Appeal Board in the time and manner set forth at Section 10352(G) of this Code's Zoning Regulations. Prior to an action of the Advisory Agency becoming final, the Council may elect to review, de novo, such decision. Such determination by the Council shall be deemed an appeal from such decision. 
Upon filing of an appeal, a noticed public hearing before the Appeal Board shall be held expeditiously; notices of the public hearing shall be given as required by the Act. Following the conclusion of the hearing, the Appeal Board shall expeditiously render its decision affirming, modifying or disapproving the determination of the Advisory Agency. 
(f)  Time Limits. The time limits for acting on maps and appeals, as specified in this Chapter and by the Act, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the City. A waiver of time limits may be required as a condition of accepting an application for, or processing of, maps for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of related approvals and/or an environmental analysis. 
(g)  Time Extensions for Approved Tentative Maps. Requests for time extensions for the filing of final maps relating to approved tentative maps shall be submitted to the Advisory Agency not less than thirty (30) days before such map is due to expire. The Advisory Agency shall review the request, and either approve or deny the extension. The aggregate period of time for all extensions shall not exceed a total of twelve (12) months. If the Advisory Agency denies an application for a time extension, the subdivider may appeal to the Appeal Board within 3 days after the effective date of the denial of the extension. 
(h)  Amendments to Approved Tentative Maps. 
(1)  Minor changes to an approved tentative map or to an approved parcel map may be approved by the Director of Community Development upon written application by the subdivider, provided that: 
(a)  No lots are added, deleted or substantially altered thereby; and 
(b)  No proposed building locations are substantially altered; and 
(c)  Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approval; and 
(d)  There are no resulting violations of this Chapter, the Act or other applicable laws. 
(2)  Changes other than minor changes to tentative maps or approved parcel maps shall be processed in the same manner as the application for the original approval. An approved amendment shall not effect the expiration date of the tentative map approval, nor extend any right pursuant to a vesting tentative map. 
(3)  All amendments shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the Advisory Agency. 
(i)  Waiver of Parcel Map Requirements. The Advisory Agency may waive the requirement of a parcel map if it finds that the proposed division of land complies with the requirements of this Chapter and the Act as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements imposed by this Chapter and the Act. 
In any case where the requirement for a parcel map is waived by the Advisory Agency, a tentative map, at the discretion of the Advisory Agency, may be required. A parcel map waiver may be conditioned to insure compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(j)  Stay Pending Outcome of Litigation. If a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction affecting the validity of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may apply to the City within ten (10) days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the City for a stay of the time in which a map will expire. Within forty (40) days after receiving the request, the Advisory Agency shall stay the map's expiration date until final conclusion of the action, if the action affects the validity of the tentative map approval.  
9007 - Form and content of tentative maps. 
(a)  Tentative maps shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer registered prior to January 1, 1982, or a licensed land surveyor. 
(b)  The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet. Whenever practicable, map sheets should be no less than eighteen by twenty-six inches. In no case shall the scale be less than one inch to eighty feet. All lettering shall be one-eighth-inch minimum. The map shall contain all of the following: 
(1)  A Title, which shall contain the subdivision number, subdivision name, and type of subdivision; and 
(2)  Name and address of the legal owner, the subdivider, and person preparing the map, including registration or license number; and 
(3)  A sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; and 
(4)  Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours; and 
(5)  Existing and proposed land use; and 
(6)  A vicinity map showing data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relation to the community; and 
(7)  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred (100) feet beyond its boundary, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Existing contours at one (1) foot intervals; and 
(b)  The approximate location of all trees standing within the boundaries of the division of land and an indication as to which trees are to be removed. The diameter of trees greater than six inches three feet above grade shall be indicated, and a statement on the existing ground cover shall also be submitted; and 
(c)  The approximate location and outline of existing structures identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be so marked; and 
(d)  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm water overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each water course; and 
(e)  The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade and name of existing streets or highways; and 
(f)  The widths, location and identity of all existing easements; and 
(g)  The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains and the approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral streets shall be indicated. 
(8)  Proposed improvements required to be shown shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The location, grade, centerline, and curb return radii and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and name of all proposed and existing adjacent streets; and 
(2)  Typical sections of all existing and proposed streets; and 
(3)  The location, width and nature of all easements; and 
(4)  The approximate lot layout and the approximate dimensions of each lot and of each building site; engineering data shall show the approximate finished grade of each lot; and 
(5)  Location and nature of all proposed recreation facilities; and 
(6)  Location and nature of all proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated for public open space or reserved for common private open space; and 
(7)  The location, elevation and size of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, water mains and storm drains; and 
(8)  Location and nature of all proposed slopes; and 
(9)  Dimensions of setbacks for proposed structures; and 
(10)  Phasing lines for proposed developments. 
(d)  The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were utilized in the preparation of the design of the tentative map; 
(e)  Accompanying Data and Reports. The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports: 
(1)  Title Report. A preliminary title report close in time to filing date of the tentative map. 
(2)  Owner's Affidavit. The subdivider shall submit written verification that the fee owner or owners of the realty have consented to the filing of the tentative map. 
(3)  Other Reports. Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the Director.  
9008 - Submission of final tract maps and parcel maps. 
(a)  Form Content. The form and content of final tract maps and parcel maps shall be as required by the Act and this Chapter. 
(1)  Preparation. Such maps shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered civil engineer registered prior to January 1, 1982, or licensed land surveyor. A final tract map or parcel map shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act and as required by this Chapter. 
(2)  Certificates and Acknowledgments. Prior to filing, the certificates and acknowledgments required by the Act and this Chapter shall appear on the final map and may be combined where appropriate. Such certificates and acknowledgments shall appear on the face of the map unless the Public Works Director advises the subdivider that such certificates and acknowledgments are to be made by separate instrument. If a certificate or acknowledgment is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately recorded documents. 
(3)  Monuments. The number, type and location of monuments shall be as set forth in the Act and this Chapter and shall conform to standards prescribed in Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code. 
(b)  Submittal for City Approval. The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the Public Works Director for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by plans, reports and documents in a form as approved by the Public Works Director, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Improvement Plans. Improvement construction plans as required by the Public Works Director; and 
(2)  Soils Report. A preliminary soils report, based upon test borings and prepared in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code adopted by this Code, shall be required for all tract maps and for those parcel maps which involve commercial or industrial development. The soils report shall be prepared by a civil engineer registered in the State. 
The requirement of a preliminary soils report may be waived or reduced in scope by the Public Works Director if, in his opinion, the soil characteristics in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision have been established by previous analyses; and 
Parcel maps which propose the construction of single family dwellings shall require the preparation of a report which includes the subsurface soil classification as well as the results of an expansive index test; and 
(3)  Title Report. A current title report prepared by a title insurer; and 
(4)  Improvement Cost Estimate. An improvement cost estimate which shall include all improvements within public rights-of-way, easements, or common areas, on-site and off-site drainage improvements and utility trench backfill as provided by the developer, except for those utility facilities to be installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission; and 
(5)  Deeds for Easements and Rights-of-Way. Deeds for easements or rights-of-way required which are not proposed to be dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the City in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of facilities, if required; and 
(6)  Traverse Closures. Traverse closure calculations for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines; and 
(7)  Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations; and 
(8)  Organization Documents. Any proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions and all other organization documents for the subdivision in a form as prescribed by Section 1355 of the Civil Code of the State. All such documents shall be subject to review and approval by the Public Works Director and City Attorney; and 
(9)  Letter of Certification-Water Agencies. The subdivider shall submit to the Public Works Director written certification from the affected water provider that adequate domestic water facilities are or will be available to serve the proposed project and that all necessary financial arrangements have been made to ensure construction of such facilities; and 
10.  Other Reports. Any additional data, calculations, reports, or information as required by the Public Works Director. 
(c)  Approval of Final Maps. 
(1)  Final Tract Maps. Each final tract map filed for approval, together with any improvement agreements, shall be submitted to the Council for approval after all required certificates on such map have been signed and, where necessary, acknowledged. 
The Council shall, at the meeting at which it receives the final map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve the final map if it conforms to all the applicable requirements of the Act and this Chapter. If the final map does not so conform, the Council shall disapprove the map. 
(2)  Final Parcel Maps. The Director of Community Development shall review final parcel maps and shall approve each such map if the map conforms to the applicable requirements of this Chapter and the Act. If the map does not so conform, it shall be disapproved. 
(d)  Disapproval of Final Tract and Parcel Maps. If a final tract map or parcel map is disapproved for failure to meet any of the requirements imposed by the Act or this Chapter, such disapproval shall be accompanied by findings identifying the requirements which have not been met or performed. Approval of a final tract or parcel map shall not be withheld when the failure of the map to comply is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the determination of the Council does not materially affect the validity of the map. 
(e)  Recording of Final Tract and Parcel Maps. After a final tract map or parcel map has been approved as provided in this Chapter, the map shall be transmitted to the county recorder for recordation.  
9009 - Merger. 
(a)  This section shall not apply to the sale, lease or financing of one or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been created under the provisions of City ordinances regulating the division of real property and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time of their creation, or which were not subject to such provisions at the time of their creation, even though the contiguous parcels or units are held by the same owner; except that if any one of the contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to standards for minimum parcel size to permit use or development under the City's Zoning Regulations (Article X) and the standards established pursuant to section 10202 (D)(3)(a) of this Code, then those parcels or units shall be merged under the provisions of said Section 10202 (D)(3)(a). 
(b)  Any parcels or units which were deemed unmerged, prior to January 1, 1984, under the Act, and which have not been merged subsequently shall be considered separate parcels for purposes of this section.  
9010 - Unmerger. 
Any parcel or unit of land which merged pursuant to the provisions of any law prior to January 1, 1984, but for which a notice of merger was not recorded on or before that date are deemed unmerged if on January 1, 1984, all of the criteria established by Section 66451.30(a) of the Subdivision Map Act are met and if none of the conditions of Section 66451.30(b) exist. Upon request of an owner the Public Works Directors shall file a certificate of compliance whenever the engineer determines that a parcel is unmerged pursuant to this section.  
9011 - Request for determination of merger. 
(a)  A property owner may request that the Public Works Director determine whether property has merged under Section 9009 or is deemed unmerged under Section 9010. A request for determination shall be made in writing and shall be accompanied by a fee established by Council resolution. 
(b)  Upon determination that property has merged the Public Works Director shall issue to the owner and record with the county recorder a notice of merger. 
(c)  Upon determination that property is deemed unmerged the Public Works Director shall issue to the owner and record with the county recorder a certificate of compliance showing each parcel as a separate parcel.  
9012 - Reversion to acreage. 
Subdivisions consisting of four (4) or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership may revert to acreage by the filing of a parcel map in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Act.  
9013 - Dedications. 
The City shall have the authority to impose conditions of approval on a final tract map or parcel map, requiring the subdivider to dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of real property for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements and other public easements. "Dedication" as used herein shall include a dedication or waiver of direct access rights to future or proposed public or private streets. 
(a)  Acceptance or Rejection of Offer of Dedication on Tract Maps. At the time the Council approves a final tract map, it may accept, accept subject to conditions, or reject, dedications or offers of dedication. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an irrevocable offer of dedication shall continue in existence until the same is expressly rejected by the Council. The City Clerk shall certify on the map the action of the Council. 
(b)  Acceptance or Rejection of Offer of Dedication on Parcel Maps. At the time the Public Works Director approves a final parcel map, he shall accept or reject offers of or dedication made by certificate on such map. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an irrevocable offer of dedication shall continue in existence until the same is expressly rejected by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall certify on the map the action of the Public Works Director.  
9014 - Fees. 
The Council, by resolution, shall set reasonable fees in connection with this Chapter, including but not limited to fees for processing tentative, final and parcel maps; fees for giving notice of public hearings; fees for copying and distributing written reports on tentative maps; and fees for processing mergers and reversions to acreage.  
9015 - Lot line adjustments. 
For the purpose of this section, a "lot line adjustment," means the adjustment or relocation of any property line between two contiguous existing, legally created lots. No lot line adjustment shall be permitted where the effect is to create additional lots or delete a lot. Lot line adjustments shall be permitted, provided that the provisions of this section are complied with. 
(a)  Requirements. Any person desiring to obtain approval of a lot line adjustment shall file a plat map (eight and one-half by eleven inches) with the Public Works Director together with a filing and processing fee in an amount as may be required by Resolution. Said map shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner(s) whose properties are shown on the map; 
(2)  North arrow; 
(3)  Scale of map; 
(4)  Date of preparation; 
(5)  The name, location and width of all streets and alleys abutting the property; 
(6)  Tract and lot identification, lot lines, bearings and dimensions of each of the two lots; 
(7)  Approximate location of existing improvements, buildings and permanent structures; 
(8)  Location and width of all easements upon or abutting the properties; 
(9)  The location of the proposed lot boundary line adjustment, together with all applicable dimensions and bearings; 
(10)  The signatures of all owners of lots involved in such boundary line adjustment; 
(11)  Any other information required by the Public Works Director. 
The Public Works Director may, at his discretion, require a survey of the properties involved, if he finds the same necessary in order to provide an adequate description of the subject properties. 
(b)  Approval. The Public Works Director shall approve a lot line adjustment map if he finds that: 
(1)  No street or alley dedication or improvements are necessary to properly service the properties involved in the proposed boundary adjustment; and 
(2)  The lots, as proposed by the boundary line adjustment, will conform, in all respects, to the provisions of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code; and 
(3)  The new lot line is located in such a manner so as not to substantially alter the size and shape of the existing lots; and 
(4)  That all record owners, trust deed holders and lien holders consent to the lot line adjustment. 
Where the Public Works Director finds all of the above facts to be present, he shall approve the lot line adjustment; and thereafter, the owner or owners of the lots involved shall cause a map, in a form approved by the Public Works Director, to be recorded. 
If the Public Works Director shall find any of the foregoing facts not present, he shall deny such lot line adjustment and shall advise the applicant thereof. In case of denial, the applicant shall have the option of filing a parcel or tract map.  
9016 - Vesting tentative maps. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the provisions of the Act relating to vesting tentative maps. 
(b)  Defined. A "Vesting Tentative Map" as used in this section means a tentative map for any subdivision, which shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map" at the time it is filed. 
(c)  Application Filing. 
(1)  Whenever a provision of the Act or this Chapter requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed. 
(2)  A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as is required of tentative maps pursuant to this Chapter except as hereinafter expressly otherwise provided: 
At the time a vesting tentative map is filed it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "Vesting Tentative Map." 
At the time a vesting tentative map is filed a subdivider shall also supply the following information: 
A.  Plans approved by a registered civil engineer for all public works improvements to be constructed as a condition of the subdivision in accordance with City standards, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
B.  Plans prepared by a registered civil engineer for all site development including but not limited to grading, drainage facilities and structures in accordance with City standards, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Plans for all structures are subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development unless otherwise prescribed in Article X (Zoning) of this Code. Such plans shall be supported by geologic and/or soils engineer's reports as required by the Subdivision Map Act or Article 4 (Subdivisions) of this Code. 
C.  Plans for all irrigation and landscaping subject to the approval of the Director of Community Development unless otherwise prescribed in Article X (Zoning of this Code. 
D.  Plot plan showing details of the entire development and all improvements to be constructed in the subdivision. 
E.  Any other studies or data required by the engineer. 
(d)  Expiration of Approval and Initial Time Period of Vested Rights. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vested tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period established by the Subdivision Map Act or as otherwise prescribed pursuant to Article IX (Subdivisions) of this Code for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, including opportunities for extensions. 
B.  The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map shall last for an initial time period of one year beyond the recordation of the final map. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded. 
C.  The initial time period set forth in subsection "b" above shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit or for development review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days, from the date a complete application is filed. 
D.  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection "B" above expires. If the extension is denied by either the Director of Community Development or Advisory Agency, whichever applies, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the Council within 15 days. 
E.  If the subdivider submits a complete application for a Development or Building Permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions "b"—"d", the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of those permits, or any extension of those permits. 
(e)  Amendments to Vesting Tentative Maps. After approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map, amendments can be made only by following procedures for the original approval or conditional approval. Approvals or permits which depart from the vesting tentative map may only be granted based upon an amendment to the vesting tentative map. No amendments shall be granted so as to modify or delete any public improvements and site development requirements and conditions approved in the first instance by the Advisory Agency or Council including, but not limited to, grading, drainage facilities and structures. This section shall not be construed to prevent the City from denying or placing any conditions upon approval of a final map pursuant to Government Code Section 66498.1(c). 
(f)  Development Rights Conferred. 
(1)  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
(2)  An approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the City from imposing reasonable conditions on required approvals or permits necessary for the development and authorized by the ordinance, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. 
(3)  Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with Article X (Zoning) of this Code in existence at that time, that inconsistence shall be noted on the map. The City may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in Article X to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall, notwithstanding subsection "a" above, confer a vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in Article X and the map, as approved. The rights conferred by this subsection shall be for the time periods set forth in Section 4 herein. 
(g)  Repeal. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Act is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall be deemed to have conferred a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved. 
(h)  The vested rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in this Chapter. If the final map is approved, the said vested rights shall last for the following periods of time: 
(1)  An initial time period of one (1) year; 
(2)  A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subdivision 1 of this subsection expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the Appeal Board within fifteen (15) days after such denial. 
(i)  Fees. 
a.  The applicable fees associated with a development and a vesting tentative map therefor shall be paid at the rate governing at the time the various applications, filings, plan checks and permits, are made. 
b.  In addition to any other fees associated with a development, there shall be paid to the City a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the Council to reimburse the City for the filing and processing of a vesting tentative map application. 
(Ord. 579 § 5 (3), (4), 1992)  
Article X - ZONING REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
Part A. - Adoption of Zoning Regulations 
 
10000 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to clarify the general provisions of this Article and to qualify the conditions and procedures under which changes and exceptions to this Article are to be considered by the City.  
10000.1 - Planning agency. 
For the purpose of this Article and pursuant to Government Code Section 65100, the Department of Community Development is designated as the Planning Agency for the City. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (1), 1992)  
10001 - Zoning text. 
The written provisions of this Article are hereby adopted and established as the Zoning Text for the City to serve and be held as the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare as necessary to provide for the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly, planned use of land resources. It is not intended by this Article to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties; provided, however, that where this Article imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or lands than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easement, covenant or agreement, the provisions of this Article shall prevail.  
10002 - Zoning map. 
The boundaries of zones described in this Article are adopted and established as set forth on the Zoning Map for the City and all notations, references and other information shown on said Map shall be as much a part of this Article as if the matters and information set forth on said Map were fully described herein. All provisions of this Article governing the use of land and buildings, the height and bulk of buildings, the sizes of yards and other open spaces about buildings, and other matters as herein set forth, are hereby declared to be in effect upon all land included within the boundaries of each and every zone as delineated on the Zoning Map. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone as shown on the Zoning Map or part thereof, the City Council shall determine all such uncertainties; provided, however, that the following rules of construction shall apply: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as following approximate street, alley, or lot lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries; 
B.  In a case of unsubdivided property and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless the same are indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the Zoning Map; and 
C.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the zoning regulations applicable to abutting property on each side of the center line shall apply up to the center line of such vacated or abandoned street or alley of each respective side thereof. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (2(part)), 1992)  
10003 - Amendments. 
A.  General. Amendments to adopted development and use standards which impose any regulation, policy, or guideline not theretofore imposed, remove or modify any such regulation, policy, or guideline theretofore imposed, are subject to the provisions of this Section and include amendments of the following: 
1.  Zoning Text. Any regulatory provisions affecting the Zoning Text adopted pursuant to Section 10001. 
2.  General Plan Text. Any advisory provision affecting the General Plan Text adopted pursuant to Article VII, Division l, Article 7 of the California Government Code. 
B.  Initiation. Provisions of the Zoning Text or General Plan Text may be amended, altered or repealed whenever public necessity and convenience and general welfare require. Such changes may be initiated by the Council only; provided, however, that the Council may initiate the same upon recommendation of the Planning Agency or in conjunction with a project for which application is made pursuant to Chapter 3, Part B of this Article. 
C.  Development Review Procedures. Amendments shall be processed in the time and manner prescribed for Development Permits in Chapter 3, Part B of this Article commencing with Section 10352(B). 
D.  Text Consistency. In the event that an amendment will result in an inconsistency between regulatory provisions of the Zoning Text and land use policies of the General Plan Text, no such change will be considered unless accompanied by, and concurrently processed with, a request for amendment in either Text as necessary to maintain consistency between the two; provided, however, that a General Plan Text amendment must, in all cases, be considered and acted upon by the Council pursuant to Section 10003(C), prior to such consideration being given to a Zoning Text amendment. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (3), (4), 1992)  
10004 - Boundary changes. 
A.  General. Geographical changes in adopted zoning and land use classifications in the City are subject to the provisions of this Section and include the following: 
1.  Zoning Map. Any boundary adjustment or zone reclassification affecting the Zoning Map adopted pursuant to Section 10002. 
2.  General Plan Map. Any boundary adjustment or land use reclassification affecting the General Plan Map adopted pursuant to Section 65450 et al of the California Government Code. 
B.  Initiation. Boundaries of the Zoning Map or General Plan Map may be amended, reclassified and altered whenever public necessity and convenience and general welfare require. Such changes may be initiated in the same manner as provided in Section 10003(B) of this Chapter. 
C.  Development Review Procedures. Boundary changes shall be processed in the same time and manner as prescribed for Development Permits in Chapter 3, Part B of this Article commencing with Section 10352(B). 
D.  Map Consistency. In the event that a boundary change will result in an inconsistency between zone classifications of the Zoning Map and land use designations of the General Plan Map, no such change will be considered unless accompanied by, and concurrently processed with, a request for boundary change in either Map as necessary to maintain conformity between the two; provided, however, that a General Plan Map boundary change must, in all cases, be considered and acted upon by the Council pursuant to Section 10004(C), prior to such consideration being given to a Zoning Map boundary change. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (5), (6), 1992)  
10005 - Variances. 
A.  General. When practical difficulties, unnecessarily severe hardships or results inconsistent with the general purpose of this Article occur through the strict interpretation of provisions hereof, variances from the terms of the Zoning Text may be granted subject to the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Limitations. Variances from the terms of this Article may be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location of surroundings, the strict application of this Article deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification. Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations of other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated. A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulations governing the parcel of property. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to conditional uses or any permit issued pursuant to Chapter 3, Part B of this Article wherein the underlying development standards permit variances from the terms of this Article. 
C.  Development Review Procedures. Except as otherwise provided herein, variances shall be processed in the time and manner prescribed for Development Permits in Chapter 3, Part B of this Article commencing with Section 10352. In lieu of the foregoing, an Administrative Permit issued in accordance with provisions of Section 10353 may be obtained for variances involving relatively routine and minor adjustments in certain types of zoning regulations as follows: 
1.  Area Regulations. Modification of distance or area regulations not exceeding twenty (20) percent of required front, side, rear, or court yard distances or other open space requirements or ten (10) percent of lot coverage requirements. 
2.  Off-Street Parking. Modification of off-street parking and landscaping development standards. 
3.  Nonconforming Buildings. Approval for additions to structures which are nonconforming as to side yard, rear yard, lot coverage, or off-street parking; provided, however, that the additions, in all other respects, meet the requirements of zoning regulations affecting the property. 
4.  Fences. Approval of walls, hedges, or fences to exceed the height limits or design requirements of this Article and permit them to be located within setback areas where consistent with safety and neighborhood appearance. 
5.  Signs. Modification of building and monument sign design criteria, other than height or area. 
6.  Nonconforming Lots. Approval of building construction upon nonconforming lots where substantial development upon nonconforming lots exists in the area.  
10006 - California Coastal Zone. 
Any amendment or boundary change authorized under the provisions of this Chapter which affects the use of any land situated within the California Coastal Zone, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 30103, shall constitute amendment of the Local Coastal Program of the City. No such amendment or boundary change shall become final until approval is granted in accordance with the provisions of Title 14, Division 20, Article 2, as amended, of the California Public Resources Code.  
Part B. - Definitions 
 
10020 - Definitions generally. 
This Article which defines and makes effective the land use zoning plan of the City shall be known as the "Zoning Regulations" and for the purpose of this Article, and for this Article only, certain words and terms are defined.  
10021 - Interpretation of grammar. 
Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the plural number include the singular. The word "shall" is mandatory.  
10023 - Accessory building. 
"Accessory building" means a building, part of a building or structure or use which is subordinate to, detached from, and the use of which is incidental to that of the main building, structure, or use of the same lot.  
10024 - Adult. 
"Adult" means a person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older.  
10025 - Adult day care facility. 
"Adult day care facility" means any facility which provides nonmedical care to persons eighteen (18) years of age or older in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis.  
10026 - Aggrieved person. 
"Aggrieved person" means any person who, in person or through a representative, appeared at public hearing or meeting of the City in connection with a decision or action which is appealed, or who, by other appropriate means prior to such hearing or meeting, informed the City of the nature of his or her concerns or who for good cause was unable to do either.  
10027 - Alley. 
"Alley" means any public thoroughfare for the use of pedestrians or vehicles, which has been deeded or dedicated to the City as a secondary means of access to abutting property and has been designated by the Council as a public alley.  
10028 - Antenna. 
"Antenna" means any exterior satellite dish receiving or transmitting antenna larger than one meter in diameter or diagonal measurement, dish or spherical antenna larger than one meter in diameter or diagonal measurement, or any system of booms, poles, rods, masts, wires or reflecting discs or any configuration with appurtenant equipment whose purpose is to receive or broadcast communication or other signals. 
(Ord. 626 § 2(38), 1999)  
10029 - Apartment. 
"Apartment" means a room or a suite of two or more rooms in a tenement or apartment house, occupied or suitable for occupancy as a residence for one family.  
10030 - Apartment house. 
"Apartment house" means any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, intended, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied as three (3) or more dwelling units.  
10031 - Arcade. 
"Arcade" means any place of public resort wherein five (5) or more coin or slug-operated amusement devices are maintained for use by the general public.  
10032 - Bathroom. 
"Bathroom" means a room containing a bathtub, tub or shower compartment, water closet, lavatory or other similar facilities. A "half-bath" shall consist of only a water closet and lavatory.  
10033 - Basement. 
"Basement" means one or more stories wholly or partly underground and having one-half or more of its height measured from its floor to its finished ceiling below the average adjoining grade. A basement shall be considered a story if the vertical distance from the average adjoining grade to its finished ceiling is over five (5) feet.  
10034 - Bedroom. 
"Bedroom" means a divided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit for sleeping purposes, containing a minimum of seventy (70) square feet and further containing a closet or recess for clothing or household utensils having less than twenty-five (25) square feet of floor area.  
10035 - Boarding house. 
"Boarding house" means the use of a dwelling unit where lodging or meals are furnished for compensation pursuant to oral or written agreement of a fixed amount for a specified period of time; where meals are provided for residents from a central kitchen and served in a central dining area; where bathroom and shower facilities are either adjacent to and connected with each individual room or a common bathroom and shower facility is provided for all residents of the boarding house. Uses involving the sharing of expenses for meals and/or a bona fide sharing of the rent or ownership costs of housing shall not be a boarding house.  
10036 - Building. 
"Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.  
10037 - Building site. 
"Building site" means the ground area of a building or group of buildings, together with all open spaces as required by this Article.  
10038 - Business or commerce. 
"Business or commerce" means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity for profit or livelihood, or the ownership or management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises or the maintenance and use of offices by professions and trades rendering services.  
10039 - Carport. 
"Carport" means an accessory building or portion of the main building, designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of operable vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building consisting of at least a roof structure and its supports.  
10040 - Child. 
"Child" means a person who is under eighteen (18) years of age.  
10041 - Child day care facility. 
"Child day care facility" means a facility which provides nonmedical care to children under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual on less than a 24-hour basis. Child day care facilities includes day care centers and family day care homes.  
10042 - Church. 
"Church" means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which building, together with its buildings and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to maintain public worship.  
10043 - Clinic, dental or medical. 
"Dental or medical clinic" means a building in which a group of physicians and/or dentists and allied professional assistants are associated for the purpose of carrying on their profession. The clinic may include a dental or medical laboratory, but shall not include inpatient care or operating rooms for major surgery.  
10044 - Club. 
"Club" means an association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business or commerce.  
10045 - Community care facility. 
"Community care facility" means any facility, place or building which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical or residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes the following: (1) residential care facility; (2) adult day care facility; (3) day treatment facility; (4) foster family home; (5) small family home; (6) social rehabilitation facility; and (7) community treatment facility.  
10046 - Community treatment facility. 
"Community treatment facility" means any residential facility which provides mental health treatment services to children in a group setting. Program components shall be subject to program standards developed by the State Department of Mental Health pursuant to Section 5405 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.  
10047 - Condominium. 
"Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in a common in portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such property.  
10048 - Day care center. 
"Day care center" means any child day care facility other than a Family Day Care Home, and includes Infant Centers, preschools and Extended Day Care Facilities.  
10049 - Day treatment facility. 
"Day treatment facility" means any facility which provides nonmedical care, counseling, educational or vocational support or social rehabilitation services on less than a 24-hour basis to persons under 18 years of age who would otherwise be placed in foster care or who are returning to families from foster care.  
10050 - Days. 
"Days" means calendar days.  
10051 - Discretionary project. 
"Discretionary project" means an activity defined as a project which requires the exercise of judgment, deliberation, or decision on the part of a City agency, body, officer, or staff member in the process of approving or disapproving a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the City agency, body, officer, or staff member merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations. "Discretionary project" includes, but is not limited to, planned developments, conditional uses, variances, boundary changes, amendments, special uses or portions of the foregoing.  
10052 - Dwelling. 
"Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed for or occupied exclusively for residential purposes.  
10053 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms in a building or apartment house designed for occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes and containing only one kitchen for the exclusive use of one family. Within this meaning, no limit shall exist as to the number of wet bars which may be contained in a single dwelling unit.  
10054 - Dwelling, one-family. 
"One-family dwelling" means a detached building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one family and containing one dwelling unit.  
10055 - Dwelling, two-family. 
"Two-family dwelling" means a dwelling designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two families and containing two dwelling units.  
10056 - Dwelling, multiple. 
"Multiple dwelling" means a building, or a portion of a building, designed or used for occupancy by three or more families and containing three or more dwelling units.  
10056.1 - Emergency. 
"Emergency" means a sudden unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property or essential public services. 
(Ord. 626 § 4(2), 1999)  
10056.2 - Emergency shelter. 
"Emergency shelter" means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons, victims of domestic violence, persons requiring temporary housing, and other individuals and households made temporarily homeless due to natural disasters (e.g., fires, earthquakes, etc.), that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person and operated by a government agency or private non-profit organization. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10056.3 - Dwelling, supportive housing. 
"Supportive housing" means housing, configured as rental housing developments, with no limit on length of stay, that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10056.4 - Dwelling, transitional housing. 
"Transitional housing" and "transitional housing development" (per California Health and Safety Code 50675.2 (h)) means housing configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10057 - Enclosed. 
"Enclosed" means a building, part of a building, or an accessory building which is improved with walls on three (3) or more sides, such walls being six (6) feet or more in height.  
10058 - Family. 
"Family" means one (1) or more persons, related or unrelated, living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10059 - Family day care home. 
"Small family day care home" means a day care facility located in a single-family dwelling where a full-time resident provides care and supervision for six (6) or fewer children (plus two (2) additional children after school). Children under the age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility. 
"Large family day care home" means a day care facility located in a residence and licensed by the State as a family child care home, where a full-time resident provides care and supervision for seven (7) to twelve (12) children (plus two (2) additional children after school). Children under the age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10060 - Fence. 
"Fence" means a device or a portion thereof, designed to separate property areas, and not carrying superimposed load.  
10061 - Foster family home. 
"Foster family home" means any residential facility providing twenty-four (24) hour care for six (6) or fewer foster children which is owned, leased, or rented and is the residence of the foster parent or parents, including their family, in whose care the foster children have been placed. Such placement may be by a public or private child placement agency or by a court order, or by voluntary placement by a parent, parents, or legal guardian.  
10062 - Frontage. 
"Frontage" means the distance measured along a front line adjoining a public street or a side lot line on the street sides of a corner lot.  
10063 - Garage, private. 
"Private garage" means an accessory building or portion of the main building, enclosed on all sides and under a roof, designed primarily for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.  
10064 - Garage, public. 
"Public garage" means a building other than a private garage used for the storage, care, mechanical repair, or servicing of automobiles.  
10064.1 - Hazardous wastes. 
"Hazardous wastes" means a waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may either: 
(a)  Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; 
(b)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term "hazardous waste" shall be understood to also include externally hazardous wastes. (Section 25117, Health and Safety Code.) 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (1), 1992)  
10064.2 - Hazardous materials. 
"Hazardous materials" means a substance or combination of substances which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may either: 
(a)  Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; or 
(b)  Post a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Unless expressly provided otherwise, the term "hazardous material" shall be understood to also include extremely hazardous material. (22 CAC, Section 66084). 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (2), 1992)  
10064.3 - Hazardous waste facility. 
"Hazardous waste facility" means that all contiguous land and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery disposal or recycling hazardous waste management units, or combinations of those units. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (3), 1992)  
10064.4 - Waste treatment and disposal. 
"Waste treatment and disposal" means public or private disposal facilities or transfer stations, operated for the purpose of recycling, reclaiming, treating or disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal, dead animals, oilfield wastes, hazardous waste or other waste material originating on or off the premises. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (4), 1992)  
10065 - Height. 
"Height" means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade along the frontage of the building to the highest point of structure, exclusive of chimneys and ventilators.  
10066 - Highway, arterial. 
"Arterial highway" means a highway designated as a major arterial highway in the General Plan of the City.  
10067 - Highway, collector. 
"Collector highway" means a highway designated as a secondary or collector highway in the General Plan of the City.  
10068 - Hospital. 
"Hospital" means an institution providing physical or mental health services, inpatient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured.  
10069 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means any building or portion thereof containing four (4) or more guest rooms used, intended, or designed to be used, let, or hired out to be occupied, whether the compensation for hire be paid directly or indirectly in money, goods, wares, merchandise, labor, or otherwise, and shall include lodging and rooming houses, dormitories, Turkish baths, bachelor hotels, studio hotels, pub lic and private clubs and any such building of any nature whatsoever so occupied, designed or intended to be occupied except motels or boarding houses; and except jails, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums, orphanages, prisons, detention homes, and all other similar buildings where human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint.  
10070 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means any lot, structure, enclosure or premises where dogs and/or cats of either sex, whether altered or not, over the age of four (4) months, whether by the owners of the dogs or cats or by other persons, are kept, for compensation for one or more of the following purposes: boarding, grooming, holding for sale, breeding, training, miscellaneous services, or kept for hire.  
10071 - Kitchen. 
"Kitchen" means any room used or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food.  
10072 - Landscaping. 
"Landscaping" means combinations of planted tree, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers or lawns.  
10073 - Local coastal program. 
"Local Coastal Program" means the Local Coastal Program of the City consisting of a land use plan and implementing actions prepared and certified in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6, Division 20 of the California Public Resources Code.  
10074 - Lodging house. 
"Lodging house" means any use of a dwelling unit by a person or persons who by oral or written agreement do not have regular use of the kitchen, nor shall any meals be permitted in any guest room therein.  
10075 - Lot. 
"Lot" means a parcel of land created pursuant to this Article of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Any such parcel shall have frontage on a public street or private road approved by the Council and may consist of a single lot of record or a combination of complete lots of record.  
10076 - Lot, corner. 
"Corner lot" means a lot located at the junction of two or more intersection streets, with a boundary line thereof bordering on each of the two streets.  
10077 - Lot, interior. 
"Interior lot" means any lot which is not a corner lot.  
10078 - Lot, reverse corner. 
"Reverse corner lot" means a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of a lot or parcel of land which adjoins the rear lot line of the corner lot.  
10079 - Lot area. 
"Lot area" means the total horizontal area included within lot lines and shall include one-half of the width of any alley, or portions thereof, abutting any such lot line, except that where it can be determined which lot or lots the alley was a part of before its dedication, then these lots shall be considered to include as lot area that area dedicated as public alley.  
10080 - Lot depth. 
"Lot depth" means the average horizontal distance from the front line to the rear lot line measured in the general direction of the side lot lines.  
10081 - Lot lines. 
"Lot lines" means the established division lines between parcels of property, public or private.  
10082 - Lot lines, front. 
"Front lot lines" means the lines separating the lot from the street in the case of an interior lot, the line separating the narrowest street frontage of the lot from the street in the case of a corner lot.  
10083 - Lot lines, interior. 
"Interior lot lines" means the lines separating interior lots.  
10084 - Lot lines, rear. 
"Rear lot lines" means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For a triangular shaped lot, the rear lot line means a line ten (10) feet in length within the lot which is parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to the cord of a curved front lot line, and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.  
10085 - Lot lines, side. 
"Side lot lines" means any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.  
10086 - Lot, through. 
"Through lot" means a corner or inside lot, having frontage on two (2) parallel or approximately parallel streets, or two (2) streets the center lines of which if projected would make an angle of less than thirty (30) degrees.  
10087 - Lot width. 
"Lot width" means the average horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured in the general direction of the front lot lines.  
10088 - Ministerial project. 
"Ministerial project" means an activity defined as a project which is undertaken or approved by a governmental decision which a public officer or a public agency makes upon a given state of facts in a prescribed manner in obedience to the mandate of legal authority without regard to personal judgment or opinion concerning the propriety or wisdom of the act although the statute, ordinance, or regulation may require, in some degree, a construction of its language by the officer or agency. "Ministerial project" includes, but is not limited to, master sign criteria, parking and landscape development plans, signs, fences, garage sales, or portions of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 3, 7-18-16)  
10089 - Mobile home. 
"Mobile home" means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, when erected on-site, meets minimum dwelling units size standards for the zone in which it is located, and is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling; with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.  
10090 - Mobile home park. 
"Mobile home park" means any area or tract of land where two (2) or more mobile home lots which are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation. In a mobile home park, mobile homes need not be placed on a permanent foundation system.  
10091 - Motel. 
"Motel" means a building or group of two (2) or more detached, semidetached, or attached buildings containing not less than four (4) guest rooms or dwelling units each of which has a separate individual entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or inner court with automobile storage space provided in connection therewith, and designed and intended to be used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers. This definition shall include auto cabins, tourist courts, motor courts, motor lodges, and similar designations. An establishment shall be considered a motel if it is required by the California Health and Safety Code to obtain the name and address of the guest, the make, year, and license number of the vehicle used by the guest, and the state in which the vehicle is registered. Motels, as defined herein, shall: (1) have a City business license; (2) have advertising signs; (3) be furnished with furniture and bed linen which is changed on a daily basis by maid service; (4) have a manager available on the premises 24 hours a day; and (5) have printed rate schedules showing rates by the day or week.  
10092 - Nonconforming building. 
"Nonconforming building" means a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the time this Article became effective, but which, because of the application of this Article to it, no longer conforms to the regulations of this Article.  
10093 - Nonconforming lot. 
"Nonconforming lot" means a parcel of land which was lawfully established at the time this Article was adopted, but which, because of the application of this Article to it, no longer conforms to the regulations of zone in which it is located. Included within the meaning of "nonconforming lot" is any improvement made upon a parcel of land, other than a building, which lawfully existed at the time this Article became effective, but which, because of the application of this Article to it, no longer conforms to the regulation of this Article.  
10094 - Nonconforming use. 
"Nonconforming use" means a use of land or any property which was lawfully established and maintained at the time this Article was adopted, but which, because of the application of this Article to it, no longer conforms to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.  
10095 - Person. 
"Person" means an individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, the Federal, State, City, or County government, or special district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity.  
10096 - Planned street width. 
"Planned street width" means the proposed ultimate right-of-way widths of those streets shown in the General Plan of the City and of such other streets where official action of the Council has determined said ultimate right-of-way widths.  
10097 - Planning agency. 
"Planning Agency" means the Department of Community Development of the City. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (7), 1992)  
10098 - Porte cochere. 
"Porte cochere" means a roof-like attachment to a building, primarily used for the protection and convenience of loading and/or unloading of passengers and/or materials.  
10099 - Project. 
"Project" means the whole of an action, which has a potential for resulting in a physical change in the environment, directly or ultimately.  
10100 - Reception window. 
"Reception window" means the area within the direct line between the antenna and the source or sources carrying or transmitting desired programming or signals.  
10101 - Residential care facility for the elderly. 
"Residential care facility for the elderly" means a group housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by residents over the age of sixty (60), but also including persons under the age of sixty (60) with compatible needs, who are provided bearing levels and intensities of care and supervision, protective supervision, personal care, or health related services, based upon their varying needs, has determined in order to be admitted and to remain in the facility.  
10102 - Residential facility. 
"Residential facility" means any family home, group care facility, or similar facility determined by the director of the State Department of Social Services, for 24-hour nonmedical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.  
10102.1 - Group quarter supportive housing. 
"Group quarter supportive housing" means housing, configured as group care facilities or similar residential care facilities, with no limit on length of stay, that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10102.2 - Group quarter transitional housing. 
"Group quarter transitional housing" means housing configured as group care facilities or similar residential care facilities and operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10103 - Room. 
"Room" means an undivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, but excluding bathrooms, closets, hallways, and service porches.  
10104 - Satellite antenna. 
"Satellite antenna" means any exterior satellite receiving antenna, dish antenna three (3) feet in diameter or larger, or any configuration with appurtenant equipment whose purpose is to receive or broadcast communication or other signals from earth-orbiting satellites or other communication systems.  
10105 - Service station. 
"Service station" means any building or premises used primarily for the retail sale of gasoline and lubricants, but which may also provide for the incidental servicing of motor vehicles including lubrication, tire repairs, battery charging, hand washing of automobiles, sale of merchandise and supplies related to the servicing of motor vehicles, and minor replacements, but excluding body and fender work, and similar activities.  
10105.1 - Single room occupancy (SRO) housing. 
"Single room occupancy (SRO) housing" means a dwelling unit consisting of no more than one (1) occupied room with a maximum gross floor area of three hundred fifty (350) square feet which may have kitchen and/or bathroom facilities. Each dwelling unit is restricted to occupancy by no more than two (2) persons and is offered on a monthly rental basis or longer." 
(Ord. No. 711, § 3, 11-5-12)  
10106 - Small family home. 
"Small family home" means any residential facility providing the 24-hour care for six (6) or fewer foster children who have mental disorders or developed mental or physical disabilities and who require special cares and provision as a result of their disabilities.  
10107 - Social rehabilitation facility. 
"Social rehabilitation facility" means any residential facility which provides social rehabilitation services for no longer than eighteen (18) months in a group setting, to adults recovering from mental illness who temporarily need assistance, guidance, or counseling. Program components shall be subject to program standards pursuant to Section 5458.1 of the California Health and Safety Code.  
10108 - Street. 
"Street" means the land dedicated in any manner or condemned for use as a public highway, or established and shown as such on the official maps of the City Engineer and shall include every boulevard, avenue, place, drive, court, lane, or other thoroughfare dedicated to public travel, but shall not include an alley as defined herein.  
10109 - Street centerline. 
"Street centerline" means the centerline of a street or right-of-way as shown on official records. If two or more centerlines appear on official records, or in the absence of a centerline on official records, the centerline shall be determined by the City Engineer.  
10110 - Street line. 
"Street line" means the boundary line between street and abutting property.  
10111 - Street, local. 
"Local street" means any dedicated street serving as the principal means of access to property which is not an arterial or collector highway as defined herein.  
10112 - Structure. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which is permanently located or requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, but not including walls and fences less than six (6) feet in height and other improvements of a minor character as determined by the Director of Community Development.  
10113 - Structural alterations. 
"Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, or columns, beams, or girders and floor joists, or roof joists, girders or rafters or changes in roof exterior lines.  
10114 - Townhouse. 
"Townhouse" means a dwelling unit integral to a building which contains two or more dwellings in which one or more walls of each unit abut a property line common to one or more such units and which units shall collectively be considered as one building for the purpose of this Article.  
10115 - Trailer, automobile. 
"Automobile trailer" means a vehicle without motor power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for human habitation or for carrying persons and property, including a trailer coach and motor home, and any self-propelled vehicle having a body design for or converted to the same uses as an automobile trailer without motor power.  
10116 - Use. 
"Use" means the purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed, or intended to be used, or for which it is or may be used, occupied, or maintained.  
10117 - Wall. 
"Wall" means any structure or device, permanent in nature, and extending from floor to ceiling in a structure, used as a barrier between two (2) areas.  
10118 - Wet bar. 
"Wet bar" means an area located in or adjacent to a dwelling unit for the exclusive use of the one (1) family residing in said dwelling unit, separate from a kitchen, and containing no electrical outlets in excess of one hundred ten (110) volts or plumbing stub-outs roughed in for future use which could be used for a kitchen. Wet bars shall have no gas outlets or provisions for such outlets roughed in for future use, nor shall they have more than one (1) bar sink fixture with one (1) sink well whose internal dimensions do not exceed twelve (12) inches in width by twelve (12) inches in length.  
10119 - Yard. 
"Yard" means an unoccupied space on a lot or building site on which a building is situated, and except where otherwise provided in this Article, open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky.  
10120 - Yard, front. 
"Front yard" means a yard extending between side lot lines from the front lot line to the garage and building intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons.  
10121 - Yard, rear. 
"Rear yard" means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and rear line of the main building nearest said rear line of the lot. The rear yard shall include one-half (½) of the width of an adjoining alley, or portions thereof, adjoining the rear lot line, except that where it can be determined which lot or lots the alley was a part of before its dedication, then these lots shall be considered to include as rear yard and lot area that area and only that area dedicated as public alley.  
10122 - Yard, side. 
"Side yard" means a yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard; the width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest part of the side lot line to the building.  
Part C. - Enforcement 
 
10175 - Compliance. 
All departments, officials, or public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses where required by law, shall conform to the provisions of this Article. No such license or permit for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this Article shall be issued. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be null and void. Any uses contrary to the provisions of this Article are declared unlawful.  
10176 - Certificate of compliance. 
No premises shall be occupied or used and no building hereafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used until a certificate of compliance shall have been issued by the Building Inspector.  
10177 - Judicial review of coastal development. 
Any person, including an applicant for a permit or the California Coastal Commission, aggrieved by a decision or action of the City on a discretionary project affecting property within the Coastal Zone, which project is not otherwise appealable pursuant to the provisions of Section 10356(A), shall have a right to judicial review of such decision or action by filing a petition for writ of mandate in accordance with the provisions of Section 1094.5 of the California Code of Civil Procedure within sixty (60) days after the decision or action has become final. The Coastal Commission may intervene in any such proceeding upon a showing that the matter involves a question of the conformity of a discretionary project within the City's certified Local Coastal Program, which intervention may be initiated upon request of the City. Notice of any such action against the City shall be filed with the Coastal Commission within five (5) working days of the filing of such action. When an action is brought challenging the validity of the City's certified Local Coastal Program, a preliminary showing shall be made prior to proceeding on the merits as to why such action should not have been brought pursuant to the provisions of Section 30801 of the California Public Resources Code.  
Chapter 2 - LAND USE PROVISIONS  
Part A. - Use Regulations 
 
10200 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to specify use regulations which apply throughout this Article.  
10201 - Permitted uses. 
A.  General. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, reconstructed, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, or premises be used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose other than a use permitted in the zone in which such land, buildings or premises are located. 
B.  Restricted Uses. Each zone hereinafter established is mutually exclusive as to the uses of land and buildings permitted in each such zone. The designation of a use or building in a particular zone shall prohibit such use or building in all other zones unless otherwise specified in this Article. 
C.  Interpretations. Judgments as to the application or interpretation of this Article shall be made by Resolution of the City Council when such judgments are made necessary by virtue of circumstances for which the procedures and requirements specified herein are unclear or otherwise create hardships inconsistent with the purpose and objectives served by this Article. Included herein shall be interpretations as to the appropriate zones within which unspecified uses may be permitted, judgments of which shall be based upon comparable uses and specified purposes of corresponding districts. All judgments rendered pursuant to this Section shall be made in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth in Section 10003; provided, however, that no fee shall be charged and no public hearing or notice of the matter need be given. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (2 (part)), (8), 1992)  
10202 - Nonconforming provisions. 
A.  General. The purpose of this section is to provide for regulation and eventual elimination of uses and structures not in compliance with the requirements of the zone in which they are located. It is hereby declared that the nonconforming use of land and structures is detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of persons and property within the City. It is further declared, that it is the policy of the City that such nonconforming uses shall be eliminated as rapidly as may be done without infringing upon the constitutional rights of the property owners of such nonconforming uses. The continuation of nonconforming uses as provided herein is intended to prevent economic hardship and to allow the useful economic value of structures to be consumed or realized within specified time periods. Nonconforming uses are declared to be illegal and prohibited after determination dates as set forth herein. 
B.  Nonconforming Buildings. 
1.  Continuation. A nonconforming building may be continued for the period specified herein, provided no additions or enlargements are made thereto except those required by law or ordinance, or as approved under a variance procedure pursuant to Section 10005(C). 
2.  Restoration. Subject to all other regulations of this Section, a building destroyed to the extent of no more than seventy-five percent (75%) of its reasonable value by fire, explosion or other casualty, act of God, or the public enemy, may be restored and the occupancy or use of such building or part thereof which existed at the time of such partial destruction, may be continued for the period specified herein; provided, however, that restoration must be undertaken within ninety (90) days of such destruction. 
C.  Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  Abandonment. If a nonconforming use existing at the time this Article became effective is subsequently abandoned, any future use shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Article. For the purpose of this Section, the term "abandoned" shall mean a discontinuation in use for a period of ninety (90) days or more. 
2.  Intensity. Any nonconforming use of a conforming or nonconforming building may be maintained and continued provided there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space, or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming use, and provided, further, that there is no increase in the intensity of such nonconforming use except as otherwise provided in this Article. Increase in intensity of use as used herein shall include, but not be limited to, an increase in the number of persons, animals or machines present at, doing business with, or visiting a nonconforming use. 
3.  Non-Residential Uses. No permit shall be issued by the Building Official or any other officer, agent or employee of the City for the erection, construction, reconstruction, moving, conversion, alteration of, addition to or occupancy of any new or existing building or structure which is to be used as a nonresidential building in any residential zone in the City unless otherwise provided under this Article. 
D.  Nonconforming Lots. 
1.  Permitted Uses. Except as otherwise provided in Section 10202(D)(3) of this chapter, the use of land as permitted in the underlying zone shall be allowed on a lot or parcel or a combination of contiguous lots or parcels of nonconforming size; provided, however, that such property complies, in all respects, with the lot area development standards of the underlying zone. Whenever use of land is permitted pursuant to this Section, no variance need be obtained under the procedure specified in Section 10005 unless the proposed use or improvement of such property requires a reduction in any development standard applicable to such property including, but not limited to, yard areas, building setbacks and off street parking. 
2.  Lot Splits. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Article, no building permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel which results from the sale of part of a lot or parcel or any other type of lot split wherein any one of the resulting lots or parcels does not meet the zoning requirements which apply to the land at the time unless, prior to sale or split, a variance is granted pursuant to Section 10005 of this Article. 
3.  Compulsory Parcel Mergers. All lots and parcels of nonconforming size to the development standards prescribed in the underlying zone within such lots or parcels are located and which meet the criteria prescribed in Section 10202(D)(3)(a) and (b) below, shall be deemed merged under operative statutes of the California Government Code commencing with Section 66451.10 thereof. Upon such merger, no affected lot or parcel shall be improved or subdivided except in strict compliance with all of the subdivision and development standards of the underlying zone within which such property is located. 
a.  Applicability. This Section 10202(D)(3) shall only apply to nonconforming lots and parcels wherein the following criteria is satisfied: 
1)  All lots and parcels are contiguous to one another and are held by the same owner as of the date a notice of intention to determine status is filed with the recorder of the County of Ventura pursuant to Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(1) below. 
2)  At least one of the affected lots or parcels is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous lot or parcel. 
3)  With respect to any affected lot or parcel, either or both of the following conditions exists: 
a)  Comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger. 
b)  Was not created in compliance with the applicable laws and ordinance in effect at the time of its creation. 
b.  Merger Procedures. A merger of lots and parcels under this Section 10202(D)(3) shall become effective only when a notice of merger is filed with the recorder of the County of Ventura specifying the names of the record owners together with a legal description of the real property. Such notice shall only be filed upon order of the City Council upon satisfying the following requirements: 
1)  Notice of Intention. Prior to recording a notice or merger, the Planning Agency shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected lots or parcels may be merged pursuant to the Section 10202(D)(3), and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on the determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the recorder of the County of Ventura on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. 
2)  Request for Hearing. At any time within thirty (30) days after recording the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(1) above, the owner of the affected property may file with the City Clerk a request for a hearing on determination of status. 
3)  Scheduling of Hearing. Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status from the owner of the affected property pursuant to Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(2) above, a public hearing shall be scheduled, noticed and conducted within the time and manner prescribed in Section 10352(F) of this Article. The hearing shall be conducted not more than sixty (60) days following the City Clerk's receipt of the property owner's request for the hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City Council and the property owner. 
4)  Conduct of Hearing. At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this Section 10202(D)(3). At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall make a determination that the affected lots or parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall so notify the owner of its determination. The City Council's decision shall be deemed final and conclusive. If the City Council so decides, a determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 10202(D)(3)(a) above. As stipulated in Section 10202(D)(3)(b) above, a determination of merger shall be recorded within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the City Council hearing. 
5)  Non Protest. If, within the thirty (30) day period specified in Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(2) above, the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(4), the City Council may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 10202(D)(3)(b) no later than ninety (90) days following the mailing of notice required by Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(3). 
6)  Non Merger Decision. If, in accordance with Sections 10202(D)(3)(b)(4) or 10202(D)(3)(b)(5), the City Council determines that the subject property shall not be merged, it shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in Section 10202(D)(3)(b) a release of the notice of intention to determine status, recorded pursuant to Section 10202(D)(3)(b)(1), and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. 
4.  Improvements. Except as may be regulated elsewhere in this Article nonconforming improvements to a lot shall be governed by the same provisions as applies to buildings and structures under Section 10202(B). 
E.  Terminations. 
1.  Amortized Schedule. Every nonconforming use or structure shall be completely removed or altered to conform to the regulations of this Article within the following specified periods of time: 
a.  Nonconforming uses must discontinue when such uses are either abandoned or changed in use or intensity of use from the date they became nonconforming except as otherwise provided in this Article; 
b.  Structures for which a building permit is not required shall cease in three (3) years; 
c.  Structures which contain less than one hundred (100) square feet shall cease in three (3) years; 
d.  Outdoor advertising structures shall cease in three (3) years; and 
e.  All other structures may remain so long as they are not restored or rebuilt to an extent of more than seventy-five (75) percent of their reasonable value or so long as they do not pose a public nuisance; provided, however, they may not be added to or enlarged upon except as required by law or ordinance, or as approved under a variance procedure pursuant to Section 10005(C). 
2.  Reference Points. The time periods specified in Subsection 10202(E)(1) shall be measured as follows: 
a.  For nonconforming structures or uses which were in conformity immediately prior to the effective date of this Article, the time period shall be measured from the effective date of this Article. 
b.  For structures or uses which hereinafter become nonconforming due to any zone change or other amendment to this Article, the time period shall be measured from the effective date of such zone change or amendment. 
c.  For structures or uses which first became nonconforming by the provisions of any prior City or County ordinance, the time period shall be measured from the date such structures or uses first became nonconforming. 
3.  Removal. Nonconforming structures and uses are hereby declared to be a public nuisance when they remain beyond the time periods specified herein. Their removal shall be accomplished under the procedures specified in Article III, Chapter 4, Part A. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (2), (9), (10), 1992)  
10203 - Architectural features. 
A.  Fire Escapes. Fire escapes may extend or project into any required front, side or rear yard not more than four (4) feet; provided, however, that such extensions shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any property line. 
B.  Open Stairways and Balconies. Open, unenclosed stairways, or balconies not covered by roof or canopy may extend or project into a required rear yard not more than four (4) feet nor into a required front yard by more than thirty (30) inches; provided, however, that such extensions shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any property line. 
C.  Uncovered Porches, Platforms and Landings. Uncovered porches, platforms, or landing places which do not extend above the level of the first floor of the building, may extend into any required front, side or rear yard not more than six (6) feet; provided, however, that such extensions shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any property line; provided, further, that an open work railing, not more than thirty (30) inches in height may be installed or constructed on any such porch, platform or landing place. 
D.  Porch Covers and Awnings. Porch covers and awnings which are unenclosed on three (3) or more sides except for necessary supporting columns and reasonable architectural features and which do not extend above the eave lines of the principle structure from which they are attached, may be erected within required side and rear yards up to a distance of not less than three (3) feet from any property line. Covered patios which are enclosed on three (3) or more sides and attached to the principle structure shall be considered to be a part of that structure for the purpose of computing setback requirements. Unenclosed porch covers and awnings may occupy not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required or existing rear yard area. 
E.  Walls, Fences and Hedges. 
1.  Standards. Open work fences, guard railings for safety protection purposes and open work architectural features may be located in the required front yard area, provided the height does not exceed three and one-half (3-½) feet above the curb elevation at the front property line and provided further that safe sight distance of street traffic is not impaired. Walls, solid fences and boundary hedges shall not exceed a height of two and one-half (2-½) feet above the curb elevation at the front property line. A solid fence or wall not more than six (6) feet in height, or a hedge maintained so as not to exceed six (6) feet in height, may be located along the side or rear lot lines, provided such fence, wall or hedge does not extend into the required front yard. Where the difference in average elevation between adjacent lots is in excess of six (6) inches, the maximum height of the wall may be measured from the higher of the two adjacent lots. The foregoing provisions shall not be construed as to limit the height of retaining walls, except that front yard retaining walls shall not be more than eighteen (18) inches higher than the soil retained and shall not impair safe sight distance of street traffic. No fence or wall shall be constructed of sheet metal or fiber glass panels nor shall any fence or wall be improved with barbed wire, concertina wire, or any other similar material of a hazardous nature which is visible from any public right-of-way. 
2.  Ministerial Permit Required. No fence shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered without a Ministerial Permit having first been issued therefor by the City pursuant to Section 10354, unless said fence is provided for in other provisions in this Article. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  Trees, shrubs, flowers or other such landscaping may be permitted in any required front, side or rear yard. Fixed concrete, asphalt or similar monolithic hardscape shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard area. In all other respects, every required front, side or rear yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky unless otherwise provided in this article. 
2.  Nonconforming Provisions. All required yard areas which are nonconforming with the provisions of subsection (F)(1) of this section shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10202(E). 
G.  Underground Utilities. Except as provided for herein, all utility facilities, including, but not limited to, electrical lines, communication lines, cable television lines, street lighting power supply lines and appurtenances thereto shall be placed underground. Except as the parties may otherwise agree, CATV shall be provided the reasonable opportunity to utilize and jointly occupy for the same purpose any trench provided in any project for a utility for the purpose of connecting the utility to service the development. Except as provided herein, all utility facilities including service laterals to individual lots shall be installed in the ground prior to the paving of streets. The City Engineer may authorize installation of utility facilities after street improvements are installed if the installation will not require reconstruction or repair of street improvements or if unusual circumstances warrant. Certain utility appurtenances such as, but not limited to, transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts used in connection with underground facilities which cannot, without undue expense, be placed underground, may be placed on the surface of the ground. All necessary arrangements for the installation of utilities shall be made with the operator of each proposed subdivision utility system pursuant to this Section. At the time of approval of the tentative map for the proposed subdivision pursuant to Article IX, Chapter 1, the Advisory Agency or City Council, as the case may be, may modify this requirement for undue hardship. This Section shall not apply to utility lines which do not provide service to the area being subdivided. 
H.  Accessory Buildings. 
1.  No accessory buildings in the R-1, R-2, or R-3 zones may exceed one (1) story or fifteen (15) feet in height. 
2.  An accessory building may occupy not more than twenty-five (25) percent of a required rear yard; provided, however, that no accessory building may be constructed closer than five (5) feet from any property line. 
3.  Accessory buildings, excluding garages, shall not have a total aggregate floor area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet. In situations where the rear yards abut a public street, metal structures intended for storage of tools and other household items shall be located ten (10) feet from all rear rights-of-way. 
I.  Porte Cochere. A porte cochere may be placed over a driveway in a side yard, provided such structure is not more than one (1) story in height, is unenclosed on at least three sides except for necessary supporting columns and reasonable architectural features and is situated not closer than three (3) feet from the side property line. 
J.  Roof Structures. Architectural features, eaves, cornices, canopies, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar roof structures may extend or project into required front, side and rear yards not more than three (3) feet; provided, however, that such extensions shall not be closer than three (3) feet to any property line. 
K.  Antennas. No antenna, as defined in Section 10028 of this Article, shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered unless provided for in the manner below: 
1.  General Provisions. 
a.  Roof Mounting. Roof-mounted mast, pole or rod antennas whose purpose is to receive or broadcast UHF, VHF and/or FM, or other signals from other communication systems, where the boom or any active element of the antenna's array is longer than fifteen (15) feet, are prohibited in all residential zone districts unless otherwise provided for in Section 10203(K) 2(a)(1). Roof-mounted satellite antennas shall be strictly prohibited in all residential zone districts unless otherwise provided for in Section 10203(K) 2(a)(1). Roof-mounted steel lattice or skeletal type antennas of any kind shall be strictly prohibited in all residential districts. 
b.  Code Compliance. All satellite antennas shall be erected in a secure and wind resistant manner in conformance with applicable City Building Regulations, and shall be of noncombustible and corrosion-resistant material. 
c.  Qualification of Property. Not more than three (3) antennas shall be allowed on a single residential parcel of record; provided further, no more than two (2) antennas, not exceeding seventy-five (75) pounds each, may be mounted on a single roof. 
d.  Definitions. As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall apply: 
1)  Screened from Public View. Substantially concealed to the maximum extent feasible and legally permissible utilizing any combination of landscaping, fencing or other appropriate and suitable means in conformance with applicable development standards prescribed for the zone district within which the affected property is situated. Antennas which direct attention to a business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which antenna is located, or affixed to, shall be strictly prohibited in all zones. In residential districts where a Planned Development (PD) does not otherwise apply, antennas shall be deemed 'screened from public view' if the rear yards, wherein said antennas are situated, are enclosed by a solid fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 
2)  Removed from Public View. Located the furthest distance away from all public property or rights-of-way to the maximum extent feasible and legally permissible in conformance with applicable development standards prescribed for the zone district within which the affected property is situated. 
e.  Non-conforming Provisions. All antennas which are nonconforming with the provisions of Section 10203(K) shall be subject to the provisions of Section 10202(E). 
2.  Locational Criteria. 
a.  Residential Zones. In residential zone districts where a Planned Development (PD) designation does not otherwise apply, satellite antennas, dish or spherical antennas three (3) feet in diameter or larger, or any system of booms, poles, rods, masts, wires, reflecting discs or configuration with appurtenant equipment which exceed seventy-five (75) pounds each may only be placed in a rear yard removed and screened from public view, as accessory structures subject to the limitations prescribed therefore in Section 10203(H) of this Chapter. No portion of an antenna or array shall be located in a front or side yard or extend beyond any property lines. Guy wires shall not be anchored within any front or side yard area, but may be attached to the building. In residential zone districts where a Planned Development (PD) designation applies, satellite antennas shall incorporate earth tone or background colors which blend with adjacent structures and surroundings and may only be placed in locations removed and screened from public view subject to specification and approval by the City. Dish or spherical antennas three (3) feet in diameter, or any system of booms, poles, rods, masts, wires, reflecting discs or configuration with appurtenant equipment including supporting structures and accessory equipment shall be located and designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public/private streets. 
1)  Exceptions. Where an applicant can demonstrate that compliance with the provisions of this Chapter would result in the obstruction of a satellite antenna's reception window or other delivery of programming via microwave television (SMATV) or direct wave traveling by line of sight for UHF, VHF and/or FM pursuant to Section 10098, and that such obstruction involves factors beyond control of the applicant, variances may be granted in the manner provided for in Section 10005(c). The antenna may then be mounted on the roof or eaves; provided, however, that the antenna be located the furthest distance from public view; does not exceed the maximum height restriction imposed upon primary uses within the zone district; and the application includes certification that the proposed installation is in conformance with applicable City Building regulations. 
b.  Non-Residential Zones. In all zone districts, other than residential, satellite antennas may only be allowed as accessory structures, which are incidental to the principal permitted buildings and uses of the affected property, and shall be placed in locations removed and screened from public view including, but not limited to, use of permanent parapet walls if roof-mounted, subject to specification and approval by the City. Other antennas consisting of those defined in Section 10028, including guy wires supporting structures and accessory equipment shall be located and designed so as to minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from public streets. No portion of an antenna array shall extend beyond the property lines, front or side yard area. Guy wires shall not be anchored within any front or side yard area but may be attached to the building. 
3.  Height Criteria. Antennas, consisting of those defined in Section 10028 shall be subject to the development standards provided under the underlying zone classification unless provided for in this Section. 
a.  Residential Zones. Antennas which are roof-mounted shall not extend higher than fifteen (15) feet above the peak of the roof, except a single pole antenna weighing less than seventy-five (75) pounds, and further containing no booms, elements or accessory equipment may extend to a maximum height of forty (40) feet above grade. Ground mounted freestanding citizens band and amateur radio transmitting and receiving antennas, intended for private, noncommercial use accessory to the dwelling shall not exceed an overall height of fifty (50) feet above grade. 
b.  Non-Residential Zones. Transmitting and receiving dish antennas, broadcast antennas and microwave antennas shall not exceed a height more than what is minimally necessary to adequately obtain a reception window as defined in Section 10028. The burden of substantiating an adequate reception window shall be supported by documented evidence submitted by the applicant; provided, however, antennas approved pursuant to Section 10352 or Section 10353 of this Article, whichever applies, may not exceed the height as that allowed for building structures within the underlying zone. 
4.  Development Review Procedures. 
a.  Residential Zones. In residential zone districts where a Planned Development (PD) designation does not otherwise apply, no satellite receiving or transmitting dish or spherical antenna three (3) feet in diameter or larger, or antenna weighing more than seventy-five (75) pounds each, shall hereafter be erected or structurally altered without a Ministerial Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10354 of this Article. In residential zone districts where a Planned Development (PD) designation applies, no satellite antenna, microwave multi-point distribution system (MDS), satellite master antenna television (SMATV), or FM radio or UH/VHF television antenna shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered without a Development or Administrative Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10352 and 10353 of this Article, whichever applies. 
b.  Non-Residential Zones. In all zone districts, other than residential, no satellite antenna, dish or spherical antenna three (3) feet in diameter or larger, microwave multi-point distribution system (MDS), or satellite master antenna television (SMATV), or broadcast antennas shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered without a Development or Administrative Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10352 or 10353 of this Article, whichever applies. 
c.  Overriding Considerations. 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 10352(F) applications for broadcast antennas and microwave relays shall be considered in light of their horizontal and vertical dimensions, mass, nature of materials, design, location in relation to setback lines and adjacent properties, the presence of screening structures or landscaping and the visual impact of the antenna on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, ability to mitigate radio frequency and television interference, and levels of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) released. 
(2)  Conditions of approval may be imposed to mitigate any negative impacts from installation of the antenna. The cost of any such condition to the applicant shall be considered in light of the public benefit derived from the condition. 
(3)  Antennas approved pursuant to Section 10352 or Section 10353 of this Article, whichever applies, shall be removed upon termination or revocation of the Permit. The Permit shall terminate on change of leasehold interest, sale or transfer of the property by the applicant and shall be so conditioned. 
L.  Flagpoles. Flagpoles flying only the United States of America Flag together/or without the State of California Flag shall be allowed in all zone districts subject to the standards provided herein and the height limits of the underlying zone classification; provided, further, only one flagpole may be erected on a single Parcel of Record in residential zone districts where a Planned Development (PD) designation does not otherwise apply. In all other zone districts, a maximum of two (2) companion flagpoles may be erected on a Parcel of Record of Property as defined in Section 10303(B)(12) provided a Ministerial Permit is first issued by the City pursuant to Section 10354 of this Article. Judgments as to the application of Section 10303(B)(12) shall be made by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative under circumstances which are unclear or otherwise create hardships inconsistent with the purpose and objectives served by this Article. 
HEIGHT OF POLE IN RELATION TO SIZE OF FLAG 
POLE 	FLAG SIZE 	POLE 	FLAG SIZE 
15'-0? 	3'-0? × 5'-0? 	35'-0? 	5'-0? × 8'-0? 
20'-0? 	4'-0? × 6'-0? 	40'-0? 	6'-0? × 10'-0? 
25'-0? 	4'-0? × 6'-0? 	45'-0? 	6'-0? × 10'-0? 
30'-0? 	5'-0? × 8'-0? 	50'-0? 	8'-0? × 12'-0? 
		60'-0? 	8'-0? × 12'-0? 
 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (13), (14), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (11), 1992)  
10204 - Lot areas. 
A.  General. No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that the yards or other open space shall be smaller than prescribed by this Article, nor shall the density of population be increased in any manner except in conformance with the regulations herein established. No yard or other open space provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Article shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other buildings; provided, further, that no yard or open space on an adjoining property shall be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected. 
B.  Building Setbacks. For the purpose of building setback and yard area regulations, multiple-family dwellings with common party walls, including townhouses and condominiums, occupying one or more contiguous lots shall be considered as one building. 
C.  Rear Yards. In computing the depth of a rear yard, for any building where such yard opens onto an alley, one-half (½) of such alley may be assumed to be a portion of the rear yard, except that where it can be determined which lot or lots the alley was a part of before its dedication, then these lots shall be considered to include that area dedicated as a public alley as a portion of a rear yard area. Building setbacks and lot area requirements, as they apply to rear yards, may be reduced up to seventy-five (75) percent of that required in underlying zone districts for property wherein the rear yard of such property abuts land which is zoned P-R (Park Reserve) as described in Chapter 4, Part G of this Article; provided, however, that no structure may be built closer than five (5) feet of the rear yard property line. 
D.  Loading Spaces. Loading spaces as required by this Article, may occupy not more than fifty (50) percent of a required rear yard.  
10205 - Automobiles, motor homes, recreation vehicles and trailers. 
A.  Residential Use. Except as permitted under Section 10205(B) or as may otherwise be authorized by conditional use within designated mobile home and recreation vehicle parks, it shall be unlawful to use any automobile, motor home, recreational vehicle, or any other vehicle or trailer for any of the following purposes within the City: 
1.  As a dwelling unit or for sleeping purposes. 
2.  For storing goods, materials, or equipment other than those items considered part of or incidental to the automobile, motor home, recreational vehicle or trailer. 
B.  Commercial Use. No automobile trailer or mobile home shall be used for office, retail or any other commercial purpose except in the following situations: 
1.  An automobile trailer or mobile home may be used as a sales office for new or used trailer sales business if such automobile trailer or mobile home is on the same lot or parcel of land, new or used trailers, other than that for a sales office, are normally kept for display to the public; 
2.  An automobile trailer or mobile home may be used as a construction shack at the construction site of a construction project for the duration of such project; or 
3.  An automobile trailer or mobile home in a Mobile Home Park in a residential zone may be used for the conduct of a home occupation upon the same conditions and regulations as apply to single-family residences in the underlying classified zone.  
10206 - Highway dedication and improvement. 
A.  General. Except as provided in Section 10206(D), no building or structure shall be erected or enlarged, no parcel shall be subdivided or improved, and no permit or discretionary approval shall be issued or granted therefor, on any lot which abuts any designated right-of-way unless one-half (½) of the highway which is located on the same side of the centerline of the highway as such lot, has been dedicated and improved for the full width of the lot so as to meet the standards for such right-of-way provided in the current standard specifications for public works construction as adopted by the City pursuant to Article IV, Chapter 1 of this code, or such dedication and improvement has been assured to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. As used in this Section, the centerline of designated right-of-way means the centers of major and secondary highways as shown on the current adopted General Plan Map of the City and all other streets so designated by ordinance of the Council. 
B.  Procedures. When the City Engineer determines that the provisions of this Section are applicable to any project for which a permit is required by operation of any Chapter or Section of this code, the City Engineer shall inform the permit applicant of his determination, of the specific requirements of this Section which he determines to be applicable thereto, and of the procedures prescribed below. 
1.  Dedication. 
a.  Processing. Any person required to dedicate land by the provisions of this Section shall make an offer to dedicate property executed by all parties of interest including beneficiaries and trustees in deeds of trust as shown by a current preliminary report prepared by a company approved by the City Attorney for that purpose. Such report shall be furnished by the applicant. Such offer shall be on a form approved by the City Attorney and the City Engineer, be in such terms as to be binding on the property owner, the owner's heirs, assigns or successors in interest; and shall continue until the Council accepts or rejects such offer or until one (1) year from the date of such offer is filed with the City Clerk for processing, whichever occurs first. The offer shall provide that the dedication will be complete upon acceptance by the Council. The offer shall be recorded by the City Clerk in the Office of the County Recorder upon its acceptance. The City Engineer shall accept or reject the offer for recordation within ten (10) days after it is filed with the City Clerk. The offer shall thereafter be promptly processed by the City Departments concerned and submitted to the Council, in order to complete the dedication within one (1) year. If the offer is rejected by the Council or not processed within one (1) year, the City Engineer shall issue a release from such offer which shall be recorded in the Office of the County Recorder unless the parties making the offer wish to have the time extended. 
b.  Disposition. For the purpose of this Section, dedication shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the City Engineer accepts for recordation the offer to dedicate provided for herein. When the City Engineer accepts the offer to dedicate, he shall so notify those City Departments from which the applicant is required to obtain permits. 
2.  Improvement. 
a.  Processing. Any person required to make improvements by the provisions of this Section shall either make and complete the same to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or shall file with the City Engineer a bond in such an amount as the City Engineer shall estimate and determine to be necessary to complete all of the improvements. Provisions governing the issuance and filing of bonds shall be as follows: 
1)  Bonds may be posted either as a cash bond or a bond executed by a company authorized to act as a surety in the State of California. The bond shall be payable to the City and be conditioned upon the faithful performance of any and all work required to be done, and should such work not be done or completed within the time specified, the City may at its option cause the same to be done or completed, and the parties executing the bond shall be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses incurred in the construction thereof. The bond shall be executed by the owner of the lot as principal, and if a surety bond, shall also be executed by a corporation authorized to act as a surety under the laws of the State. The bond shall be in such form as it is approved by the City Attorney. 
2)  Whenever the owner elects to deposit a cash bond, the City is authorized, in the event of any default on the owner's part, to use any or all of the deposit money to cause all of the required work to be done or completed, and for payment of all costs and expenses therefor. Any money remaining shall be refunded to the owner. In the event that the work necessary shall cost more than the money deposited, the owner shall be responsible for said deficiency. 
3)  When a substantial portion of the required improvement has been completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and the completion of the remaining improvements is delayed due to conditions beyond the owner's control, the City Engineer may recommend that the completed portion be accepted by the Council and may recommend that the Council consent to a proportionate reduction in the surety bond in an amount estimated and determined by the City Engineer to be adequate to assure the completion of the required improvements remaining to be made. 
4)  Whenever a surety bond has been filed in compliance with this Section, the City is authorized, in the event of any default on the part of the principal, to enforce collection, under such bond, for any and all damages sustained by the City by reason of any failure on the part of the principal faithfully and properly to do or complete the required improvements, and in addition may cause all of the required work to be done or completed, and the surety upon the bond shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs thereof. 
5)  The term of the bond shall begin on the date of the deposit of cash or the filing of the surety bond and shall end upon the date of the completion to the satisfaction of the City Engineer of all improvements to be made and accepted by the Council. The fact of such completion shall be endorsed by a statement thereof signed by the City Engineer, and the deposit shall be returned to the owner, or the surety bond may be exonerated at any time thereafter. 
b.  Disposition. For the purpose of this Section, improvements shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the City Engineer accepts the cash or surety bond provided for herein or the improvements required to be made have been completed to the City Engineer's satisfaction. When the City Engineer accepts the bond or the work has been completed to his satisfaction, the City Engineer shall so notify those City Departments from which the applicant is required to obtain permits. 
3.  Appeals. 
a.  City Council. Any person required to dedicate land or make improvements under the provisions of this Section may appeal any determination made by the City Engineer in the enforcement or administration of the provisions of this Section to the City Council. Such an appeal shall be in writing, shall state in clear and concise language the grounds therefor, and shall be filed with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the City Engineer's determination which is the subject of the appeal. Within twenty (20) days from the date of the filing of such an appeal, the City Engineer shall transmit the appeal together with all relevant file information and his report and recommendation thereon to the Council. 
(b)  Processing and Disposition. Appeals to the Planning Commission and Council made pursuant to this Section shall be conducted in the time and manner prescribed in Section 10353(E); provided, however, that no fees shall be charged and no public hearing or notice of the manner need be given. The Council may make such modifications in the requirements of this Section or may grant such waivers or modifications of the determinations which are appealed to it as they shall determine are required to prevent any unreasonable hardship under the facts of each case so long as each such modification or waiver is in conformity with the general spirit and intent of the requirements of this Section. 
4.  Fulfillment. When all dedication and improvements required by this Section have been completed or satisfactorily assured, permits, subdivision maps and all other discretionary approvals required by operation of this code may thereafter be issued and granted. 
C.  Standards and Criteria. 
1.  Limits of Dedication. The maximum area of land required to be dedicated pursuant to this Section shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of any such lot which was of record on the effective date of this Section in the Office of the County Recorder. In no event shall such dedication reduce the lot below the minimum width required by operation of this Article or any area of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
2.  Limits of Improvement. No additional improvements shall be required on any lot where complete roadway, curb, gutter and sidewalk improvements exist within the present dedication contiguous thereto. Where necessary to make use of the dedicated right-of-way, the undergrounding of overhead utilities may be required as part of the improvement of such right-of-way under this Section. 
3.  Construction Standards. All major and secondary highways shall be constructed and improved in accordance with the standards contained in the then current standard specifications for public works construction adopted pursuant to Article VI, Chapter 1 of this code. All improvements required to be made by the provisions of this Section shall be done according to said specifications and such special standards as shall be set by the City Engineer. 
4.  Lot Development Standards. On a lot which is affected by street widening pursuant to the provisions of this Section, all required yards, setbacks, parking area, and all other development standards of the underlying zone district within which the lot is situated shall be measured and calculated from the new lot lines being created by said widening; provided, however, that for the purpose of establishing the required front yard depth on a frontage where the ultimate street line has been determined under the provisions of this Section, the depth of all existing front yards may be measured from such ultimate street boundary instead of the front lot line. In applying all other provisions of this Article, the area of such lot shall be considered as that which existed immediately prior to such required street widening. 
5.  Alignment Determinations. Whenever uncertainty exists as to the proper application of the provisions of this Section in the matter of street alignment, the City Engineer shall determine their application in conformity with the spirit and intent of this Section. 
6.  Fees and Improvement Cost. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, no fee shall be charged for the rendering of any service by the City in connection with dedication or improvement required by the provisions of this Section and not a part of a subdivision proceeding. Upon proper application to the Council and upon recommendation of the City Engineer, the City may accept and provide for the contribution toward the cost of making any improvement required by the provisions of this Section which the City Engineer determines will cost an amount greatly in excess of the cost to other property owners who are required to make improvements under the provisions of this Section in the immediate vicinity of the improvement. 
D.  Exemptions. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to the following types of projects and classes of development: 
1.  Residential Alterations. Additions and accessory buildings incidental to a residential building legally existing on a lot, provided no additional dwelling units or guest rooms are created. 
2.  Commercial Alterations. Additions and accessory buildings incidental to other than a residential building existing on the lot on January 6, 1968, provided that the total cumulative floor area of all such additions and accessory buildings shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (12), 1992)  
10207 - Oil and gas exploration and production. 
A.  General. The purpose of this Section is to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and controls for oil and gas exploration and production facilities and operations within the City. These regulations are adopted in the public interest to effect practices which will provide for a more economic recovery of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances, and which will ensure that development activities will be conducted in harmony with other uses of land within the City under which the rights of surface and mineral owners are balanced. It is contemplated that areas within the City may be explored for gas and oil by directional drilling methods through which surface drilling and production operations are limited to a few controlled drilling sites so located and spaced as to cause the least detriment to the community and to the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare. 
B.  Definitions. Unless otherwise defined herein, or unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the definition of petroleum-related terms shall be that used by the Division of Oil and Gas of the State of California. 
1.  Controlled Drilling Site. Within the context of this Section, the term "controlled drilling site" means that particular location upon which surface operations incident to oil or gas well drilling or deepening and the production of oil or gas or other hydrocarbon substances may be permitted. 
2.  Directional Drilling. Within the context of this Section, the term "directional drilling" shall mean whipstocking, or slant drilling from a controlled drilling site. 
3.  Operator. Within the context of this Section, the term "operator" means all persons, corporations and other legal entities who, acting under the authority vested in a petitioner, erects, conducts, or performs any oil or gas related use, operation or facility within an approved Oil Drilling District. 
4.  Petitioner. Within the context of this Section, the term "petitioner" means all persons, corporations and other legal entities who, pursuant to the provisions of this Section, petition the City for the establishment of an Oil Drilling District. 
5.  Sensitive Uses. Within the context of this Section, the term "sensitive uses" means all permitted and conditional uses allowed within Residential (R) and Park Reserve (P-R) Zones as listed in this Article. 
C.  Oil Drilling Districts. No oil or gas related use, operation or facility shall be permitted within the City unless such use, operation or facility is conducted within an approved Oil Drilling District in compliance with the conditions adopted pursuant thereto and development standards prescribed herein. 
1.  Establishment of Districts. The procedure for the establishment of Oil Drilling Districts shall be the same as that prescribed in Section 10004 for the amendment of zone boundaries. The Director of Community Development shall prescribe a form of petition which shall include such requests for information as may be required to permit a full consideration of the merits of the request and operating conditions to be imposed hereunder. 
a.  Development Plan. For the purpose of Section 10352(C)(5), a development plan shall accompany all applications for the establishment of Oil Drilling Districts, which plan shall include the following information: 
1)  The location of drilling and/or production sites, storage tanks, pipelines and access roads. 
2)  Plans for the consolidation, to the maximum extent feasible, of drilling and/or production facilities, together with accessory facilities. 
3)  A phasing plan for the staging of development which indicates the approximate anticipated time table for project installation, completion and decommissioning. 
4)  A plan for eliminating or substantially mitigating adverse impacts on surrounding land uses including scenic resources and archaeological sites due to siting, construction, or operation of facilities. 
5)  Grading plans for all facilities requiring the movement of greater than fifty (50) cubic yards of dirt. 
6)  A description of means by which all oil and gas will be transported off-site to a marketing point. 
7)  A description of the procedures for the transport and disposal of all solid and liquid waste. 
8)  Oil spill prevention and control measures. 
9)  Fire prevention procedures. 
10)  Emission control equipment. 
11)  Procedures for the abandonment and restoration of the site. 
12)  Compliance with any other requirement of this code related to oil and gas development. 
b.  Minimum Requirements. An Oil Drilling District shall not be established unless it meets the following requirements: 
1)  Each District shall not be less than sixty (60) acres in area and may not include land included within any other Oil Drilling District. 
2)  Not more than one (1) Controlled Drilling Site shall be permitted for each sixty (60) acres in any Oil Drilling District and such site shall not be larger than two (2) acres. 
3)  The number of wells which may be drilled from any Controlled Drilling Site shall not exceed one (1) well for each five (5) acres in the Oil Drilling District. 
4)  No petition for a establishment of an Oil Drilling District may be granted unless the petition is signed by persons having the proprietary or contractual authority to extract oil under the surface of at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the property in the Oil Drilling District proposed. 
c.  Conditions of Development. In addition to the Development Standards prescribed in Section 10207(C)(2), conditions may be imposed requisite to creation of any Oil Drilling District as are necessary and reasonable to ensure that the operations to be conducted within such District shall not adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of any resident of the City, shall not adversely affect the value of property located within such District, shall not constitute a nuisance, and shall not create such a condition of noise, odors, air emissions, vibrations, or other factors of nuisance and annoyance as to disturb residents or persons doing business within such District, and if potentially injurious or detrimental effects cannot be mitigated by the imposition of reasonable conditions, then the petition for the creation of such District shall be denied. 
1)  General Guidelines. The general guidelines which follow shall be used in the development of conditions which will help ensure that oil development projects generate minimal negative impacts on the environment. These guidelines shall be applied whenever physically and economically feasible and practicable, unless the strict application of a particular guideline would otherwise defeat the intent of other guidelines. A petitioner should use these guidelines in the design and development of a project and anticipate their use as conditions requisite to creation of an Oil Drilling District, unless the petitioner can demonstrate that they are not feasible or practicable. 
a)  Oil Drilling Districts and Controlled Drilling Sites should coincide and should only be as large as necessary to accommodate typical drilling and production equipment in fields of exploration. 
b)  Controlled Drilling Sites and production facilities should be located so that they are not readily visible. 
c)  Pipelines should be used to transport petroleum products off-site to promote traffic safety and air quality. 
d)  Gas from wells should be piped to centralized collection and processing facilities, rather than being flared, to preserve energy resources and air quality and to reduce fire hazards and light sources. 
e)  Oversized vehicles should be preceded by lead vehicles, where necessary for traffic safety. 
f)  Lighting should be kept to a minimum to approximate normal night time light levels. 
g)  In general, projects should be located, designed and operated so as to minimize their adverse impact on the physical and social environment. To this end, dust, noise, vibration, noxious odors, intrusive light, aesthetic impacts and other factors of nuisance and annoyance should be reduced to a minimum or eliminated through the best accepted practices incident to the exploration and production of oil and gas. 
2)  Applicability. The creation of an Oil Drilling District shall not relieve a petitioner or operator of the responsibility of securing and complying with any other permit which may be required by other City Ordinances, or State or Federal laws. No condition imposed upon the creation of an Oil Drilling District shall be interpreted as permitting or requiring any violation of law, or any lawful regulations or rules or orders of any authorized governmental agency. In instances where more than one (1) set of rules apply, the stricter one shall take precedence. Nothing herein shall be construed or interpreted as to restrict or limit the types of conditions which may be imposed upon operation or physical conditions within any Oil Drilling District. 
2.  Development Standards. The Development Standards specified below constitute minimum standards and criteria which apply to all Oil Drilling Districts. More restrictive requirements may be imposed as are necessary and appropriate pursuant to Section 10207(C)(1)(c). 
a.  Setbacks. No well shall be drilled and no equipment or facilities shall be permanently located within: 
1)  One-hundred (100) feet of any dedicated public street, highway, or nearest rail of a railway being used as such. 
2)  Five-hundred (500) feet of any building or dwelling not necessary to the operation of the well, unless a waiver is signed by all the occupants of said structures, allowing the setback to be reduced. In no case shall the well be located less than one-hundred (100) feet from said structures. 
3)  Five-hundred (500) feet of any building used as a place of public assemblage, institution, or school, unless a waiver is signed by the owners of said facilities, allowing the setback to be reduced. In no case shall the well be located less than three- hundred (300) feet from said structures. 
4)  Three-hundred (300) feet from the edge of the existing banks of "Red Line" channels as established by the Ventura County Flood Control District and one-hundred (100) feet from the existing banks of all other channels appearing on the most current United States Geological Service 2,000' scale topographic map as a blueline. These setbacks shall prevail unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Public Works Agency of the County of Ventura that the subject use can be safely located near the stream or channel in question without posing an undue risk of water pollution, damage to wildlife and habitat, and impairment of flood control interests. In no case shall setbacks from streams or channels be less than fifty (50) feet. All drill sites located within the 100-year flood plain shall be protected from flooding in accordance with Flood Control District requirements. 
5)  The applicable setbacks for accessory structures for the zone in which the use is located. 
b.  Obstruction of Drainage Courses. Drill sites and access roads shall not obstruct natural drainage courses, unless such courses are diverted or channeled subject to approval and specification of the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Removal of Equipment. All equipment used for drilling, redrilling, and maintenance work on approved wells shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days of the completion of such work. 
d.  Containment of Contaminates. Oil, produced water, drilling fluids, cuttings, and other contaminates associated with the drilling, production, storage, and transport of oil shall be contained on the site unless properly transported off-site or injected into a well. The petitioner, in conjunction with the Development Plan required pursuant to Section 10207(C)(1)(a), shall furnish plans for controlling oil spillage and preventing saline or other polluting or contaminating substances from reaching surface or subsurface waters. Said plans shall be consistent with the requirements of all governmental agencies having jurisdiction. 
e.  Securities. Prior to the commencement of drilling or other uses within an approved Oil Drilling District, each operator shall file, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and certified by the City Clerk, a bond or other security in the penal amount of not less than $10,000.00 for each well that is drilled or to be drilled. Any operator may, in lieu of filing such a security for each well drilled, redrilled, produced or maintained, file a security in the penal amount of not less than $10,000.00 to cover all operations conducted in the City, conditioned upon the operator well and truly obeying, fulfilling and performing each and every term and provision governing the Oil Drilling Districts within which the operator is to perform. In cases of any failure by the operator to perform or comply with any term or provision thereof, the City Council may, after notice to the operator and a public hearing, by resolution, determine the amount of the penalty and declare all or part of the security forfeited in accordance with its provisions. The sureties and principal will have joint and severable obligation to pay forthwith the amount of the forfeiture to the City. The forfeiture of any security shall not insulate the operator from liability in excess of the sum of the security for damages or injury, or expense or liability suffered by the City from any breach by operator of any term or condition imposed herein or of any applicable ordinance or of the security. No security shall be exonerated until after all the applicable conditions of the Oil Drilling District have been complied with. 
f.  Dust Prevention. The drill site and all roads or hauling routes located between the public right-of-way and the subject site shall be improved or otherwise treated as required by the City and maintained as necessary to prevent the emanation of dust. 
g.  Light Emanation. Light emanation shall be controlled so as not to produce excessive levels of glare or abnormal light levels directed at any neighboring uses. 
h.  Reporting Accidents. All operators shall immediately notify the Director of Community Development, Chief of Police and Fire Department and all other applicable agencies in the event of fire, spills or hazardous conditions not incidental to the normal operations at the project site. Upon request of any City Department, the operator shall provide a written report of any incident within seven (7) calendar days which shall include, but not be limited to, a description of the facts of the incident, the corrective measures used and the steps taken to prevent reoccurrence of the incident. 
i.  Painting. All permanent facilities, structures, and above ground pipelines on the site shall be colored so as to mask the facilities from the surrounding environment and uses in the area. Said colors shall also take into account such additional factors as heat buildup and designation of danger areas. Said colors shall be approved by the Director of Community Development prior to painting of said facilities. 
j.  Site Maintenance. The site of all oil and gas related uses, operations and facilities within approved Oil Drilling Districts shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner so as not to create any hazardous or unsightly conditions such as debris, pools of oil, water or other liquids, weeds, brush, and trash. Equipment and materials may be stored on the site which are appurtenant to the operation and maintenance of the oil well located thereon. If the well has been suspended, idled or shut-in for thirty (30) days, as determined by the Division of Oil and Gas, all such equipment and materials shall be removed within ninety (90) days. 
k.  Site Restoration. Within ninety (90) days of revocation, expiration, or surrender of any entitlement for use, operation or facility within an approved Oil Drilling District, or abandonment of the same, the operator shall restore and revegetate the premises to as nearly as original condition as is practicable, unless otherwise requested by the land owner. 
l.  Insurance. Each operator shall maintain, for the duration of operations conducted within an approved Oil Drilling District, liability insurance of not less than $500,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for all persons and $2,000,000 for property damage. This requirement shall not preclude an operator from being self-insured. 
m.  Noise Standard. Unless herein exempted, drilling, production, and maintenance operations conducted within an approved Oil Drilling District shall not produce noise, measured at a point outside of occupied sensitive uses that exceeds the following standard or any other more restrictive standard that may be established as a condition of such Oil Drilling District. Noise from the project site shall be considered in excess of the standard when the average sound level, measured over one (1) hour, is greater than the standard that follows. The determination of whether a violation has occurred shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the conditions imposed upon the Oil Drilling District within which the alleged violation has occurred. 
Average Noise Levels (LEQ) 
Time Period 	Production Phase 	Drilling and Maintenance Phase 
Day (7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.) 	55 dba 	45 dba 
Night (7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) 	45 dba 	40 dba 
 
For purposes of this Section, a well is in the "producing phase" when hydrocarbons are being extracted or when the well is idled and not undergoing maintenance. It is presumed that a well is in the "drilling and maintenance phase" when not in the "producing phase." Nomenclature and noise level descriptor definitions are in accordance with ANSI Sec. 3.33-1980, "Second Level Descriptors for Determination of Compatible Land Use." Measurement procedures shall be in accordance with the adopted "Noise Measurement Guidelines and Procedures." 
n.  Exceptions to Noise Standard. The noise standard established pursuant to Section 10207(C)(2)(m) shall not be exceeded unless exempted under any of the following provisions: 
1)  Where the ambient noise level exceed the applicable noise standards. In such cases, the maximum allowable noise levels shall not exceed the ambient noise levels. 
2)  Where the owners and occupants of sensitive uses have signed a waiver pursuant to Section 10207(c)(2)(s) indicating that they aware that drilling and production operations could exceed the allowable noise standard and that they are willing to experience such noise levels. The applicable noise levels shall apply at all locations where the owners and occupants did not sign such a waiver. 
o.  Compliance With Noise Standard. When an operator has been notified by the Department of Community Development that his operation is in violation of the applicable noise standard, he shall correct the problem as soon as possible in coordination with the Department of Community Development. If the noise problem has not been corrected by 7:00 p.m. of the following day, the offending operations, except for those deemed necessary for safety reasons by the Director of Community Development upon the advice of the Division of Oil and Gas, shall be suspended until the problem is corrected. 
p.  Preventative Noise Insulation. If drilling, redrilling, or maintenance operations, such as pulling pipe or pumps are located within 1,600 feet of an occupied sensitive use, the work platform, engine base and draw works, ground block, power sources, pipe rack and other probable noise sources associated with a drilling or maintenance operation shall be enclosed with soundproofing sufficient to ensure that expected noise levels do not exceed the noise limits applicable to the Oil Drilling District. Such soundproofing shall be installed prior to commencement of drilling or maintenance activities. The requirements may be waived if the operator can demonstrate that the applicable noise standard can be met or that all parties within the prescribed distance sign a waiver pursuant to Section 10207(c)(2)(s). 
q.  Hours of Well Maintenance. All non-emergency maintenance of a well, such as the pulling of pipe and replacement of pumps, shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. of the same day if the well site is located within 3,000 feet of an occupied residence. The requirements may be waived by the Director of Community Development if the operator can demonstrate that the applicable noise standards can be met or that all applicable parties within the prescribed distance has signed a waiver pursuant to Section 10207(c)(2)(s). 
r.  Limited Drilling Hours. All drilling activities shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m. of the same day when they occur less than eight hundred (800) feet from an occupied sensitive use. Night time drilling shall be permitted if it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director of Community Development that applicable noise standards can be met or that all applicable parties within the prescribed distance have signed a waiver pursuant to Section 10207(c)(2)(s). 
s.  Waivers. Where provisions exist for the waiver of a Development Standard prescribed in this Section, the waiver must be signed by all adult occupants of a dwelling, or in the case of other sensitive uses, by the owner of the use in question. Once a waiver is granted, the operator is exempt from the corresponding Development Standard for the duration of time which the operator performs operations within an approved Oil Drilling District. Unless otherwise stated by the signatory, a waiver signed pursuant to Section 10207(C)(2)(n) shall also be considered a waiver applicable to Sections 10207(C)(2)(p), (q), and (r). 
t.  Application of Sensitive Use Related Standards. The imposition of regulations on oil and gas operations, which are based on distances from occupied sensitive uses, shall only apply to those occupied sensitive uses which were in existence at the time of establishment of an Oil Drilling District; provided, further that waivers duly executed pursuant to Section 10207(c)(2)(s) shall bind all subsequent owners and occupants of sensitive uses until cessation of the use, operation or facility to which such waiver pertains. 
u.  Pipelines. When feasible, pipelines shall be routed to avoid areas of sensitive use. Unavoidable routing through such areas shall be done in such a manner as to minimize the impacts of a spill, should it occur, by considering spill volumes, durations, and projected path. Pipeline segments shall be isolated, in the case of a break, by automatic shut-off valves. In addition, the following provisions shall apply: 
1)  Biological Impaction. Prior to installation, a survey by a qualified expert in biological resources shall be conducted along the route of any pipeline to determine what, if any, biological resources may be impacted by construction and operation of a pipeline and to recommend any feasible mitigation measures. The cost of the survey shall be borne by the petitioner pursuant to Section 10207(C)(1), and may be conducted as part of environmental review pursuant to Section 10352(B)(2)(b). The recommended mitigation measures shall be incorporated as part of the establishment of an Oil Drilling District. 
2)  Geological Impaction. Prior to installation, geologic investigations shall be performed by qualified geologist or engineering geologist where a proposed petroleum pipeline route crosses potential faulting zones, seismically active areas, or other such areas of similar geologic risk. This report should investigate the potential risk and recommend such mitigation measures as pipeline route changes and/or engineering measures to help assure the integrity of the pipeline and minimize erosion, geologic instability, and substantial alterations of the natural topography. The recommended measures shall be incorporated as part of the approval of an Oil Drilling District. New pipeline corridors should be consolidated with existing pipeline or electrical transmission corridors where feasible unless there are overriding technical constraints or significant social, aesthetic, environmental, or economic reasons to do otherwise. 
3)  Site Restoration. Upon completion of pipeline construction, the site shall be restored to the approximate previous grade and condition. All sites previously covered with natural vegetation shall be reseeded with the same or recovered with the previously removed vegetative materials and should include other measures deemed necessary to prevent erosion until the vegetation can become established. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (2) (part), (14), 1992)  
Part B. - Use and Maintenance Standards 
 
10225 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City, to regulate buildings used for human habitation in conformance with Part 1.5, Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code, and to provide an orderly method of eliminating blighting influences which cause neighborhood deterioration.  
10226 - Property maintenance. 
A.  General. For the purpose of this Chapter, "Property Maintenance" means the external components and their state of repair of any real property within the City, including, but not limited to, structures, accessory structures, landscaping, appurtenances, or any other aspects of real property which are visible from any public right-of-way. 
B.  Deficient Structures. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property in this City to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
1.  Buildings that are left in a state of partial construction after expiration of a building permit or buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, or partially destroyed; 
2.  Buildings which are susceptible to dry rot, warping or termite infestation as a result of unpainted, chipped or peeling exteriors; 
3.  Buildings which contain or house broken windows; or 
4.  Building exteriors which are maintained in such an unsightly, defective, deteriorated, or disrepaired fashion that the same causes significant diminution of the property values of surrounding property. This condition includes, but is not limited to, unsightly and unnecessary markings, drawings, decorations, or graffiti on exterior surfaces which are visible from any public right-of-way; or any device, design, fence, accessory structure, clothesline, or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition or location. 
C.  Property Nuisances. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property or premises in this City to allow any of the following uses or conditions to exist upon such real property or premises: 
1.  Overgrown vegetation, dead trees, weeds or debris; 
2.  Storage or parking of equipment, machinery, or vehicles, either operative or inoperative, in front yards, unscreened side yards or any other yard areas not otherwise required by this Article which are visible from any public right-of-way; provided, however, operable campers, boats, automobile trailers, trucks of less than six thousand (6,000) pounds gross vehicle weight, and automobiles may be parked on a monolithic asphalt-concrete or portland cement slab or driveway which covers less than fifty (50) percent of the required front yard area and is connected to a public right-of-way by a curb cut; 
3.  Hazardous pools, ponds or excavations; 
4.  Storage of packing boxes, broken or discarded furniture, vehicle parts, household items, appliances, yard or building debris, garbage cans or any other similar item on a driveway or in front yards, unscreened side yards or any other yard areas not otherwise required by this Article which are visible from any public right-of-way; provided, however, that refuse awaiting collection by the City in compliance with this Article shall be exempt from this standard; 
5.  Clotheslines in front yards or unscreened side yards which are visible from any public right-of-way; 
6.  Conditions which constitute a public nuisance as defined by Section 3480 of the California Civil Code; 
7.  Real property or premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties; or 
8.  Real property or premises in such a condition as to depreciate values of neighboring properties to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts for such neighboring properties are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein. 
9.  Disassemble, repair, or otherwise perform any work upon any vehicle, machine, motor, appliance or other similar device on any property within the City unless such activity is incidental to a permitted or conditionally permitted use applicable to the underlying zone classification and is conducted within a building or within an area wholly enclosed from public view by a wall or fence conforming to the requirements of this Article. 
D.  Housing Code Violations. The Uniform Housing Code, latest edition, as approved by the International Conference of Building Officials and adopted in Article VIII of this code as the Housing Code of this City. The purpose of this Housing Code is to provide minimum requirements for the protection of life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants of residential buildings. Nuisance conditions in violation of the Housing Code include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Any public nuisance known at common law or equity jurisprudence; 
2.  Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors; 
3.  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, as determined by the Health Officer; 
4.  Insufficient ventilation or illumination; 
5.  Overcrowding of a room with occupants; 
6.  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities; 
7.  Uncleanliness, as determined by the Health Officer; or 
8.  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, as determined by the Health Officer. 
E.  Substandard Buildings. Under the provisions of the Housing Code, any building or portion thereof, including any dwelling unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is located, in which there exists any of the below listed conditions to an extent that endanger life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof, shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a substandard building. Where any of the following described conditions conflict with the definition of substandard building as set forth in Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California, the later shall govern. 
1.  Inadequate Sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Lack of, or improper water closet, lavatory, or bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit or lodging house; 
b.  Lack of, or improper water closets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel; 
c.  Lack of, or improper kitchen sink, in a dwelling unit; 
d.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel; 
e.  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit or lodging house; 
f.  Lack of adequate heating facilities; 
g.  Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilation equipment; 
h.  Lack of the minimum amounts of natural light or ventilation required by the Housing Code; 
i.  Room and space dimensions less than required by the Housing Code; 
j.  Lack of required electrical lighting; 
k.  Dampness of habitable rooms; 
l.  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents as determined by the Health Officer; 
m.  General dilapidation or improper maintenance; 
n.  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system; or 
o.  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the Health Officer. 
2.  Structural Hazards. All structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
b.  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports; 
c.  Flooring or floor supports in insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
d.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that split, lean, list, or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
e.  Members of walls, partitions, or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
f.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration; 
g.  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle or of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
h.  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or deterioration; or 
i.  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
3.  Hazardous Wiring. All wiring except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
4.  Hazardous Plumbing. All plumbing except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and which is free of cross-connections and siphonage between fixtures. 
5.  Hazardous Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition. 
6.  Faulty Weather Protection. All faulty weather protection including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster; 
b.  Deteriorated or ineffective water proofing of exterior walls, roof, foundation, or floors, including broken windows or doors; 
c.  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering; or 
d.  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
7.  Fire Hazards. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste, or vegetation which, in the opinion of the Chief of the fire department or his deputy, is in such condition as to cause a fire or explosion or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of a fire or explosion arising from any cause. 
8.  Faulty Materials of Construction. All materials of construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by the Housing Code and the Building Regulations, adopted pursuant to Article VIII of this code, and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
9.  Hazardous or Unsanitary Premises. Hazardous or unsanitary premises which are hereby defined as premises upon which exist an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborage, stagnant water, combustible materials, and similar materials or conditions which constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
10.  Inadequate Maintenance. Any building or portion thereof which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with Section 203 of the Building Regulations. 
11.  Inadequate Exits. All buildings or portions thereof not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by the Housing Code except those buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of their construction and which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
12.  Inadequate Fire Protection or Fire-Fighting Equipment. All buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire-extinguishing systems or equipment required by the Housing Code except those buildings or portions thereof which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire-extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
13.  Improper Occupancy. All buildings or portions thereof occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies. 
F.  Dangerous Buildings. The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, latest edition, as approved by the International Conference of Building Officials and adopted in Article VIII of this code is, is hereby adopted as the Abatement of Dangerous Building Code of this City. Any building or structure which has any or all of the following conditions or defects shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions exist to the extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants are endangered: 
1.  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
2.  Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or panic; 
3.  Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live loads, is more than one and one-half the working stress or stresses allowed in the Uniform Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
4.  Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is materially less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the Uniform Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location; 
5.  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance thereof is likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
6.  Whenever any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance, or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of one-half of that specified in the Uniform Building Code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the Uniform Building Code for such buildings; 
7.  Whenever any portion thereof has wracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction; 
8.  Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, because of (i) dilapidation, deterioration or decay; (ii) faulty construction; (iii) the removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; (iv) the deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or (v) any other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse; 
9.  Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used; 
10.  Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third of the base; 
11.  Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) percent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) percent damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings; 
12.  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become (i) an attractive nuisance to children; (ii) a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or as to (iii) enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts; 
13.  Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirements or prohibition applicable to such building or structure provided by the Building Regulations adopted pursuant to Article VIII of this code, as specified in the Uniform Housing Code, or of any law or ordinance of this City or the State relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings; 
14.  Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than fifty (50) percent, or in any supporting part, member, or portion less than sixty-six (66) percent of the (i) strength; (ii) fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or (iii) weather-resisting qualities or characteristics required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and occupancy in the same location; 
15.  Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the Health Officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease; 
16.  Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidation, deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire marshal to be a fire hazard; 
17.  Whenever any building or structure is in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence; or 
18.  Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (39), 1999)  
10227 - Performance standards. 
A.  General. For the purposes of this Chapter, "Performance Standards" means the limits within which any real property within the City may be used, including, but not limited to, any operation or process conducted thereon. 
B.  Criteria. It shall be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property in this City to maintain or use such real property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon: 
1.  Fire and Explosion Hazards. Storage and transportation of flammable or explosive materials, as defined by the Secretary of Commerce of the United States of America effective April 9, 1941 (as classes A, B and C), which are provided without adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and devices, standard in the industry. Burning of waste materials, except the burning of agricultural materials, in open fire is prohibited at any point; 
2.  Fissionable, Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbance. Storage or use of fissionable or radioactive material, if their use or storage results at any time in the release or emission of any fissionable or radioactive material into the atmosphere, the ground, or sewage systems, or any activities which emit electrical disturbances, affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance; 
3.  Glare, Humidity, Heat and Cold. Direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from flood lights or from high temperature processes, or humidity, heat or cold which is produced and is perceptible without instruments by the average person at the points of measurement specified; 
4.  Liquid and Solid Wastes. Discharge at any point into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream, or into the ground, of any material of such nature or temperature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements, except in accordance with standards approved by the California Department of Public Health or such other governmental agency as shall have jurisdiction over such activities; 
5.  Odors. Emissions or odorous gases or other odorous matter which is produced in such quantities as to be readily detectable by the average person at the points of measurement specified; 
6.  Particulate Matter and Air Contaminants. Emissions, including but not limited to, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, gases, and other forms of air contaminants which are produced from any facility or activity which are readily detectable without instrument by the average person at the points of measurement specified which can cause any damage to health, animals, vegetation or other forms of property, or which can cause excessive soiling at any point; 
7.  Smoke. Emissions produced at any point of visible gray smoke of a shade equal to or darker than Ringlemann No. l or its equivalent opacity for more than three (3) minutes in any one-hour period; 
8.  Vibration. Ground vibration which is produced and is discernible without instruments to the average person at the points of measurement specified. Ground vibration caused by motor vehicles, trains, aircraft, and temporary construction or demolition work is exempted from this standard; or 
9.  Prohibition of Dangerous Elements. Land or buildings which are used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, noxious, injurious or otherwise objectionable fire, explosive or other hazard; noise or vibration; glare; liquid or solid refuse or waste; or other dangerous or objectionable substance, condition, or element in such a manner or such an amount as to adversely affect other uses; or 
10.  Noise. Unless otherwise provided for, no person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound at any location in the City, or allow the creation of any noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person which causes the noise level when measured on any receiving property to exceed the noise level limits set forth by the Noise Control Ordinance as adopted and amended; 
C.  Effect of Other Regulations. Any use, process or operation subject to the criteria specified in Section 10202(B) shall comply with all other authorized governmental standards or regulations which are in effect in this City. More restrictive performance standards or regulations enacted by an authorized governmental agency having jurisdiction in this City on such matters, will take precedence over the provisions of said criteria. 
D.  Exceptions. Exceptions to the criteria specified in Section 10227(B) may be made during brief periods for reasons such as equipment shakedown, breakdown of equipment, modification or cleaning of equipment, or other similar reasons, when it is evident that such cause was not reasonable preventable. The criteria specified in Section 10227(B) shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation equipment unless otherwise specified in this Article. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (32), (33), 1999)  
10228 - Enforcement. 
In addition to being an infraction, all or any part of premises found to be maintained or used in violation of the provisions of this Chapter are declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Section. No provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City from commencing civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under the applicable provisions of the law of the State in addition to the proceedings provided herein. Whenever a finding is made that premises within the City are suspected of being maintained or used contrary to one or more of the provisions of this Chapter, the procedures set forth in Article III, Chapter 4 of this code shall apply. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (13), 1992)  
Part C. - Adult-Oriented Businesses 
 
10250 - Intent. 
The intent of this Chapter is to regulate zoning of adult-oriented businesses that, unless closely regulated, may have serious secondary effects on the community. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values, increases in vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas, increases in incidences of criminal activity, increases in noise, litter and vandalism and the interference with property owners' enjoyment of their property in the vicinity of such businesses. 
It is neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
Nothing in this Chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or permit the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any City ordinance or any law of the State of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. 
(Ord. 666 § 2 (part), 2005)  
10251 - Definitions. 
As used in this Chapter: 
"Adult bookstore" means any establishment, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct, displays and/or distributes sexually oriented merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, photographs, drawings, sculptures, motion pictures, videos, slides, films, or other written, oral or visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on a matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
"Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, lounge, restaurant or similar establishment or concern which features as a regular and substantial course of conduct, any type of adult live entertainment, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, other photographic reproductions, or other oral, written or visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
"Adult hotel/motel" means a hotel or motel, which as a regular and substantial course of conduct provides to its patrons, through the provision of rooms equipped with closed-circuit television or other medium, material which is distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts; or which rents, leases or lets any room for less than a twelve (12) hour period; or rents, leases or lets any room more than once in a twenty-four (24) hour period; or which advertises the availability of any of the above. 
"Adult live entertainment" means any physical human body activity (except verbal communication), whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including, but not limited to, singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which the performer or performers expose to public view, without opaque covering, specified anatomical parts, or depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered. 
"Adult model studio" means any premises where there is furnished, provided or procured a figure model or models who pose in any manner which is characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts where such model(s) is being observed or viewed by any person for the purpose of being sketched, painted, drawn, sculptured, photographed, filmed, or videotaped for a fee, or any other thing of value, as a consideration, compensation or gratuity for the right or opportunity to so observe the model or remain on the premises. Adult model studio shall not include any live art class or any studio or classroom that is operated by any public agency, or any private educational institution authorized to issue and confer a diploma or degree under California Education Code Section 94300 and following. 
"Adult motion picture arcade" means any business establishment or concern containing coin- or slug-operated or manually or electronically controlled still, motion picture or video machines, projectors, or other image producing devices that are maintained to display images to an individual in individual viewing areas when those images are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
"Adult-oriented business" means any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct performs or operates as an adult bookstore, adult theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult cabaret, adult model studio, adult motel/hotel; any business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct sells or distributes sexually oriented merchandise or sexually oriented material; or any other business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers to its patrons products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. "Adult-oriented business" does not include those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by State law. 
"Adult theater" means a business establishment or concern which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, presents adult live entertainment, motion pictures, videos, slide photographs, or other pictures or visual reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
"Establish" means any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any of the adult-oriented businesses defined herein to any other existing adult-oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any such adult-oriented business. 
"North commercial area" means all property within the City which has a zoning designation of General Commercial (C-1) and is located north of the centerline of Channel Islands Boulevard, west of the centerline of Ventura Road, east of the centerline of Victoria Avenue, and south of the centerline of Hemlock Street. 
"Live art class" means any premises on which all of the following occur: there is conducted a program of instruction involving the drawing, photographing or sculpting of live models exposing specified anatomical parts; instruction is offered in a series of at least two (2) classes; the instruction is offered indoors; an instructor is present in the classroom while any participants are present; and pre-registration is required at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of participation in the class. 
"Operate" means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on such premises. 
"Sexually oriented material" means any element of sexually oriented merchandise, or any book, periodical, magazine, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film, video, or other written, oral or visual representation which, for purposes of sexual arousal, provides depictions which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or specified anatomical parts. 
"Sexually oriented merchandise" means sexually oriented implements and paraphernalia including, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, edible underwear, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity. 
"Specified anatomical parts" means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals; pubic region; buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
"Specified sexual activities" means: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse; oral copulation; anal intercourse; oral-anal copulation; bestiality; direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals; flagellation, cutting, stabbing, piercing, or torture in the context of a sexual relationship; the use of human or animal excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship; or any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, or pedophilia; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; or 
(8)  The presence of any person who engages in any specified sexual activity; or who exposes any specified anatomical part; or who performs adult live entertainment in attire commonly referred to as pasties or a G-string, or any other opaque covering which covers only the areola or nipples of the female breast, and while covering the natal cleft and pubic area covers less than one (1) inch on either side of the entire length of the natal cleft and two (2) inches across the pubic area. 
(Ord. 666 § 2 (part), 2005)  
10252 - Permitted districts. 
Adult-oriented businesses shall only be established and operated within the north commercial area. 
(Ord. 666 § 2 (part), 2005)  
10253 - License required. 
Adult-oriented businesses shall obtain and maintain an adult-oriented business permit in compliance with all applicable requirements of Chapter 3 of Title V of this code. 
(Ord. 666 § 2 (part), 2005)  
10254 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this Chapter are not intended to provide exclusive regulation of the regulated adult uses. Such uses must comply with any and all applicable regulations imposed in other articles of the Zoning Code, other City ordinances, and State and federal law. 
(Ord. 666 § 2 (part), 2005)  
Part D. - Home Occupations 
 
10275 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate certain incidental and accessory uses which may be allowed in residential neighborhoods under conditions that will insure their compatibility with the neighborhood and to protect the rights of those residents who engage in certain home occupations that are harmonious with a residential environment.  
10276 - Permitted uses. 
For purposes of this Chapter, "Home Occupations" is defined as those activities conducted entirely within a dwelling and/or its accessory buildings and carried on by the inhabitants thereof; provided, however, that the occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling or dwelling purposes and there is no display, no stock in trade or commodities sold upon the premises, no person employed and no furniture, machinery or other mechanical equipment used except such as is customarily necessary or incidental to domestic uses; and further, provided, that such occupation is in conformance with all performance standards specified in Section 10278 necessary to protect the health, safety, public welfare and property values in the neighborhood. The following uses shall not be considered to be home occupations in any case and shall be regulated elsewhere in this Article: 
A.  Automobile and truck repair shops; 
B.  Barbershops; 
C.  Beauty salons; 
D.  Business or professional offices; 
E.  Care homes; 
F.  Clinics or hospitals; 
G.  Convalescent hospitals; 
H.  Fortune-telling; 
I.  General retail and service stores; 
J.  Garage sales (except on a limited basis of not more than two (2) days per year); 
K.  Kennels and boarding for pets; 
L.  Medical offices for physicians, dentists, osteopaths, and other practitioners of the healing arts; and 
M.  Other occupations or uses of a character similar to the above as determined by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative.  
10277 - License or permit required. 
Any person wishing to conduct a home occupation as defined in Section 10276 must obtain a business license pursuant to Article V of this code. Any person wishing to conduct a garage sale limited to a maximum of two days per year shall first obtain a Ministerial Permit pursuant to Section 10354. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 1, 7-18-16)  
10278 - Home occupation regulations. 
The following activities are prohibited in connection with any home occupation. Any person responsible for any of the following activities in connection with the conducting of a home occupation is guilty of an infraction punishable pursuant to Article I, Chapter 2 of this code. 
A.  Activities that violate any Section or Chapter of this code; 
B.  Activities conducted by persons other than members of the household occupying the dwelling; 
C.  Activities conducted outside the enclosed living area of the main dwelling unit; 
D.  Activities that generate any outdoor storage of materials, equipment or vehicles; 
E.  Activities requiring more than one (1) room in the main dwelling unit or which occupy any space devoted to purposes specifically required by this Article (e.g., off-street parking, except as authorized by subdivision H; 
F.  Activities requiring the employment of persons other than members of the household occupying the dwelling unit; 
G.  Activities causing change to the principal character or use of the dwelling unit; 
H.  Activities involving exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation including, but not limited to, the parking of more than one (1) commercial vehicle on or immediately adjacent to the premises; 
I.  Activities involving the commercial sale of goods or the rendering of services on the premises; 
J.  Activities creating greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than normal for the district within which it is located; 
K.  Activities not otherwise conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; 
L.  Activities conducted in such a manner as to evidence use of the property other than for residential purposes to a substantial number of abutting residents or the public at large; or 
M.  Activities which produce or cause the production of objectionable or offensive elements not characteristic of residential areas in which the home occupation occurs including, but not limited to, uncharacteristically excessive quantities of noise, light, vibration, smoke, odor, humidity, radiation, heat, cold, glare, dust or dirt, electrical interference, pedestrian activity, vehicular traffic, television or radio interference or other such objectionable or offensive conditions. 
(Ord. No. 726, § 2, 7-18-16)  
Part E. - Large Family Day Care Homes 
 
10280 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this part is to ensure that large family day care homes providing child care in residential districts do not adversely impact the adjacent neighborhood. While large family day care homes are needed by residents in this City, especially in close proximity to their homes in residential neighborhoods, the potential traffic, noise and safety impacts of this use should be regulated in the interest of nearby residents and the children in the day care facility. It is also the intent of this section to allow family day care homes in residential surroundings to give children a home environment which is conducive to healthy and safe development. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 4, 11-5-12)  
10281 - Permitted uses. 
Large family day care homes are permitted uses in the City's R-1 district, subject to the permit requirements (Section 10282) and performance standards (Section 10283) established below. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 4, 11-5-12)  
10282 - Permits required. 
Any person wishing to conduct a large family day care home as defined in Section 10059 shall apply for a Ministerial Permit pursuant to Section 10354. A large family day care home meeting the performance standards for operation specified in Section 10283, shall, after application therefore, be issued a Business License pursuant to Article V of this code. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 4, 11-5-12)  
10283 - Performance standards. 
A.  State Licensing Required. These standards apply in addition to the requirements of the California Department of Social Services and its facility licensing procedures. Licensing by the Department of Social Services is required for all child day care facilities. 
B.  Structures. A large family day care home shall conform to all property development standards of the zoning district in which it is located unless otherwise provided in this section. 
C.  Noise. The operation of a large family day care home shall comply with noise standards contained in the Port Hueneme Municipal Code, Article III, Chapter 5 (Noise Control). 
D.  On-Site Parking. On-site parking for large family day care homes shall not be required except for that required for the residential building. 
E.  Passenger Loading. Curbside loading shall be presumed adequate for drop-off and pick-up of children. However, where the Parking and Traffic Engineer, in evaluating a particular large family day care home, determines that curbside loading is not adequate, the Parking and Traffic Engineer shall approve a passenger loading plan. 
F.  Lighting. Passenger loading areas may be illuminated. If a passenger loading area is illuminated, the lighting shall be directed away from adjacent properties and of an intensity compatible with the residential neighborhood. 
G.  Concentration of Uses. A residential parcel shall not be bordered on more than one (1) side by a care facility. 
H.  Swimming Pools or Spas. No swimming pools or spas shall be installed on the site due to high risk and safety considerations. An existing pool or spa for a separate use on the parcel may be allowed if determined by the Director that adequate, secure separation exists between the pool or spa and the facilities used by the children. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 4, 11-5-12)  
Chapter 3 - LAND DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS  
Part A. - Development Standards 
 
10300 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating the design, materials, construction, location and maintenance of off-street parking, landscaping, exterior lighting and signs. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (29), 1999)  
10301 - Off-street parking. 
A.  General. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered unless such uses and improvements comply with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Parking Required. 
1.  Number by Use. The number of off-street parking spaces required shall not be less than as set forth below and if the aggregate number of parking spaces required results in a fraction of a space, the next highest whole number of spaces shall be required. Where square footage is used as a determinate of off-street parking requirements, excluded from the computation shall be that area devoted to restrooms, stairwells and utility shafts, balconies and other such architectural features of a nature not pertinent to the use as determined by the Director of Community Development. 
USE 	PARKING SPACE REQUIRED 
a. Residential Types. 	
One family dwellings, mobile homes and two-family dwellings: 	Two (2) for each dwelling unit; both spaces contained within an enclosed garage; within an enclosed garage; provided, however, a three-car enclosed garage shall be required when the total number of bedrooms within a dwelling unit exceeds four (4) and/or when the total number of bathrooms as defined in Section 10032 exceed three (3). 
Multiple-family dwellings: 	One and one-half (1-½) for each dwelling unit of less than two (2) bedrooms and two (2) for each dwelling unit of two or more bedrooms, each apartment shall have at least one (1) covered space; parking for townhouses and condominiums shall have both spaces contained within an enclosed garage. 
Lodging houses, boarding houses, clubs or fraternities and the like, having sleeping rooms: 	One and one-half (1-½) for each sleeping room or one for each non-kitchen unit, one (1) for each 250 square feet of office space and one guest space for each five (5) units. 
Day-care, preschools, and nursery schools: 	One (1) per staff member and one (1) for each five (5) children at licensed maximum capacity. Large family day care homes: 1 (1) per 10 (10) children if adequate drop-off facilities are provided and designed to accommodate a continuous flow of passenger vehicles to safely load and unload children; provided, however, large family day care residences also provide two (2) driveway parking spaces including a readily accessible garage. The adequacy of drop-off facilities proposed shall be determined by the approval body for the proposed use. 
Hotels, motels, boatels, and the like: 	One and one-half (1-½) for each kitchen unit, one (1) for each non-kitchen unit, one (1) for each 250 square feet of office space and one (1) guest space for each five (5) units. 
Emergency shelters: 	One (1) parking space per ten (10) adult beds, plus one (1) parking space per employee on the largest shift. 
Single room occupancy (SRO) housing: 	One (1) parking space per two (2) units. 
b. Institutional Types. 	
Hospitals, children's homes, homes for the aged, nursing homes, residential care facilities and the like serving seven (7) or more persons. 	One (1) for each two beds and one (1) for each two (2) employees on the largest shift. 
Churches, clubs and lodges: 	One (1) for each four (4) seats or one (1) for each twenty-eight (28) square feet of the general assembly room or auditorium, whichever is greater. 
Libraries, museums, galleries and the like: 	One (1) for each 250 square feet of total floor space. 
Primary schools: 	One (1) per classroom plus one (1) for each thirty-five (35) square feet of the general assembly room or auditorium. 
Secondary schools: 	Five (5) per classroom plus one (1) for each thirty-five (35) square feet of the general assembly room or auditorium. 
c. Commercial Types. 	
Professional office, customer service, and general retail: 	One (1) for each 250 square feet of total floor area. 
Establishment or enterprises of a recreational or entertainment nature: 	
1) Spectator type, e.g., theaters, auditoriums, thirty-five (35) arenas, sections, and the like: 	One (1) for each five (5) seats or one (1) for each square feet of total sport seating area, whichever is greater, plus one (1) for each 250 square feet of total non-seating area. 
2) Participant type, e.g., skating rinks, arcades, dance and exercise studios, martial arts training, and the like: 	One (1) for each fifty (50) square feet of total floor area. 
Bowling alleys, tennis courts and billiard rooms: 	Three (3) for each court, billiard table and/or alley plus parking for incidental uses (e.g., restaurants, taverns, etc.). 
Full service car wash: 	One (1) parking space per employee on the largest shift, plus one and one-half space for every twenty (20) feet of car wash conveyor, plus one (1) for each 250 square feet of incidental uses (e.g., customer service, general retail, etc.). 
Used car sales: 	One (1) parking space per 1,000 square feet of total indoor/outdoor display area, plus one (1) for each 250 square feet of total office area. 
Mobile recycling units: 	Mobile recycling units may not locate where existing parking capacity is already fully utilized, the locations of which shall be submitted to and approved in the manner provided for in Section 10352 or Section 10353 of this Article, whichever applies. Otherwise, a reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may be allowed as follows: 
For a commercial host use: 	
No. of Available Parking Space 	Maximum Reduction 
	0—25  0 
	26—35  2 
	36—49  3 
	50—99  4 
	100+  5 
Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of food and beverage: 	One (1) for each four (4) fixed seats, plus one for each 45 square feet of dining or service area excluding fixed seats, plus one (1) for each 250 square feet of non-service area. 
Vocational or training schools or businesses: 	One (1) for each instructor plus one (1) for each three (3) students/participants 
Service stations and commercial garages: 	One (1) for each pump island, plus one (1) for each service rack or bay, plus one (1) for each 250 square feet of office area (pump island and service bay areas shall not be counted as parking spaces) 
d. Industrial & Manufacturing Types. 	
For all industrial and manufacturing uses listed as permitted in M Zones, the greater of the following two computations apply: 	
1) Related to personnel: 	
a) Managerial, administrative and clerical employees: 	One (1) for each such employee, plus 
b) Unclassified employees: 	One (1) for each two (2) such employees, on the largest shift: plus 
c) Visitor parking: 	One (1) for each five (5) managerial, administrative, and clerical employees, plus 
d) Business vehicles: 	One (1) for each such vehicle parked on the premises: 
2) Related to floor area: 	
a) Warehouses & wholesale establishments: 	One (1) for each 500 square feet of total floor area, plus 
b) Manufacturing, research and development and office space: 	One (1) for each 300 square and development and feet of total floor area 
 
2.  Unspecified Uses. The parking space requirements for uses not otherwise specified in Section 10301(B)(1) shall be fixed by the City Council. Such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most compatible uses specified herein and shall be made in accordance with the amendment procedures set forth in Section 10003; provided, however, that no fee shall be charged and, no public hearing or notice of the matter need be given. 
3.  Loading Spaces. For all uses of an institutional, personal, professional and business service nature, included, but not limited to, offices, hotels and motels, hospitals and auditoriums, one off-street loading space shall be required for each 50,000 square feet of total floor area which, in any case, need not exceed a total of three (3) such spaces. For all uses of a general retail, industrial or manufacturing nature, one off-street loading space shall be required for each 30,000 square feet of total floor area which, in any case, need not exceed a total of five (5) such spaces. 
4.  Compact Stalls. In every parking area containing ten (10) or more stalls, not more than twenty (20) percent of the required and non-required off-street parking provided for a use other than residential may be designed as compact automobiles shall be clearly marked as a compact stall, with letters six (6) inches high. 
5.  Multiple-Family Dwellings and Mobile Home Parks. In addition to the requirements specified in Section 10301(B)(1), additional off-street parking for multiple-family dwellings and mobile home parks shall meet the following standards: 
a.  An uncovered off-street guest parking space shall be provided in addition to those spaces required by Section 10301(B)(1) at a ratio of one for each two (2) dwelling units. 
b.  An uncovered compact automobile stall may be provided at a ratio of one for each five (5) parking spaces, in lieu of the regular size. 
6.  Shared Parking. Parking facilities may be used jointly for uses with significantly different peak hours of operation, provided, however, requests for shared parking must meet the following requirements: 
a.  A parking study completed by a State Registered Traffic Engineer or firm shall be submitted by the applicant demonstrating that there will not exist substantial conflict in the peak hours of parking demand for the uses for which joint use is proposed. 
b.  The number of parking stalls which may be credited against the requirements for the structures or uses involved shall not exceed the number of stalls reasonably anticipated to be available during the differing hours of operation. 
c.  The establishment of the shared parking agreement shall be fixed by the City Council in accordance with Section 10352, or Section 10301(B) (2) if the property is not zoned PD (Planned Development). 
7.  Handicapped Parking. All property developed or improved on or after the effective date of Part 2, Chapter 2-71, Title 24 of the California Code of Administrative Regulations shall provide handicapped parking in compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations governing such parking. In addition, all handicapped parking required by operation of this section shall be designated for the exclusive use vehicles which display either a distinguishing license plate or a placard issued pursuant to operative provisions of the California Vehicle Code. All persons owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any real property subject to the requirements of this section shall maintain all handicapped parking in strict compliance with the design standards prescribed in Title 24 of the California Code of Administrative Regulations and the minimum standards prescribed in Section 22511.8(a) of the California Vehicle Code, as such standards now exist and may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  Access and Size. Each unenclosed off-street parking space shall have dimensions of at least nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet for standard size automobiles and dimensions of at least eight (8) feet by fifteen (15) feet for compact automobiles, exclusive of driveways and aisles. Required parking stall lengths within unenclosed areas may be reduced by a maximum of two (2) feet to allow for overhang of automobiles upon landscaped planters and sidewalks; provided, however, that such planters and sidewalks are a minimum of six (6) feet in width. Each enclosed off-street parking space shall have dimensions of at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet for each stall. Garage door openings for single and double-car garages shall be a minimum of eight (8) and sixteen (16) feet, respectively. Each off-street loading space shall have dimensions of at least ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet. Where such loading space does not adjoin a street or alley, convenient and adequate access, at least twenty (20) feet in width shall be required. Aisle width shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
ANGLE OF 	AISLE WIDTH 
30 	14' 
45 	18' 
60 	20' 
90 	25' 
 
2.  Location. Parking spaces shall be located off public and private streets in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Parking spaces for dwelling units shall be located on the same lot or building site as the building that they are intended to serve. Required covered parking shall be within an enclosed garage or carport; provided, however, that no open storage shall be allowed within a carport which is visible from any public right-of-way. 
b.  Parking spaces for all uses other than residential shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the building or use which they are intended to serve, or located on a contiguous lot thereof. 
c.  Parking spaces shall be arranged so that it is not necessary to back onto an arterial or collector highway. 
d.  Tandem parking shall not be recognized in fulfilling off-street parking requirements pursuant to Section 10301(B)(1). 
e.  In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements for various uses in accordance with Section 10301(B)(1). Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing facilities for any other use unless approved otherwise pursuant to Section 10301(B)(6). 
f.  Every parking stall, other than those provided for one (1) or two (2)-family dwellings, which is adjoined on either side by its longer dimension by a fence, wall, partition, column, post or similar obstruction, shall have its minimum width increased by not less than three (3) feet on the side of the obstruction. 
g.  Parking spaces located perpendicular to a curvilinear parking aisle, shall for the purposes of measuring a stall width, be taken at a point ten (10) feet in from the mouth of a standard stall, and seven and one-half (7-½) feet in from the mouth of a compact stall. 
3.  Improvements. 
a.  Surface. All Parking areas shall be surfaced with a minimum of two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete over four (4) inches of base, or four (4) inches of portland cement concrete. Site grading and drainage shall be subject to the approval of the Department of Public Works. All designated driving areas and each off-street parking space required by this section shall be striped in accordance with specifications of the Department of Public Works, which at all times shall be maintained in a readily visible state. 
b.  Fence. Where a group parking area for four (4) or more automobiles abuts property classified for residential use, it shall be separated therefrom by a solid masonry wall, six (6) feet in height, provided the wall, from the front property line to a depth equal to the required front yard on the abutting residential classified property, shall be two and one-half (2½) feet in height. Where such parking area abuts a street, it shall be separated therefrom by an ornamental fence, wall or compact evergreen hedge having a height of not less than two (2) feet and not more than two and one-half (2½) feet, which shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
c.  Access. Each entrance and exit to a parking lot shall be constructed and maintained so that any vehicle entering or leaving such parking lot shall be clearly visible a distance of not less than ten (10) 
4.  Driveways. For uses other than one (1) and two (2)-family dwellings, driveway access from a public street to the required off-street parking area shall be as follows: 
a.  Where the parking area contains less than twenty-five (25) parking spaces, driveway access shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width. There shall be an additional three (3) feet in width of landscaping wherever the driveway abuts a main building on the lot. 
b.  Where the parking area contains more than twenty-five (25) parking spaces, a two-way driveway shall be required with a minimum paved width of eighteen (18) feet. There shall be an additional three (3) feet in width of landscaping wherever the driveway abuts a main building on the lot. 
c.  No driveway or vehicle accessway shall have a grade in excess of ten (10) percent within twenty (20) feet of a street or alley right-of-way, and the slope of every driveway or ramp shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent; provided, however, that where an existing driveway being used for access is required to be modified because of a public improvement project, such grade may exceed fifteen (15) percent, provided the design is approved by the Department of Public Works. Transition slopes in driveways and ramps shall be designed to the standards established by the Department of Public Works and the City Building Official. For the purpose of calculating the driveway grade, elevation of the property line or the street plane line, whichever is more restrictive, shall be three and one-half (3½) inches on curbed streets or five (5) inches on non-curbed streets, above the elevation of the center lines of the street. Access to alleys shall be three (3) inches above alley center lines of property lines. 
d.  No driveway shall individually exceed thirty (30) feet in width, nor shall the cumulative total of driveways exceed one-half (½) of the total lot frontage. 
5.  Lights. Any lights used to illuminate off-street parking or vehicle sales areas shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining residential property and streets. 
6.  Maintenance. All parking areas and access thereto shall be maintained in a good state of repair. Any parking improvements found to be in violation of this Section shall be abated in the time and manner prescribed for property maintenance enforcement in Chapter 2, Part B. 
D.  Development Review Procedures. 
1.  Ministerial Permit Required. No off-street parking shall be hereafter installed or modified without a Ministerial Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10354, unless said parking is provided for in other provisions of this Article. 
2.  Alternative Development Criteria. Where off-street parking does not meet the requirements of this Section for the use with which it is associated, the property may be improved, building enlarged or use intensified only if the parking is made to conform with the requirements of this Section or approval is granted by one of the following means: 
a.  Development Permit. Approval is granted in conjunction with issuance of a Development Permit or modification thereto pursuant to the provisions of Section 10352. 
b.  Variances. A variance is granted in accordance with the provisions of Section 10005. 
3.  Exemptions. Properties, buildings, and uses which are nonconforming with respect to the off-street parking requirements of this Section shall be deemed exempt, except for maintenance standards, from the requirements and procedures specified in this Section under the following circumstances: 
a.  Residential Exemptions. Within a Residential (R) Zone, residential uses existing as of April 15, 1980, shall be exempt so long as: 
1)  Each use, at a minimum, complies: (1) with the terms and conditions of a Development Permit, if any, which was issued by the City relative to each such use; or (2) where a Development Permit has not been issued, each use complies with the off-street parking requirements in effect at the time of original construction as determined on the basis of building permits on record; provided, however, that where the date of original construction cannot be determined on this basis, each such use shall be deemed exempt; 
2)  Off-street parking is lawfully accomplished within the parameters of Section 10226(C)(2) of this Article; and 
3)  No additions are made on or to the property; provided, however, that single-family structures may be improved to the extent that any addition, either individually or cumulatively, does not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit as originally constructed. 
b.  Commercial Exemptions. With a Commercial (C) Zone, commercial uses existing as of April 15, 1980, shall be exempt so long as: 
1)  Each use within a building: (1) maintains a valid business license; (2) remains unchanged in type of use; (3) remains unchanged in area, space, and volume occupied by each use; and (4) complies with the terms and conditions of each Development Permit, if any, which has been issued by the City relative to each such use; or 
2)  Each use which fails to meet the provisions of Section 10301(D)(3)(b)(1) is replaced by a use which requires not more than one (1) off-street parking space for every 250 square feet of total floor area, as specified in Section 10301(B)(1). 
c.  Manufacturing Exemptions. Within a Manufacturing (M) Zone, manufacturing and coastal industry uses existing as of April 15, 1980, shall be exempt so long as: 
1)  Each use, at a minimum, complies: (1) with the terms and conditions of each Development Permit, if any, which has been issued by the City relative to each such use; or (2) where a Development Permit has not been issued, each use complies with the off-street parking requirements in effect at the time of original construction as determined on the basis of building permits on record; provided, however, that where the date of original construction cannot be determined on this basis, each such use shall be deemed exempt; and 
2)  No additions are made on or to the property. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (31), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (2) (part), (14), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 5, 11-5-12)  
10302 - Landscaping. 
A.  General. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered unless such uses and improvements comply with the provisions of this Section. 
B.  Landscaping Required. Any development or administrative permit approved by the City may be conditioned to require permanent landscaping. All open off-street automobile parking areas that contain more than four (4) parking spaces and which abut upon a public street right-of-way shall provide landscaping to a depth of five (5) percent of the parking lot depth from the abutting street right-of-way not to exceed ten (10) feet with openings for pedestrian paths or driveways. An additional five (5) percent of the gross lot area used for off-street parking and access thereto, exclusive of the landscaped area abutting the street right-of-way, shall be devoted to landscaping. 
C.  Design Standards. 
1.  Improvements. All parking lot landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  All landscaping shall be contained in planting areas with a minimum size of twenty (20) square feet and a minimum dimension of four (4) feet. 
b.  All planting areas shall be bound by a concrete curb having a minimum height of six (6) inches. 
c.  Landscaped areas shall be located throughout parking lot areas in order to obtain the maximum amount of dispersion. 
d.  Not less than one tree of a species satisfactory to the City shall be installed for every ten (10) single-row parking stalls and for every twenty (20) double-row parking stalls within a parking lot. 
e.  All plant material within a thirty (30) foot triangle at the intersection of two streets shall be no more than three (3) feet in height above the curb elevation; provided, however, that trees may be planted which are trimmed so that no branches extend lower than six (6) feet above curb level. 
f.  Landscaped areas shall contain trees and/or shrubs with vertical growth and those portions of a planting area not planted with either trees or shrubs shall be developed in one of the following manners: 
1)  Planting with ground cover capable of covering the entire planting area within a six (6)-month period. 
2)  Use of a plastic or other synthetic membrane with holes punched for existing plants and covered with a minimum of two (2) inches of either redwood, bark, stone, or similar material. 
g.  All planting areas shall be served by an automatic underground sprinkler system supplied with bubblers, sprinklers or hose bibs. 
h.  All proposed plant materials shall be of a type having a root structure which, in their natural and anticipated extension and growth and in relation to their location will not damage or interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of the following: 
1)  Public or private lines, cables, conduits, pipes, or other underground structures. 
2)  Public or private sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or hard surface roads, streets, driveways, parking and turnaround areas, easements, or like things designed and constructed to accommodate vehicles. 
3)  Contiguous, adjacent or abutting structures, foundations or landscape materials. 
i.  No landscaped material shall be of a type that displays any of the following characteristics: 
1)  Are noxious or dangerous to persons or domestic animals. 
2)  Exude or emit substances or things which, because of the proposed location, will likely injure or damage real or personal property in the area of their immediate effect. 
3)  Are designed for relatively permanent emplacement yet will likely die because of proposed locations unrelated to their ecological requirements. 
4)  Will likely block the view, sunlight or fresh air flow otherwise available at a window or other opening in the walls of the building on the property or on a building on adjacent property. 
5)  Are so arranged or placed so as not to produce the aesthetic results desired by such landscaping. 
2.  Maintenance. All parking lot landscaping shall be maintained in conformance with the following standards: 
a.  All vegetation shall be maintained free of physical damage or injury arising from lack of water, chemical damage, insects, diseases, or other such case. Vegetation showing such damage shall be replaced by the same or similar vegetation which will be comparable at full growth. 
b.  Lawn and ground cover are to be trimmed or mowed regularly. All planting areas are to be kept free of weeds and debris. 
c.  All planting areas are to be kept in a healthy and growing condition. Fertilization, cultivation, and tree pruning shall be part of regular maintenance. 
d.  Irrigation systems shall be kept in working condition. Adjustments, replacements, repairs, and cleaning shall be part of regular maintenance. 
e.  Stakes, guides and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functions. Ties are to be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or branches. 
f.  Any landscaping found to be in violation of this Section shall be abated in a time and manner prescribed for property maintenance enforcement in Chapter 2, Part B of this Article. 
D.  Development Review Procedures. 
1.  Ministerial Permit Required. No landscaping shall be hereafter installed or modified without a Ministerial Permit having first been issued therefor by the City pursuant to Section 10354, unless such landscaping is provided for in other provisions of this Article. 
2.  Alternative Development Criteria. Where on-site landscaping does not meet the requirements of this Section for the property with which it is associated, the property may be improved, building enlarged or use intensified only if the landscaping is made to conform with the requirements of this Section or approval is granted by one of the following means: 
a.  Development Permit. Approval is granted in conjunction with issuance of a Development Permit or modification thereto pursuant to the provisions of Section 10352. 
b.  Variances. A variance is granted in accordance with the provisions of Section 10005. 
3.  Exemptions. Properties, buildings, and uses which are nonconforming with respect to the landscaping requirements of this Section shall be deemed exempt, except for maintenance standards, from the requirements and procedures specified in this Section under the following circumstances: 
a.  Residential Exemptions. With a Residential (R) Zone, residential uses existing as of April 15, 1980, shall be exempt so long as: 
1)  Each use, at a minimum, complies: (1) with the terms and conditions of a Development Permit, if any, which was issued by the City relative to each such use; or (2) where a Development Permit has not been issued, each use complies with the off-street parking requirements in effect at the time of original construction as determined on the basis of building permits on record; provided, however, that where the date of original construction cannot be determined on this basis, each such use shall be deemed exempt; and 
2)  No additions are made on or to the property; provided, however, that single-family structures may be improved to the extent that any addition, either individually or cumulatively, does not exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total floor area of the dwelling unit as originally constructed. 
b.  Commercial Exemptions. Within a Commercial (C) Zone, commercial uses existing as of April 15, 1980, shall be exempt so long as: 
1)  Each use within a building: (1) maintains a valid business license; (2) remains unchanged in type of use; (3) remains unchanged in area, space, and volume occupied by each use; and (4) complies with the terms and conditions of each Development Permit, if any, which has been issued by the City relative to each such use; or 
2)  Each use which fails to meet the provisions of Section 10301(D)(3)(b)(1) is replaced by a use which requires not more than one off-street parking space for every 250 square feet of total floor area, as specified in Section 10301(B)(1). 
c.  Manufacturing Exemptions. Within a Manufacturing (M) Zone, manufacturing and coastal industry uses existing as of April 15, 1980, shall be exempt so long as: 
1)  Each use, at a minimum, complies: (1) with the terms and conditions of a Development Permit, if any, which was issued by the City relative to each such use; or (2) where a Development Permit has not been issued, each use complies with the off-street parking requirements in effect at the time of original construction as determined on the basis of building permits on record; provided, however, that where the date of original construction cannot be determined on this basis, each such use shall be deemed exempt; and 
2)  No alterations or additions are made on or to the property. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (15), 1999)  
10303 - Signs. 
A.  General. No sign shall be painted, pasted, posted, printed, tacked, fastened, constructed, erected, or otherwise permitted in the City except as provided in this Section. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Area of a Sign. The entire area within a single, continuous rectilinear perimeter of not more than eight (8) straight lines enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any materials or color forming an integral part or background of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is to be placed. Only one (1) face of a double-face sign shall be considered in determining the sign area, provided both sides are of essentially similar design, and not more than twenty-four (24) inches apart. The supports, uprights, structures, or extraneous design features of a sign shall not be included in determining the sign area unless they are designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the background of the display. 
2.  Building Frontage. Those frontages which face upon a public or private street or parking area between such building and street. Where a building faces two (2) or more streets, the frontage containing the principal entrance to the building shall be designated as the building frontage. 
3.  Canopy Sign. An unlighted sign perpendicular to the face of a building, fastened to the underside of the eaves, canopy or promenade roof structure of such building, which sign is designed primarily to identify business concerns to pedestrians passing thereby. 
4.  Construction Sign. A sign stating the names of those individuals or firms directly connected with the construction project. Said sign may include the names of the City in which their business is located and emergency telephone numbers. 
5.  Directional Sign. A sign which only contains one of the following words or phrases: "entrance", "enter", "exit", "in", "out", "one way", or similar words or a sign containing arrows or other characters indicating traffic direction and used either in conjunction with the above words or phrases or separately. No directional sign shall contain any advertising or trade name identification. 
6.  Flashing Sign. Any sign which contains or is illuminated by lights which are intermittently on and off, change in intensity, or which create the illusion of flashing in any manner. 
7.  Free-Standing Sign. A sign for which a building permit has been issued and is permanently supported by one or more uprights, braces, poles, or other similar structural components when utilizing earth, rock, the ground, or any foundation set in the ground as a primary holding base. Such signs which project through a roof projection or canopy, around which there are no enclosing walls, and monument signs as defined below shall be considered freestanding signs. 
8.  Height of a Sign. The distance from the average surface grade immediately surrounding the base of the sign to the top of its highest element, including any structural element. 
9.  Monument Signs. Low-profile, freestanding street frontage signs incorporating the design and building materials accenting the architectural theme of the building on the same property. 
10.  Off-Site Sign. Any sign which does not fall into the category of an on-site sign as defined below. 
11.  On-Site Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the premises upon which such sign is located, or to which it is affixed. Not more than twenty (20) percent of the total allowable on-site sign area shall be devoted to the advertising of a standard name-brand commodity or service which is not the exclusive commodity or service being sold or rendered on the premises, or a part of the name of the business concern involved. A parcel of record having an access easement as its only street frontage may place its on-site sign on the said easement. 
12.  A Parcel of Record of Property. Any separate parcel of property as shown on the latest available assessor's maps, provided that when a shopping center is divided into separate parcels, it shall continue to be considered as one parcel of record, and provided further that where one tenant, business, or enterprise occupies two or more contiguous parcels, it shall be considered as one parcel of record. 
13.  Portable, Movable or Temporary Sign. Any sign for which a building permit has not been issued and which is not permanently affixed or erected in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Building Code or any sign which is intended to be movable or capable of being moved from place to place, whether or not wheels or other special supports are provided. 
14.  Projecting Sign. Any sign which projects more than twelve (12) inches from the face of the building. 
15.  Roof. The cover of any building and includes the eaves and similar projections. Elevator or equipment housing, penthouses, or similar structures shall not be considered in determining the roof location unless they comprise more than sixty (60) percent of the roof area. 
16.  Roof Sign. Any sign erected, constructed or placed upon or over the roof of a building. 
17.  Rotating Sign. Any sign that moves, or any portion of which moves or rotates in any manner. 
18.  Shopping Center. A group of at least three (3) businesses which function as an integral unit on a single or separate parcel, and which utilize common off-street parking and access. 
19.  Street Frontage. The linear frontage of a parcel of record on the private or public street providing its principal access or visibility. 
20.  Window Sign. Any sign painted, attached, glued, or otherwise affixed to a window and designed to be viewed from adjoining streets, sidewalks, malls or parking lots. 
21.  Advertising Structure (Billboard). A permanent off-site structure of any kind or character for which a building permit has been issued to erect and maintain such structure for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever, may be placed, including statuary. "Advertising structure" does not include: 
(a)  Directional, warning or information structures required or authorized by law, federal, state or local authority; 
(b)  A structure erected near a city boundary or within a city, which contains the names of such city and the names of, or any information regarding, civic, fraternal or religious organizations located therein; 
(c)  Subdivision directional signs as provided for in subsection (C)(4)(a) of this section. 
C.  Signs in Residential Zones. Signs permitted in the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zones include only those which are listed below: 
1.  Real Estate Signs. One unlighted sign not more than six (6) square feet in area pertaining only to the sale or lease of property or premises upon which it is displayed, provided that such sign shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any property line abutting a public road, street or highway. 
2.  Name Plates. One unlighted sign or name plate not more than one square foot in area identifying the property and owner. 
3.  Civic Identification Signs. Not more than two (2) identification signs for civic organizations, churches, and other related quasi-public facilities, such signs not to cumulatively exceed eight (8) feet in height and twenty-four (24) square feet in area. 
4.  Subdivision Signs. In new residential subdivisions, the following signs may be permitted, provided that only subdivision directional signs, as specified below, may be permitted in locations other than within the subdivision site boundaries. 
a.  Directional and Sales Signs. No more than two (2) subdivision sales signs and two (2) subdivision directional signs after a final subdivision map has been recorded pursuant to Article IX, Chapter 1, including, but not limited to, the following provisions: 
1)  The signs may be either single or double-faced, or V-shaped, provided an angle between the two faces does not exceed sixty (60) degrees. 
2)  Neither the horizontal nor the vertical dimensions of a sales sign shall exceed sixteen (16) feet including supporting structures and the total area shall not exceed one-hundred (100) square feet. 
3)  Neither the horizontal nor the vertical dimensions of a subdivision directional sign face shall exceed ten (10) feet and the total area shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. The height of the sign shall be limited to twelve (12) feet. For the purpose of this Section, a subdivision directional sign is one which informs the viewer as to the route or change of direction of travel in order to arrive at the land development project. This type of sign may only display necessary travel directions, the name of the land development project, any characteristic trademark, insignia or similar device of the developer, and if any identifying materials as may be required by this Section. 
4)  No riders are permitted. There shall be no additions, tag signs, streamers, devices, display boards or appurtenances added to the sign as originally approved pursuant to Section 10303(G). 
5)  Any such sign approved for a particular subdivision shall not be changed to advertise another subdivision, without prior approval of the City pursuant to Section 10303(G). 
6)  Subject to proper site distance, such signs may be established along, but not within, the right-of-way of any highway, street or thoroughfare; provided, however, that such signs may not be established along existing freeways which may have been designated as freeway routes by the Division of Highways of the State of California. 
7)  Unless a time extension is granted by the City pursuant to Section 10005(C), such signs may be maintained for a period of not more than eighteen (18) months from the date upon which the final subdivision map is recorded pursuant to Article IX, Chapter 1 or until all of the lots in the subdivision have been initially sold; whichever occurs first. 
8)  Prior to erecting any subdivision directional or sales sign approved by the City pursuant to Section 10303(G), a penal bond in the amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be filed with and accepted by the Director of Community Development, and the applicant shall file a written statement from the property owner authorizing either the applicant or the City to go onto the property to remove the sign. In the case of failure to perform or comply with any term or provisions pertaining to such sign, the Director of Community Development may declare the bond forfeited. Upon expiration of the sign approval and removal of that sign, the bond may be exonerated by the Director of Community Development upon application. 
b.  Model Signs. One feature sign and one model home sign identifying the particular model not exceeding two (2) feet by three (3) feet in size and three (3) flags on each lot on which a model home is located and which fronts on an interior road. The subdivider may elect to locate all of the feature signs and flags on one model home lot, on the sales office lot or parking area which is a part of the tract, in lieu of one feature sign and three (3) flags on each model home lot. 
5.  Apartment and Condominium Project Signs. One unlighted or softly backlighted sign in an amount not to exceed one square foot per dwelling unit, and in no case exceeding a total of fifty (50) square feet, identifying only the name and address of an apartment or condominium project, and containing no other information. 
D.  Signs in Commercial and Manufacturing Zones. Signs permitted for businesses in C-1, C-S, R-4, M-1, and M-PR Zones include only those which are listed below: 
1.  Building Signs. On-site advertising signs and structures painted upon or fixed to any building, subject to the following provisions: 
a.  No part of any sign shall extend above the highest part of the commercial/manufacturing portion of the building elevation upon which the sign is displayed nor shall any roof sign be permitted. 
b.  The sign area shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage on its principal road, street or highway. If two (2) or more businesses are located upon one parcel of record the sign area for each business shall not exceed one square foot of sign panel for each linear foot of each individual business building frontage on the principal road, street or highway. When more than one business is located in a building or upon a single parcel of record, the frontage of each separate business building facing the right-of-way shall be considered as building frontage. The total area of any sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet and no dimension on the panel face shall exceed ten (10) feet. 
c.  Where the sign are permitted under Section 10303(D)(1)(b) is less than would be permitted based upon a ratio of one-half (½) square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage, the latter ratio may be used in computing the permitted single areas, provided that the total area of any sign shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
d.  Temporary window signs placed entirely within a building shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the window area of the building facing the streets, sidewalks, malls or parking lots. 
e.  In a shopping center or multiple business property where four (4) or more separate businesses are located on a parcel of record, and where two (2) or more of said businesses face an arcade, mall or walkway, or when a business has a second or third frontage and public entrance facing a parking area in a direction other than that facing a principal street, an additional sign not exceeding one-half (½) square foot of sign area per linear foot of each business building facing said parking area, arcade, mall or walkway is permitted subject to all other conditions specified in this Section. 
f.  In a shopping center or on multiple business property where two (2) or more businesses are located on a parcel of record, and where one or more of said businesses have no frontage on a public road, street or highway, said businesses may provide signs as allowed in Section 10303(D)(1)(e) based upon the building frontage on a parking lot, parking area or private driveway. 
g.  Except as otherwise allowed pursuant to Section 10303(D)(1)(e), each business within either a C-1, C-S, R-4, M-l, and M-PR Zone, shall be entitled to only one building sign, which sign shall be affixed to the building used to compute the allowable sign area for each such business. Signs shall be parallel with the building and shall project not more than twelve (12) inches therefrom. 
2.  Monument Signs. On-site low-profile monument type, freestanding signs subject to the following conditions: 
a.  On-site freestanding signs shall be located within the center eighty (80) percent of the property frontage, as measured from the side property lines. On a corner lot, the eighty (80) percent may be measured from the corner to one side line, or from the respective side lines and around the corner. 
b.  The sign shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage, and in no case shall exceed a total of one hundred (100) square feet. 
c.  On-site freestanding signs shall not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height, and no dimensions on the panel face shall exceed ten (10) feet. 
d.  Except as otherwise allowed pursuant to Section 10582(C)(5) or approved as part of a Development Permit under Chapter 3 of this Article, only one monument sign shall be allowed on a parcel of record of property. 
3.  Temporary Off-Site Signs. Temporary off-site freestanding signs, structure or structures are subject to the following conditions and may only be authorized by issuance of a special use permit pursuant to Section 10355 for a period not to exceed six (6) months unless otherwise provided in this Article: 
a.  Off-site freestanding signs are permitted only on vacant or unimproved property. 
b.  Height shall be limited to eighteen (18) feet and no dimension of the panel face shall be greater than ten (10) feet. 
c.  The maximum area of any sign panel face shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
d.  A V-shape structure shall not have an interior angle between the two panel faces of more than sixty (60) degrees. 
e.  Off-site freestanding signs shall be set back from the front property line at least ten (10) feet. 
f.  Off-site advertising structures shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet apart on the same side of a public road or street. 
4.  Canopy and Changeable Copy Poster Signs. Canopy and changeable copy poster signs are subject to the following conditions: 
a.  One canopy sign for each business not extending beyond the building eaves and not exceeding twelve (12) inches in width nor having a clearance of less than seven (7) feet as measured from the finished grade to the bottom of the sign encasement. 
b.  Two (2) changeable copy poster signs and special feature signs not exceeding twelve (12) square feet each may be permitted for each parcel of record only when permanently affixed to a pole or building or permanently planted in foundations in accordance with all other provisions of this Article. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to prohibit any lawful establishment selling motor fuels to display the minimum sized price indicator signs required by Chapter 14, Article 12, of the California Business and Professions Code. 
c.  Signs allowed by this subsection shall be included within the computation of total allowable sign area pursuant to Section 10303(D)(1). 
5.  No permanent advertising structure (billboard) shall be placed or maintained on property located within the City. 
E.  Design Standards. General requirements and limitations for all signs regardless of their location are as follows: 
1.  General Restrictions. 
a.  A sign, except for public service time and temperature signs, shall not flash, scintillate, move or rotate, or contain any part which flashes, scintillates, moves or rotates, provided that continuously rotating signs that do not exceed a rotating speed of eight (8) revolutions per minute are permitted. 
b.  Banners, pendants, flags, captive balloons, or signs which change color or appear to change color, or where the intensity of light changes or appears to change are permitted only for the purpose of a grand opening, under new management or other special event; provided, however, that the use of such signing shall not exceed a period of twenty-one (21) days per year for all events inclusive. 
c.  Perimeter or flood lighting, whether used for illumination or advertisement, which illuminates private land, whether improved or not, is permitted only when such lighting is installed on private property and is hooded or shielded so that no direct beams therefrom fall upon public streets, alleys, highways or other private property. 
d.  A sign which is lighted or illuminated to an intensity in excess of that of adjacent public street lights may not be permitted within or closer than two hundred (200) feet of any facing property in a residential zone. 
e.  A sign shall not project over a public street or alley right-of-way. 
f.  Not more than six (6) permanent directional signs, not exceeding three (3) square feet in area each, on a single parcel of record may be allowed. 
g.  Not more than two (2) construction signs, not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area each, on a single parcel of record may be allowed. 
2.  Maintenance and Safety. 
a.  Every sign and all parts, portions, units and material comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports or anchorage therefore, shall be manufactured, fabricated, assembled, constructed and erected in compliance with all applicable State and Federal laws and ordinances of the City now in effect or hereafter enacted or amended. 
b.  Every sign and all parts, portions, units and materials comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports or anchorage therefore, shall be maintained in proper repair and state of preservation. Any sign found to be in violation of this Section shall be abated in the time and manner prescribed for property maintenance enforcement in Chapter 2, Part B of this Article. 
c.  The display surface of all signs shall be kept neatly painted and/or posted. Signs pertaining to enterprises or occupants that are no longer using the premises to which the signs relate shall be removed from the premises by the property owner within sixty (60) days after the associated enterprise or occupant has vacated the premises. Temporary advertising signs, such as political, leasing or construction signs, for which a special use permit is issued pursuant to Section 10355 shall be removed by the property owner within ten (10) days following the occurrence or completion of the event or election or other purpose served by the sign. Any sign violating this Section shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to summary abatement pursuant to the provisions of the California Government Code. 
F.  Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Banners, pendants, flags, captive balloons and similar paraphernalia shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Section. 
2.  A portable, moveable or temporary sign, other than those included within the provisions of Section 10303(D)(3) or as approved under a variance procedure pursuant to Section 10005(C)(5), shall be removed upon the effective date of this Section. Signs on or affixed to trucks, automobiles, trailers or other vehicles which advertise, identify or provide direction to a use or activity not related to its lawful making of deliveries of sales of merchandise or rendering of services from such vehicles is prohibited. 
3.  A nonconforming off-site sign shall be removed within three (3) years of the effective date of this Section; provided, however, that this Section shall not validate or extend the permitted time for any signs approved pursuant to Section 10303(G) at the effective date of this Chapter; provided, further, that this Section shall act as a continuation of Section 10202 of this Article and shall validate any enforcement action taken pursuant to it. 
4.  All other legally erected or painted signs which are not made conforming by approval of a variance therefore pursuant to Section 10005 of this Article, shall be completely removed within five (5) years of the effective date of this Section; or if such sign is made nonconforming by virtue of rezoning or annexation, from the date of such rezoning or annexation. 
5.  A nonconforming sign shall not be altered, reconstructed or moved without complying in all respects with the other provisions of this Section. A sign destroyed by the elements, fire, or other act of God to an extent exceeding sixty (60) percent of its valuation as determined by the City Building Official, shall be subject to the provisions of this Section. No additional signs or expansion of existing signs which render the total amount of sign area for any business nonconforming or further nonconforming shall be permitted, except by a variance as provided in Section 10005. As used in this Section, the term "altered" means any change in shape, size, structure, or any significant change in content of a sign, not including the painting and/or maintenance of pre-existing nonconforming signs. 
6.  Whenever vacant or unimproved property contains one or more off-site signs constructed prior to the effective date of this Section and is improved by having a building erected thereon, said sign shall become a nonconforming use and subject to the regulations set forth in this Section. 
7.  Whenever vacant or unimproved property contains one or more signs constructed after the effective date of this Section, and is improved by having a building erected thereon, said sign shall be completely removed prior to occupancy or release of utilities of said building. 
G.  Development Review Procedures. 
1.  Ministerial Permit Required. No sign shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for those signs permitted by Section 10303(C)(1) and Section 10303(C)(2), without a Ministerial Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10354.. 
2.  Master Sign Criteria. In a commercial retail center or multiple business property where two or more businesses are located in a single building, all building and canopy signs shall conform to a master sign criteria for that property which specifies the size, color, material and location of all such signs. Unless otherwise approved as part of a Development or Administrative Permit pursuant to Chapter 3, Part B of this Article, master sign criteria required by this Section shall be processed in the same manner as prescribed for building and monument signs pursuant to Section 10303(G)(1). 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (1)—(3), (16), (34)—(36), 1999)  
10304 - Exterior lighting. 
General. Exterior lighting, where provided, shall be accomplished in such a manner as not to illuminate adjacent properties or streets. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (30), 1999)  
Part B. - Development Review Provisions 
 
10350 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a uniform means by which applications for discretionary and ministerial projects are to be processed by the City.  
10351 - Development Review Committee. 
For purposes of this Chapter, a Development Review Committee is hereby established. The Development Review Committee shall consist of the Director of Community Development, Director of Public Works, Chief of Police or their designated representatives. A designate of the Ventura County Fire Department shall be invited to participate in Development Review Committee matters as an advisory, nonvoting member. A quorum of the Committee shall consist of two (2) voting members. In the event of a tie vote, the matter before the Committee shall be deemed denied. The Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall serve as chairman of the Development Review Committee and, for the purpose of Government Code Section 65913.3, be responsible for the coordination, review and processing of all projects subject to the development review provisions of this Chapter.  
10352 - Development Permits. 
A.  General. Projects, other than those which are explicitly exempt under the provisions of Section 10584(A), requiring the issuance of Development Permits or which are otherwise subject to the development review procedures prescribed in this section include the following: 
1.  Planned Developments encompassing: 
a.  Projects which involve any property, irrespective of size, with an underlying zone classification of C-S, P-R, M-1 and M-PR; and 
b.  Projects which involve any property zoned PD in excess of 20,000 square feet with an underlying zone classification of R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and C-1; 
2.  Conditional Uses; 
3.  Variances; 
4.  Boundary Changes; and 
5.  Amendments. 
B.  Preapplication Process. Prior to formal application being made for Development Permits, projects should be screened through the Development Review Committee for preliminary evaluation. 
1.  The purpose of this optional procedure is threefold: 
a.  To avoid preparation and the filing of applications for projects which are clearly inappropriate; 
b.  To reduce problems and time delays which may otherwise be encountered during processing of formal applications; and 
c.  To incorporate environmental considerations early on in the development review process. 
2.  To initiate the preapplication process, the following information must be submitted to the Department of Community Development: 
a.  Conceptual Drawings. Five (5) sets of preliminary plot plans and building elevations of a scale and detail sufficient to convey the project's general nature including the location of all major existing and proposed improvements and related architectural design characteristics. 
b.  Environmental Questionnaire. One (1) original copy of information required to conduct and Initial Study under provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, on forms prescribed by the City. 
3.  The Development Review Committee shall be convened within fourteen (14) days of the date of receipt of the preapplication and shall convey the results of their evaluation to the applicant not later than twenty-one (21) days of the date of filing. 
C.  Application Submittal. Applications for Development Permits shall be filed with the Department of Community Development and consist of the following information: 
1.  Application Cover Sheet. One (1) original copy of information identifying the applicant and project on forms prescribed by the Department of Community Development. The name and address of the property owner(s) and their written authorization to submit the application(s) shall be included. 
2.  Property Owner/Resident Map. One (1) original map prepared at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one-hundred (100) feet indicating the size of the subject property and all properties within a three-hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the application area. When required by operation of subsection (C)(3) of this section, a separate map shall be prepared to delineate all properties within a one-hundred (100) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the application area. 
3.  Property Owner/Resident List. Upon pre-gummed labels appropriate for placement on envelopes, one (1) original copy of the names and mailing addresses of all property owners within the three-hundred (300) foot radius shown on the Property Owner/Resident Map. For projects which constitute appealable developments as defined pursuant to Section 10356(B)(1), the Property Owner/Resident List shall also include the mailing addresses of all persons, other than property owners, residing within one-hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the application area. 
4.  Affidavit. One (1) original copy of an Affidavit signed by the applicant of the applicant's agent certifying that the names and addresses shown on the Property Owner/Resident List are the latest as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of Ventura. 
5.  Development Plan. Twelve (12) sets of preliminary drawings consisting of plot plans, building elevations, and related exhibits drawn to a scale of not less that one (1) inch equals thirty (30) feet (folded to a size of eight and one-half (8 ½) inches by fourteen (14) inches before submittal) as necessary to depict the following: 
a.  The location, size, height, and number of stories of all existing and proposed buildings and structures including signs, walls and fences; 
b.  The location, size, and dimension of yards, courts, and setbacks and all other open spaces between existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
c.  The location, dimension, and type of construction of all driveways, parking areas, walkways and means of access, both ingress and egress; 
d.  The location, dimension, and method of improvement of all property to be dedicated to the public utilities; and 
e.  All exterior elevations and architectural features; the nature, texture and color of all exterior building materials to be used, including signs; the location, type, intensity, and architectural theme of all exterior lighting; and the density, location, and nature of all landscaped areas and landscape materials. 
6.  Development Plan Reduction. One (1) original eight and one-half (8 ½) inches by eleven (11) inches acetate or mylar reduction of all Development Plan drawings and exhibits suitable for use on an overhead projector. 
7.  Environmental Questionnaire. One (1) original copy of information required to conduct an Initial Study under provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, on forms prescribed by the Department of Community Development. The Department of Community Development shall approve or disapprove a project within one (1) year of the date on which an application requesting approval of a project has been received and accepted when accompanied with an Environmental Impact Report prepared pursuant to Section 21100 or 21151 of the Public Resources Code. If a Negative Declaration is adopted or if the project is exempt from Division 13 (commencing with Section 21000) of the Public Resources Code, the development project shall be approved or disapproved within six (6) months from the date on which an application is filed pursuant to subsection D of this section. This requirement is waived if previously completed in conjunction with the Preapplication Process pursuant to subsection B of this section. 
8.  Certification of Compliance with Section 65962.5(e) of the California Government Code. One (1) original copy of a Certificate of Compliance signed by the applicant or applicant's agent certifying whether the project is or is not located on a site which is included on any list compiled and updated by the California Department of Health Services as submitted to the Office of Planning Research containing hazardous waste and substance sites pursuant to California Government Code Section 65962.5(e). 
9.  Market Study for Commercial and Residential Projects. One (1) original copy of a market analysis with estimated absorption rates. The general content and suitable age of the market analysis and the size of residential and commercial projects to be exempt from submitting a market analysis shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Application Filing. Upon receipt of the items listed in subsection C of this section, the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall review the completed application prior to accepting it for filing. The Director of Community Development or his designated representative may waive any or all application requirements if, in their opinion, specific materials are deemed unnecessary. If it is determined that the information provided is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant and not accepted for filing. If, however, the application is accepted, a meeting of the Development Review Committee and public hearing before the City Council shall be scheduled pursuant to subsections E and F of this section, respectively. In either case, a written determination as to the application's completeness shall be made to the applicant within thirty (30) days of its receipt or otherwise it shall be deemed to have been filed. If the application is incomplete, the Director of Community Development shall indicate in writing the specific manner in which the application can be made complete. Upon receipt of any resubmittal of an application, a new thirty (30) day period shall begin. If the application together with submitting materials, is again determined incomplete, the applicant may appeal the matter to the City Council; provided, however, that no fee shall be charged and no public hearing or notice of the matter need be given. The applicant shall be provided a written determination not later than sixty (60) calendar days after receipt of the written appeal. 
E.  Staff Review. The Development Review Committee shall be convened within twenty-one (21) days of the date of filing of the formal application for the purpose of developing preliminary recommendations. The applicant shall be advised not later than twenty-eight (28) days from the date of filing as to the nature of preliminary recommendations of the Development Review Committee. The applicant, at his discretion, may cause the Development Plan to be revised and refiled with the Department of Community Development so as to conform with the preliminary recommendations of the Development Review Committee; provided, however, that such revised Development Plans are received not later than twenty-one (21) working days prior to the date of public hearings scheduled pursuant to subsection F of this section. If revised Development Plans are filed later than twenty-one (21) working days prior to the date of the public hearings scheduled pursuant to subsection F of this section, or if the Development Plans have not been revised to as to conform with preliminary recommendations of the Development Review Committee, the public hearing shall automatically be continued until the City Council's next regularly scheduled meeting date. 
F.  Planning Commission Public Hearing. Upon acceptance of the filing of an application pursuant to Section 10352(D), a public hearing before the City Council shall be scheduled not earlier than thirty (30) days from the date of filing nor later than thirty (30) days from the date of expiration of public review periods pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970. If any provision of law requires the City or a Responsible Agency to provide public notice of a Development Permit or Public Hearing, or both, and the City has not provided the public notice or held the hearing, or both, at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the time limits established by Government Code Sections 65950 and 65952, the applicant or his or her representative may file an action pursuant to Section 1085 of the Code of Civil Procedure to compel the City to provide the public notice or hold the hearing, or both, and the court shall give the proceedings preference over all civil actions or proceedings, except older matters of the same character. In the event that the City or a responsible agency fails to act to approve or to disapprove a Development Permit within the time limits required by this Article, a failure to act shall be deemed approval of the Development Permit application for the project. However, the permit shall be deemed approved only if the public notice required by law has occurred. If the applicant has provided seven (7) days advance notice to the City of his or her intent to provide public notice, then no earlier than sixty (60) days from the expiration of the time limits established by Government Code Sections 65950 and 65952, an applicant may provide the required public notice using the distribution information provided pursuant to Section 65941.5. If the applicant chooses to provide public notice, that notice shall include a description of the proposed development substantially similar to the descriptions which are commonly used in public notices by the City, the location of the proposed development, the permit application number, the name and address of the City, and a statement of the project shall be deemed approved if the City has not acted within sixty (60) days. If the applicant has provided the public notice required by this Section, the time limit for action by the City shall be extended to sixty (60) days after the public notice is provided. If the applicant provides notice pursuant to this Section, the permitting agency shall refund to the applicant any fees which are collected for providing notice and which are not used for that purpose. Failure of an applicant to submit complete or adequate information pursuant to Government Code Sections 65943 to 65946, inclusive, may constitute grounds for disapproving a Development Permit. Nothing in this section shall diminish the City's legal responsibility to provide, where applicable, public notice and hearing before acting on a permit application. In addition, the following shall occur: 
1.  Notice. Notice of the hearing shall contain a statement setting forth a description of the property under consideration, the nature of the project, and the time and place at which a public hearing or hearings on the matter will be held and shall be given in the manner specified below not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of the first of such hearings which may be conducted on the project: 
a.  Publishing a notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the City; 
b.  Mailing a notice to the owner of the subject real property or the owner's duly authorized agent, mailing a notice to the project applicant and mailing a notice to all persons listed in the Property Owner/Resident List; provided, however, that in the event the number of persons to whom which notice would be sent is greater than one-thousand (1,000), notice in lieu thereof may be given by publishing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) page in a newspaper having general circulation within such area, or, in lieu of a display advertisement, a notice may be inserted with any generalized mailing sent by the City to property owners and residents within the area affected by the project such as a billing for City services; provided, further, that if in-lieu notice is given under the circumstances and in the manner prescribed herein, the requirements of Section 10352(C)(3) and 10352(C)(4) may be waived, and if such notice is given by way of a display advertisement as herein provided, such notice shall satisfy the requirements of Section 10352(F)(1)(a); 
c.  Posting a notice in front of the property under construction; provided, however, that if more than one parcel of property is involved, notices shall be posted not more than one hundred (100) feet apart on each side of the street upon which said property fronts for a distance of not less than five-hundred (500) feet in each direction from said property; provided, further, that the notice provisions of this Section are optional as may be exercised at the discretion of the Director of Community Development or his designated representative to supplement the mandatory notice requirements of Section 10352(F)(1)(a) and Section 10352(F)(1)(b); 
d.  Mailing a notice to each governmental agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected; and 
e.  Mailing notice to each person who has filed a written request for notice with the Department of Community Development. 
2.  Investigations. The City Council shall cause to be made by its own members, or members of its staff, such investigation of facts bearing upon the project set for hearing, including an analysis of precedent cases as will serve to provide all necessary information to assure action on each case consistent with the purposes of this Article and with previous actions of the Planning Commission. 
3.  Conduct of Hearings. Public hearings as provided in this Section shall be conducted before the City Council, or before any members thereof designated by the whole Council to serve. The City Council's conduct shall be governed by the provisions of Article II, Chapter 1 of this code. 
4.  Persons Testifying. The permanent official records of the City Council shall contain the names and addresses of the persons testifying at the public hearing. 
5.  Continuation of Hearing. If, for any reason, testimony on any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the date for such hearing, the Councilmen presiding at such public hearing may, before the adjournment or recess thereof, publicly announce the time and place to and at which the hearing will be continued and such announcement shall serve as sufficient notice of such continuance and without recourse to the form of public notice as provided in the first instance by this Section. 
6.  Findings. In considering the matter, the City Council may approve, disapprove, or modify and approve the project, attaching any reasonable conditions thereto. Not later than at the next regular meeting of the City Council following action on the matter, the City Council shall announce its findings by formal resolution, and the resolution shall cite, among other things, facts and reasons which, in the opinion of the City Council, constitute grounds for the approval, denial, or conditional approval of the project necessary to carry out the provisions of this Chapter and general purpose of this Article. Where a project is approved under the provisions of this Section, the City Council's authorizing resolution shall constitute the Development Permit, where such Permit is required, which Permit shall be deemed issued upon its approval. If the City Council grants the Development Permit or otherwise approves the project, it shall also cite in the resolution such conditions and limitations as may be imposed to serve the purpose of this Article. If no action is taken by the City Council on the project within one year of the date of filing pursuant to Section 10352(D), said project shall be deemed to be approved unless a single ninety (90) days extension is granted by mutual consent of the applicant and City Council. 
7.  Fulfillment. Action of the City Council shall be deemed final and conclusive. A Development Permit as approved and issued by the Planning Commission shall be observed and fulfilled in the development and/or use of the property involved. All features required shall be installed and maintained indefinitely unless otherwise stipulated in the Development Permit. After approval and issuance of a Development Permit, initiation of improvements and/or uses anticipated therein must be begun within twelve (12) months from the date of such approval and issuance, unless some other period is specified by the Planning Commission or the Development Permit shall, without prejudice, become null and void. Actions which become final under provisions of this section shall be reported to the County Assessor's Office in accordance with Section 65863.5 of the California Government Code. 
G.  (Reserved) 
H.  Amendments. Changes in either the use, intensity, architectural character, nature, extent of location of uses and/or improvements of an approved Development Permit shall not be authorized unless processed in the manner prescribed herein. 
1.  Applications for Amendments. Applications for amendments to approved Development Permits shall be in writing and shall include an adequate description of the proposed amendment together with plans and specifications, as necessary, to clarify the same. Application, at a minimum, shall consist of those items specified in subsections (C)(1) through (C)(4) of this section; provided, however, that the Property Owner/Resident List shall include only those properties which abut the exterior boundaries of the application area. Within fourteen (14) days from the date of receipt of an application for amendment, the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall render a decision as to whether such amendment constitutes a major or minor modification of the approved Development Permit, which decision shall be communicated in writing to the applicant. 
2.  Major Modifications. Where it is determined that an application for amendment constitutes a significant material change in either the intensity, architectural character, nature, extent, or location of uses and/or improvements authorized under an approved Development Permit, such amendment shall be deemed a major modification and shall be processed in the same manner and fashion as prescribed for Development Permits commencing with subsection B of this section. Amendments which constitute major modifications include, without limitation, those which: 
a.  Involve any property located in an area within which the Coastal Commission retains original permit jurisdiction as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A) of this Article, and which would either: 
1)  Cause a significant alteration of land form including, but not limited to, removal or placement of vegetation; or 
2)  Result in an increase of ten (10) percent or more in either internal floor area or height of any existing structure. 
b.  Involve the expansion or construction of water wells or septic tanks. 
c.  Cause any change in the intensity of use of property or structure to be improved. 
d.  Involve the conversion of any existing multiple-family rental or visitor-serving commercial property to or from a use involving a fee ownership of long-term leasehold including, but not limited to, a condominium conversion, stock cooperative conversion or motel/hotel time-sharing conversion. 
e.  Involve the placement or erection of any new permanent attached or detached accessory structure in excess of one-thousand (1,000) square feet or which exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in construction value. 
f.  Deviates from any development standard applicable to the property to be improved, which development standards include, as applicable: 
1)  Those prescribed in Section 10582 of this Article; 
2)  Those applicable to the underlying zone district within which the property is situated; and/or 
3)  Those prescribed as part of the terms and conditions of Development Permit approval. 
g.  May, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development: 
1)  Lessen or avoid the intended effect of an approved Development Permit; 
2)  Diminish any public vista; 
3)  Significantly diminish the value of surrounding property, including, but not limited to, the impact upon prominent views and the effect upon light and air; and/or 
h.  Have cumulative effects beyond the property or structure to be improved. 
3.  Minor Modifications. Where it is determined that an application for amendment constitutes an immaterial change in either the intensity, architectural character, nature, extent or location of uses and/or improvements authorized under an approved Development Permit, such amendment shall be deemed a minor modification. Where such a determination is made, notice to this effect shall be given by the Director of Community Development to those persons listed on the Property Owner/Resident List submitted as part of the application for amendment pursuant to subsection (H)(1) of this section. If no written objection is received at the Department of Community Development within ten (10) days of the date which notice is mailed, the determination of immateriality shall be conclusive and the minor modification shall be deemed approved. If, however, an objection is raised as to the Director's determination of immateriality, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to be a major modification subject to the provisions of subsection (H)(2) of this section. 
(Ord. 681 § 2 (Exh. A), 2007; Ord. 626 § 2 (18), (21), (37), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (2), (15)(part), (16)—( 23), 1992)  
10353 - Administrative Permits. 
A.  General. Projects, other than those which are explicitly exempt under the provisions of Section 10584(A), requiring the issuance of Administrative Permits or which are otherwise subject to the development review procedures prescribed in this section include the following: 
1.  Planned Developments encompassing all projects, other than those specified in Section 10352(A)(1), which involve property situated within a PD Zone; and, projects involving the reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings located within the M-CR (Coastal-Related Industry) Zone situated seaward of the westerly prolongation of Port Hueneme Road; 
2.  Administrative Variances; 
3.  Secondary housing units; 
4.  Beverage Control Act Type 41 liquor license or similar license which allows the sales, service and consumption of beer or wine on premises in conjunction with a primary restaurant use. 
B.  Application Submittal. Applications for Administration Permits shall be filed with the Department of Community Development and consist of the following information: 
1.  Application Cover Sheet. One original copy of information required to identify the applicant and project on forms prescribed by the Department of Community Development. 
2.  Property Owner/Resident Map. One original map prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals one hundred (100) feet indicating the size of the subject property and all properties within a three-hundred (300) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the application area. When required by operation of Section 10353(B)(3), a separate map shall be prepared to delineate all properties within a one hundred (100) foot radius of the exterior boundaries of the application area. 
3.  Property Owner/Resident List. Upon gummed labels suitable for attaching to envelopes, one original copy of the names and mailing addresses of all property owners within the three-hundred (300) foot radius shown on the Property Owner/Resident Map. For projects which constitute appealable developments as defined pursuant to Section 10356(B)(1), the Property Owner/Resident List shall also include the mailing addresses of all persons, other than property owners, residing within one hundred (100) feet of the exterior boundaries of the application area. 
4.  Affidavit. One (1) original copy of an Affidavit signed by the applicant or the applicant's agent certifying that the names and addresses shown on the Property Owner/Resident List are the latest as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of Ventura. 
5.  Development Plan. Five (5) sets of preliminary drawings consisting of plot plans, building elevations and related exhibits drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals thirty (30) feet (folded to a size of 8 ½? × 14? before submittal) as necessary to depict the following: 
a.  The location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures, landscaping, signs, property access, parking areas and other existing and proposed uses on the subject property; and 
b.  The location and dimension of street right-of-way, existing and proposed easement, property lines, curbs, sidewalks, and adjacent property uses and buildings and setback distances from adjoining property lines. 
C.  Application Filing. Upon receipt of the items listed in Section 10353(B), the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall review the completed application prior to accepting it for filing. The Director of Community Development or his designated representative may waive any or all application requirements if, in their opinion, specific materials are deemed unnecessary. If it is determined that the information provided is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant and not accepted for filing. If, however, the application is accepted, notice shall be made and a meeting of the Development Review Committee shall be scheduled pursuant to Section 10353(D). In either case, a determination as to the application's completeness shall be made within thirty (30) days of its receipt or otherwise it shall be deemed to have been filed. 
D.  Staff Review. The Development Review Committee shall be convened within twenty-one (21) days of the date of filing pursuant to Section 10353(C) for the purpose of rendering a decision on the project. A notice indicating the time and place at which the Development Review Committee will consider the matter shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 10352(F)(1)(b) no later than ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting of the Development Review Committee. At the time and place specified in the notice for consideration of the project, the Director of Community Development shall permit all interested persons present to be heard. After hearing all such persons and considering all communications received, the Development Review Committee may render its decision, continue the matter to a specific time and place, or decline to make a decision on the basis that the matter ought to be heard by the City Council. In the latter instance, the application shall be processed in the manner prescribed in Section 10352. Not more than thirty (30) days following the date of filing, the Development Review Committee shall announce its findings and notify the applicant in writing of the same. The Committee's findings shall be announced by way of formal resolution, which resolution shall be set forth in the same manner and shall serve the same purpose and effect as that of the resolution adopted by the City Council pursuant to Section 10352(F)(6). If no action is taken by the Development Review Committee on the discretionary project within six (6) months of the date of filing pursuant to Section 10353(C), said project shall be deemed approved. Any Administrative Permit granted shall be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this Article and shall not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the public welfare. Accordingly, the Development Review Committee may approve, disapprove, or modify and approve the project on the same grounds that the City and Council may act upon a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352, attaching any reasonable conditions thereto. Action of the Development Review Committee shall become final if no appeal is taken pursuant to Section 10353(E) within ten (10) days of the date of the mailing of the notice of the Committee's decision pursuant to this section. 
E.  Appeals. Upon receipt by the Director of Community Development of an appeal filed by any person aggrieved by a decision pursuant to Section 10353(D), the Director of Community Development shall promptly give written notice to the applicant and the appellant that an appeal has been taken and that the matter will be considered and heard by the City Council at a regular or adjourned regular meeting, the date of which shall be set forth in the notice, but in no event, to be more than thirty (30) days or less than ten (10) days after such notice is mailed to the applicant and appellant. A copy of this notice shall be circulated at the same time and manner as prescribed in Section 10352(F)(1). The City Council at the time of such hearing, shall consider all matters pertinent thereto and by its next meeting after such hearing, the City Council shall render its decision either upholding or reversing the action of the Development Review Committee and/or modifying the Committee's actions and conditions. Written notice thereof, unless waived by the applicant and/or appellant at the time of the hearing, shall promptly be mailed to the applicant and appellant by the Director of Community Development. The decision of the City Council shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
F.  Amendments. Changes in either use, intensity, architectural character, nature, extent, or location of uses and/or improvements of an approved Administrative Permit shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Section 10352(H). 
G.  City Council Reports. All actions of the Development Review Committee taken under provisions of this section shall be reported to the City Council at a regular meeting following such actions. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (19), 1999; Ord. 611 § 1 (4), (5), 1996; Ord. 579 § 6 (2) (part), (15) (part), (24) (part), (25), (26), 1992)  
10354 - Ministerial Permits. 
A.  General. Projects requiring the issuance of Ministerial Permits or which are otherwise subject to the provisions of this Section include the following: 
1.  Master Sign Criteria; 
2.  Parking and Landscape Development Plans; 
3.  Fences; 
4.  Signs; 
5.  Garage Sales (maximum of two (2) days per year and occurring between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.); 
6.  Satellite Receiving and Transmitting Dishes, Dish or Spherical Antennas three (3) feet in diameter or larger, or antennas weighing more than seventy-five (75) pounds in residential zone districts where a Planned Development (PD) designation does not otherwise apply; and 
7.  Flag Poles. 
B.  Application Submittal. Applications for Ministerial Permits shall be filed with the Department of Community Development and consist of the following information: 
1.  Application Cover Sheet. One (1) original copy of information required to identify the applicant and project on forms prescribed by the Department of Community Development. 
2.  Development Plan. One set of preliminary drawings consisting of plot plans, building elevations, and related exhibits drawn to a scale of not less than one-quarter (¼) inch equals one (1) foot (folded to a size of 8 ½? × 14? before submittal) as necessary and applicable to depict the location, architectural character, and dimensions of all proposed physical improvements. 
C.  City Approval. Upon receipt of the items prescribed in Section 10354(B), the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall review the completed application prior to accepting it for filing. The Director of Community Development or his designated representative may waive any or all application requirements if, in their opinion, specific materials are deemed unnecessary. If it is determined that the information required is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant and not accepted for filing. If, however, the application is accepted, a decision by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall be made immediately thereafter as to whether or not the project complies with the applicable provisions of this Article. If no action is taken within thirty (30) days of the date of filing, the project shall be deemed to be approved. A Ministerial Permit as approved and issued by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall be observed and fulfilled in the development and/or use of the property involved subject to the limitations imposed in this Article or other applicable regulations of this code. The decision of the Director of Community Development or his designated representative made pursuant to this Section shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
D.  Applicability. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any component of a project for which either a Development or Administrative Permit is otherwise required by this Article. Such components, including, but not limited to, those projects listed in Section 10354(A), shall be processed as part of the project for which either a Development or Administrative Permit is issued pursuant to Sections 10352 and 10353, respectively. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (15) (part), (24) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 726, § 4, 7-18-16)  
10355 - Special use permits. 
A.  General. Projects involving uses and/or improvements of a temporary duration are subject to the provisions of this Section and include the following: 
1.  Temporary Sales Facilities. Temporary tract real estate sales offices and mobile homes in connection with recorded subdivisions; provided, however, that such offices and mobile homes may be authorized for a period not to exceed eighteen (18) months after which authorization may be granted only as an amendment to the Development or Administrative Permit governing the subdivision; 
2.  Temporary Uses and Improvements. Temporary uses and improvements of an inconsequential nature including, but not limited to, produce stands, Christmas tree sales, commercial sidewalk sales, and special events; provided, however, that such uses and improvements may be authorized for a duration of time not to exceed ninety (90) calendar days in any consecutive twelve (12) month period; 
3.  Temporary Advertising Signs. Temporary advertising signs including, but not limited to, political, construction, sales and leasing signs; provided, however, that such signs may be authorized for a period not to exceed six (6) months; and 
4.  Emergency Uses and Improvements. Uses and improvements required in emergency situations where delays incident to normal permit processing pursuant to this Chapter would defeat or seriously impair the purposes of an applicant or endanger the public health, safety or welfare. Temporary clearance for emergency uses and improvements under this Section shall be valid for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days beyond which such uses and improvements may remain only if proper application is made and approved in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Application Submittal. Applications for Special Use Permits shall be filed with the Department of Community Development and shall consist of one original copy of information required to identify the applicant and project on forms prescribed by the Department of Community Development. 
C.  City Approval. Upon receipt of application described in Section 10355(B), the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall review the completed application prior to accepting it for filing. The Director of Community Development or his designated representative may waive any or all application requirements if, in their opinion, specific materials are deemed unnecessary. If it is determined that the information required is incomplete, the application shall be returned to the applicant and not accepted for filing. If, however, the applicant is accepted, a decision by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall be made as to whether or not the project qualifies as a special use under the provisions of Section 10355(A) and if allowable, under what conditions the permit shall be granted. The Director of Community Development or his designee shall make public notice indicating the nature and location of the special use and send the public notice by regular mail to property owners which abut the exterior boundaries of the application area for any proposed project qualifying as temporary use and improvement pursuant to Municipal Code Section 10355(A)(2). If no action is taken within thirty (30) days of the date of filing, the project shall be deemed to be approved. Action taken by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative with regard to an application for a Special Use Permit, shall be deemed final unless an appeal is received in writing by the Department of Community Development within five (5) calendar days of the date which notice is mailed to abutting property owners. Appeals shall be processed under the provisions of Section 10353(E). 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (17), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (2) (part), (15) (part), (24) (part), 1992)  
10356 - Coastal development. 
A.  General. The purpose of this Section is to comply with and implement applicable regulations adopted pursuant to Section 30620.6 and Section 30333 of the California Public Resources Code. Only properties within the Coastal Zone of the City, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 30103, are subject to the provisions of this Section as well as all other provisions of this Article. The boundaries of the Coastal Zone and areas within which the California Coastal Commission retains original permit and appeal jurisdiction pursuant to this Section are set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map as established and adopted by the Coastal Commission and all notations, references and other information shown on said Map shall be as much a part of this Article as if the matters and information set forth on said Map were fully described herein. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this Section, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Appealable Developments. Coastal developments constituting any of the following: 
a.  Projects, consisting of those defined in Sections 10355(A)(1), (2), (3), 10356(B)(5)(a) and 10356(B)(5)(e), involving property located in an area within which the Coastal Commission retains appeal jurisdiction as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A); or 
b.  Public works projects or energy facilities, as defined in Sections 10356(B)(5)(c) and 10356(B) (5)(d), respectively, involving property located anywhere within the Coastal Zone but which is outside an area wherein the Coastal Commission retains original permit jurisdiction as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A). 
2.  Categorical Exclusions. Projects which are exempt from the Development Review requirements of this Chapter by operation of California Public Resources Code Sections 30610(e) and 30610.5. 
3.  Coastal Commission. California Coastal Commission. 
4.  Coastal Development. Development, as defined by Section 10356(B)(5) but not including categorical exclusions, involving property located anywhere within the Coastal Zone. 
5.  Development. Projects constituting any of the following: 
a.  A project approved by the City pursuant to provisions of Section 10352 or Section 10353, not including minor modifications to Development or Administrative Permits; 
b.  A project defined as a categorical exclusion by operation of Section 10356(B)(2); 
c.  A public works project, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 30114, which exceeds $100,000 in estimated cost of construction and does not otherwise meet the criteria specified in Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611, or 30624 of the California Public Resources Code; 
d.  An energy facility, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 30107, which exceeds $100,000 in estimated cost of construction; or 
e.  A subdivision, lot split or other division of land approved by the City pursuant to the California Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code). 
6.  First Public Road Paralleling the Sea. That road nearest to the sea, as defined in Section 30115 of the California Public Resources Code which: 
a.  Is lawfully open to uninterrupted public use and is suitable for such use; 
b.  Is publicly maintained; 
c.  Is an improved, all-weather road open to motor vehicle traffic in at least one direction; 
d.  Is not subject to any restrictions on use by the public except when closed due to an emergency or when closed temporarily for military purposes; and 
e.  Does in fact connect with other public roads providing a continuous access system, and generally parallels and follows the shoreline of the sea so as to include all portions of the sea where the physical features such as bays, lagoons, estuaries, and wetlands cause the water of the sea to extend landward of the generally continuous coastline. 
7.  Non-Appealable Developments. Coastal developments constituting any of the following: 
a.  Projects, consisting of those defined in Sections 10356(B)(5)(a) and 10356(B)(5)(e), involving property located anywhere within the Coastal Zone but which is outside of an area within which the Coastal Commission retains appeal jurisdiction as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A); or 
b.  Public works projects or energy facilities, as defined by California Public Resources Code Sections 30114 and 30107, respectively, not exceeding $100,000 in estimated cost of construction which do not otherwise meet criteria specified in Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611, or 30624 of the California Public Resources Code, and which involve property located anywhere within the Coastal Zone but outside of an area wherein the Coastal Commission retains original permit jurisdiction as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A). 
C.  Development Review Procedures. The provisions of this Section and appeal provisions of Section 10356(D) are applicable to all coastal developments except those which involve property located in an area within which the Coastal Commission retains original permit jurisdiction as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A). 
1.  Project Determinations. Determinations as to whether a coastal development constitutes an appealable development, non-appealable development or categorical exclusion shall be made as follows: 
a.  For coastal developments originated or initiated by the City or other governmental entity, determinations shall be made by the City at the earliest possible date on or after the date of project inception, but in no event later than: 
1)  The time at which application for such development is made and accepted by the City for filing; or 
2)  Where no formal application is required, no later than the time at which an irrevocable commitment of funds is made relative to such development. 
b.  If a City determination is challenged by an applicant or interested person, or if the City chooses to have a Coastal Commission determination as to the appropriate designation, such disputes or questions shall be referred to the Coastal Commission for resolution in accordance with lawful regulations adopted pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 30620.6 and Section 30333. 
2.  Notice Requirements. Notice for coastal developments shall be given by the Department of Community Development in the following manner: 
a.  Procedure. 
1)  Appealable Developments. For appealable developments which require public hearing under any Article of this code, such hearing shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with applicable Municipal Code provisions; provided, however, that at a minimum, notice by first class mail is given to those persons listed in Section 10356(C)(2)(b) not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of each such hearing, which notice, at a minimum, shall contain that information specified in Section 10356(C)(2)(c)(1). For appealable developments which do not required public hearing under any Article of this code, such developments shall be deliberated and acted upon by the Council following the conduct of a minimum of one (1) public hearing pursuant thereto and adoption of written findings required by Section 10357(A); provided, further, that such public hearing shall be preceded by written notice given by first-class mail to those persons listed in Section 10356(C)(2)(b) not less that seven (7) days prior to the date on which the first public hearing is scheduled, which notice, at a minimum shall contain the information specified in Section 10356(C)(2)(c)(1). If a decision on an appealable development is not made on the date so noticed and the matter is continued to a time which is neither previously stated in the required notice nor announced at the notice time as being continued to a time certain, then a new notice shall be given in the same manner and within the same time frame as specified for the original notice as required herein. 
2)  Non-Appealable Developments. For non-appealable developments which require public hearing under any Article of this code, such hearings shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with applicable Municipal Code provisions; provided, however, that at a minimum, notice by first class mail be given to those persons listed in Section 10356(C)(2)(b) not less than ten (10) days prior to the date of each such hearing, which notice, at a minimum, shall contain that information specified in Section 10356(C)(2)(c)(1). For non-appealable developments which do not require public hearing under any Article of this code, such developments shall be deliberated and acted upon in accordance with applicable Municipal Code provisions; provided, however, that at a minimum, notice by first class mail is given to those persons listed in Section 10356(C)(2)(b) not less than ten (10) days prior to the date a decision is scheduled to be made on each such development, which notice, at a minimum, shall contain that information specified in Section 10356(C)(2)(c)(2). If a decision on a non-appealable development is not made on the date so noticed and the matter is continued to a time which is neither previously stated in the required notice nor announced at the noticed time as being continued to a time certain, then a new notice shall be given in the same manner and within the same time frame as specified for the original notice as required herein. 
3)  Categorical Exclusions. Categorical exclusions shall be exempt from the notice requirements of this Section. Records for all permits issued for categorically excluded development shall be maintained by the Department of Community Development pursuant to the provisions of this code and shall be made available to the Coastal Commission or any interested person upon request. All permit records for categorically excluded developments shall, at a minimum, contain the applicant's name and description of the nature and location of the project. 
b.  Distribution List. For all appealable and non-appealable developments, notice required pursuant to Section 10356(C)(2)(a) shall be given to the following persons: 
1)  Each applicant; 
2)  All persons who have requested to be on the mailing list for each particular project or for all decisions concerning projects within the Coastal Zone; 
3)  All property owners and residents within one-hundred (100) feet of the perimeter of the parcel upon which each project is proposed; provided, however, that in the event the number of persons to whom which notice would be sent is greater than one-thousand (1,000), notice in lieu thereof may be given by publishing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth ( 1/8 ) page in a newspaper having general circulation within such area, or, in lieu of a display advertisement, a notice may be inserted with any generalized mailing sent by the City to property owners and residents within the area affected by the project such as a billing for City services; and 
4)  Coastal Commission. 
c.  Notice Contents. 
1)  Public Hearing Required. For appealable and non-appealable developments which require public hearing under any Article of this code, notice of public hearing required pursuant to Section 10356(C)(2)(a) shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
a)  A statement that the project is within the Coastal Zone; 
b)  The date of filing of the application and the name of the applicant; 
c)  The number assigned to the application; 
d)  A description of the project and its proposed location; 
e)  The date, time and place at which the application will be heard by the City; 
f)  A brief description of the general procedure of the City concerning the conduct of the hearing and local actions related thereto; and 
g)  The system for City and Coastal Commission appeals, including any filing fees required. 
2)  No Public Hearing Required. For non-appealable developments which do not require public hearing by any Article of this code, notice of decisions concerning the same as required pursuant to Section 10356(C)(2)(a) shall, at a minimum, contain the following information: 
a)  A statement that the project is within the Coastal Zone; 
b)  The date of filing of the application and name of the applicant; 
c)  The number assigned to the application; 
d)  A description of the project and its proposed location; 
e)  The date the application will be acted upon by the City; 
f)  The general procedure of the City concerning the submission of public comments wither in writing or orally prior to a decision being rendered on the matter; and 
g)  A statement that a public comment period, of sufficient time to allow for the submission of comments by mail, will be held prior to the decision being made. 
3.  City Action. 
a.  Finality. A City decision on a coastal development shall be deemed final when the City's decision on such development has been made and, for appealable and non-appealable developments, the following has been satisfied: 
1.  Findings. 
a)  Local Compliance. Where stipulated under applicable provisions of this code or as required by operation of law, written findings are made and adopted in conjunction with the City's decision. 
b)  Coastal Act Conformity. Specific factual findings are made in conjunction with the City's decision concerning the development's conformance with the City's certified Local Coastal Program and, where applicable, the public access and recreation policies of Chapter 3 of the California Coastal Act of 1976. 
2)  Fulfillment. All rights of appeal, as provided under applicable provisions of this code, have been exhausted. 
b.  Notification. Within seven (7) days of a final City decision on an appealable or non-appealable development, the City shall give written notice of its action by first class mail to the Coastal Commission and to any person who has so requested, which notice, at a minimum, shall contain the conditions of approval and required findings and specify the procedures for appeal of the City's decision to the Coastal Commission. If the City has failed to act on an application for an appealable or non-appealable development within the time limits set forth in Section 65950 through 65957.1 of the California Government Code, the person claiming a right to proceed pursuant to such Sections shall give written notice to the City and the Coastal Commission of his or her claim that the project, as identified in the notice, has been approved by operation of law. When the City determines that the time limits established pursuant to California Government Code Section 65950 through 65957.1 have expired, the City shall, within seven (7) days of its determination, give written notice to the Coastal Commission and to any person who has requested, that the City has taken final action by operation of law and that the project may be appealed to the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 13100 et seq. of the California Administrative Code. 
D.  Coastal Commission Appeals. Appeals to the Coastal Commission are limited solely to City decisions on appealable developments subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Effectuation of City Actions. Unless an appeal is filed with the Coastal Commission pursuant to the provisions of California Public Resources Code Section 30603(a)(1) or the City has failed to comply with the notification provisions of Section 10356(C)(3)(b), the effective date of a City decision on an appealable development shall be the later of: 
a.  Ten (10) working days following the date of receipt by the Coastal Commission of the notice required pursuant to Section 10356(C)(3)(b); or 
b.  Twenty-one (21) days following the date of final City action. 
2.  Appeal Periods. Appeal periods, for the purpose of Section 10356(D)(1), shall commence upon the Coastal Commission's receipt of the City's notice of final action given pursuant to Section 10356(C)(3)(b) and shall terminate ten (10) working days thereafter. Where the notice provisions of Section 10356(C)(3)(b) have not been lawfully satisfied, appeal periods and effective dates of City decisions on appealable developments shall be established by the Coastal Commission. 
3.  Eligible Appellants. An appellant for the purpose of Section 10356(D)(1) and 10356(D)(2), may include any applicant, aggrieved person or any two (2) members of the Coastal Commission; provided, however, that an applicant or an aggrieved person must first have exhausted all rights of local appeal as provided under applicable provisions of this code; provided, further, that the requirements for exhaustion of all rights of local appeal shall not apply if any of the following occur: 
a.  No appeal provisions exist under this code for the project in dispute; or 
b.  The City charges a fee for the filing or processing of appeals. 
E.  Public Access Easements. Except as excluded by the provisions of California Public Resources Code Section 30212, all coastal development situated between the ocean and first public road paralleling the sea shall be subject to the public access requirements prescribed in this Section. 
1.  Mandatory Dedications. As a condition requisite to project approval, easements shall be granted through the property upon which the coastal development is proposed to allow both vertical public access to the mean high tide line and lateral public access along the shore line. This requirement shall not apply in those circumstances wherein the configuration of property is such as to preclude adequate access corridors without adversely affecting the privacy of the property owner; provided, however, in no case shall development interfere with the public right of access to the sea where acquired through use unless an equivalent access to the same beach area is guaranteed. In areas where coastal bluffs exceed five (5) feet in height, the lateral easement shall include all beach seaward of the base of the bluff. In areas where the coastal bluffs are less than five (5) feet, the area of the easement to be granted shall be determined by the City based on findings reflecting historic use, existing and future public recreational needs, and coastal resource protection. At a minimum, the lateral easement shall be adequate to allow for lateral access during periods of high tide. In no case shall the lateral easement be required to be closer than ten (10) feet to a residential structure. In addition, all fences, no trespassing signs, and other such similar obstructions that may limit public lateral or vertical access shall be removed as a condition of project approval. 
2.  Coastal Commission Review. In accordance with the procedures prescribed below, the executive director of the Coastal Commission shall review and approve all legal documents specified in the conditions of approval of a coastal development for public access easements: 
a.  Document Submission. Upon satisfying the provisions of Section 10356(C)(3)(a) and 10356(D)(1) with respect to the finality and effectuation of a City decision on a coastal development, and prior to the City's issuance of development permits related thereto, the City shall forward a copy of the permit conditions and findings of approval and copies of the legal documents to the executive director of the Coastal Commission for review and approval of the legal adequacy and consistency with requirements of potential accepting agencies. 
b.  Easement Review. The executive director of the Coastal Commission shall have fifteen (15) working days from receipt of the documents prescribed in Section 10356(E)(2)(a) in which to complete the review and notify the applicant of recommended revisions, if any. If the executive director has recommended revisions to the applicant, requisite development permits shall not be issued until the deficiencies have been resolved to the satisfaction of the executive director. 
c.  Permit Issuance. The City may issue requisite development permits upon expiration of the fifteen (15) working day period if notification of inadequacy has not been received by the City within that time period. 
F.  Developments Subject to Coastal Commission Approval. Nothing herein shall be construed as to limit or extend the Coastal Commission's jurisdiction with regard to coastal developments which are located in an area within which the Coastal Commission retains original permit jurisdiction. All such coastal developments either initiated or approved by the City shall be conditioned so as to require Coastal Commission approval prior to commencement of use or construction. Where building permits are required, no such permit shall be issued without evidence of Coastal Commission approval. 
(Ord. 626 § 4 (2), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (15) (part), (27), 1992)  
10357 - Implementation. 
A.  LCP Land Use Plan Consistency. All coastal developments must, as a prerequisite of approval, be consistent with all of the development policies of the City's Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan, which consistency shall be set forth in writing and incorporated with the findings promulgated by the City in connection with all decisions concerning such developments. 
B.  Construction Costs. On the anniversary date of adoption of this Chapter and annually thereafter, the values of construction referenced in Sections 10352(H)(2)(e), 10356(B)(5) and 10356(B)(6) shall automatically be adjusted in accordance with the Engineering News Record Construction Cost Index applicable to the City as published by the United States Department of Labor. 
C.  Hazardous Waste Management Plan. All development, administrative, ministerial and special use permits granted under this Chapter, as well as all subdivision approvals granted under Chapter 4, Part L, Section 10600 shall be consistent with the siting and design criteria for hazardous waste and materials handling facilities as set forth in the Ventura County and Incorporated Cities Hazardous Waste Management Plan as amended. Actual identification of specific sites utilizing the siting and design criteria shall require amendment to the certified Local Coastal Program to identify new or compatible land use and zoning categories and development standards. Said consistency shall be set forth in writing and incorporated with the findings promulgated by the City in connection with all discretionary decisions rendered under Chapter 4, Part L, Section 10600. 
D.  Enforcement. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of permits issued and decisions rendered under the provisions of this Chapter shall constitute violation of this Article in which case the provisions of Article X, Chapter 1, Part C shall apply. 
E.  Permit Revocation. Any development, administrative, ministerial, or special use permit granted under this Chapter may be revoked if it is found that it is not being used in accordance with its terms or there has been a willful inclusion of inaccurate, erroneous or incomplete information in connection with the permit application, where the City finds that accurate and complete information would have caused the City to require additional or different conditions on a permit or deny an application. Revocation of either a Development or Administrative Permit shall be subject to public hearing before the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 10352(F). 
F.  Fee Schedule. The Council, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall from time to time establish fees for all reasonable costs incurred in conjunction with the administration of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (5), 1992; Ord. 574 § 6 (2) (part), (28), 1992)  
Chapter 4 - ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS 
Sections:  
Part A. - R-1: Single Family Zone 
 
10400 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for low density, single-family residential use. The zone is further intended to provide a quiet living environment free from rooming and boarding houses, commercial and industrial activities, and to the greatest degree possible, free from other than local vehicular traffic. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated R-1 (Single-Family Zone) unless otherwise provided in this Article.  
10401 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
A.  One family dwellings; 
B.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, public parks, flower and vegetable gardens, and fruit trees; 
C.  Mobile Homes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) and placed on a permanent foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
D.  The keeping of not more than two (2) adult dogs and two (2) adult cats and their litters up to the age of ten (10) weeks, and any combination of rabbits, poultry, fowl, bird, reptile, or rodent so long as they are kept in cages and do not exceed a combined total of four (4); provided, further, that livestock, as defined in the Animal Control ordinance of the County of Ventura, and roosters are strictly prohibited; 
E.  Community care facilities as defined in Section 1502 of the State Health and Safety Code which include but are not limited to: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, small family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center; provided, however, that the aforementioned uses serve six (6) or fewer persons; 
F.  Small family day care homes; 
G.  Supportive housing; and 
H.  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 6, 11-5-12)  
10402 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-1 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352 of this Article; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided; further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said Permit: 
A.  Community care facility serving seven (7) or more persons which include, but are not limited to group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day care treatment facility, foster family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center; shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Community care facilities and child day care facilities (excluding foster family homes and residential care facilities for the elderly), shall be separated by a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the outside walls of other structures housing such facilities so as not to impair the integrity of residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Hours of operation for a child day care facilities are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
3.  Facilities must comply with the provisions of Title 22, Divisions 6 and 12, of the California Administrative Code. 
4.  Off-street parking as required pursuant to Section 10301(B)(1)(a). 
5.  Development Review for large family day care homes shall be processed pursuant to Section 1597.46(3) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  Mobile home parks, not including recreational vehicles, commercial coaches, or factory-built "modular" housing as defined in the California Health and Safety Code; 
C.  Schools; 
D.  Community centers; 
E.  Private recreation clubs; 
F.  Churches, temples, or similar places of worship; 
G.  Hospitals and medical office buildings (at least fifty (50) percent of the leased space occupied by medical or dental facilities and the remainder of the leased space to be approved by the City Council); and 
H.  Boarding houses and lodging houses (among factors to be considered by the City Council in determining whether to approve, deny, or conditionally approve an application for a Development Permit for a boarding or lodging house is the maximum number of residents proposed for the boarding or lodging house as compared to the average number of residents residing in residential structures on lots of the same size in the same zone). 
I.  Government and public utility facilities. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (4), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (2) (part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 6, 11-5-12)  
10403 - Development standards. 
In addition to the Land Use Provisions and Development Standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated R-1 shall be subject to the following Development Standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet. 
B.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such front yard need not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Side Yard. On interior lots, there shall be a side yard on each side of the building of not less than ten (10) percent of the width of the lot, provided, that such side yards need not exceed five (5) feet in width. On corner lots, the side yard regulations shall be the same as with interior lots except in the case of a reversed corner lot. In the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be a side yard of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard of the lot immediately to the rear of such reversed corner lot, and no accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line of the lot immediately to the rear of the reversed corner lot. 
D.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such rear yard need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
E.  Lot Area. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of less than six-thousand (6,000) square feet in area; provided, however, that where a lot has less area than herein required, and was of record at the time this Article became effective, the lot may be improved by not more than one family dwelling unit. 
F.  Lot Width. Lots shall have a width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
G.  Lot Depth. Lots shall have a depth of not less than one-hundred (100) feet. 
H.  Density. There shall be not more than one (1) dwelling unit per lot, which dwelling may be occupied by not more than one (1) family. 
I.  Architectural Features. All one-family dwellings, including mobile homes placed on a permanent foundation in accordance with Section 10401(C), room additions, and similar architectural features constructed, erected, or moved into an R-1 Zone on or after July 1, 1981, shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  No sheet metal roofs shall be permitted except those which are covered by wood shake, wood shingle, asphalt shingle, fiberglass shingle, concrete or clay tiles, or built-up roofs; provided, however that sheet metal awnings, patio covers, and other such similar roof appenditures may be installed in rear yards and screened side yards appurtenant to the main building. 
2.  All main buildings and structures shall have eave overhang of a minimum of sixteen (16) inches or a minimum of one (1) foot high parapet standing above roof level along the periphery of the building. 
3.  No metal siding shall be permitted in front yards or unscreened side yards with the exception of non-corrugated, horizontally applied metal-lapped siding. 
4.  Building additions, garages and carports as permitted and required, shall be constructed so as to match the exterior composition of the principal dwelling with regard to architectural theme/design, roof pitch, colors, textures and materials or the entire structure remodeled in a single style. 
5.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the exterior wall of the second story on a new dwelling or an addition to an existing dwelling shall be set back a minimum of two (2) times the required side yard setback and one-half (½) times the required front yard setback not including uncovered decks or balconies. Openings on a second story exterior wall located on a side yard setback shall use translucent glazing or celestial windows to allow illumination while protecting privacy on adjacent property. 
J.  Minimum Size. No dwelling unit constructed, erected, or moved into an R-1 Zone on or after July l, 1981, shall have an exterior width of less than twenty (20) feet nor shall any dwelling unit have a gross floor area of less than eight-hundred (800) square feet. 
K.  Floor/Lot Area Ratio. No dwelling located within an R-1 Single Family Zone shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except or unless: (1) the gross floor area of such dwelling does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total lot area on which said dwelling is situated; (2) building site coverage, including the dwelling garages, carports, accessory buildings over one hundred (100) square feet and all areas under a roof except patio covers, does not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total lot area; and (3) a three-car enclosed garage is constructed on the lot when the total number of bedrooms within the dwelling exceeds four (4) and/or when the total number of bathrooms as defined in Section 10032 exceed three (3). These limitations shall not apply to residentially zoned property with an underlying designation of Planned Development (PD). As used herein, the term "gross floor area" shall mean the total area included within the surrounding exterior walls of all the floors and levels of a dwelling. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (7), (8), 1999)  
Part B. - R-2: Limited Multifamily Zone 
 
10420 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for medium density residential use, generally maintaining the same residential character as found in an R-1 Zone. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated R-2 (Limited Multifamily Zone) unless otherwise provided in this Article.  
10421 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
A.  One family dwellings and mobile homes certified under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) and placed on a permanent foundation system, pursuant to Section 18551 of the California Health and Safety Code; provided, however, that all such dwelling units constructed, erected, or moved into an R-2 Zone on or after July 1, 1981, shall conform to the development standards prescribed in Section 10403 of this Article; 
B.  Two family dwellings; 
C.  Condominiums, apartments, or townhouses; 
D.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, public parks, flower and vegetable gardens, and fruit trees; 
E.  The keeping of not more than two (2) adult dogs and two (2) adult cats and their litters up to the age of ten (10) weeks, and any combination of rabbits, poultry, fowl, bird, reptile, or rodent so long as they are kept in cages and do not exceed a combined total of four (4); provided, further, that livestock, as defined in the Animal Control Ordinance of the County of Ventura, and roosters are strictly prohibited; 
F.  Community care facilities as defined in Section 1502 of the California Health and Safety Code which include but are not limited to: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, small family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center; provided, however, that the aforementioned uses serve six (6) or fewer persons; 
G.  Small family day care homes; 
H.  Supportive housing; and 
I.  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 7, 11-5-12)  
10422 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-2 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352 of this Article; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said Permit: 
A.  Community care facilities serving seven (7) or more persons which include, but are not limited to: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center; shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Community care facilities and child day care facilities (excluding foster family homes and residential care facilities for the elderly) shall be separated by a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the outside walls of other structures housing such facilities so as not to impair the integrity of residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Hours of operation for child day care facilities are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
3.  Facilities must comply with the provisions of Article 22, Divisions 6 and 12, of the California Administrative Code. 
4.  Off-street parking as required pursuant to Section 10301(B)(1)(a). 
5.  Development review for large family day care homes shall be processed pursuant to Section 1597.46(3) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
B.  Mobile home parks, not including recreational vehicles, commercial coaches, or factory-built "modular" housing as defined in the California Health and Safety Code; 
C.  Schools; 
D.  Community centers; 
E.  Private recreation clubs; 
F.  Churches, temples, or similar places of worship; 
G.  Hospitals and medical office buildings (at least fifty (50) percent of the leased space occupied by medical or dental facilities and the remainder of the leased space to be approved by the City Council); and 
H.  Boarding houses and lodging houses (among factors to be considered by the City Council in determining whether to approve, deny, or conditionally approve an application for a Development Permit for a boarding or lodging house is the maximum number of residents proposed for the boarding or lodging house as compared to the average number of residents residing in residential structures on lots of the same size in the same zone). 
I.  Government and public utility facilities. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (5), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (2) (part)), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 7, 11-5-12)  
10423 - Development standards. 
In addition to the Land Use Provisions and Development Standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated R-2 shall be subject to the following Development Standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of thirty (30) feet nor be more than two stories. 
B.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such front yard need not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
C.  Side Yard. On interior lots there shall be a side yard on each side of the building of not less than ten (10) percent of the width of the lot, provided that such side yards need not exceed five (5) feet in width. On corner lots the side yard regulations shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of a reversed corner lot. In the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard of the lot immediately to the rear of such reversed corner lot, and no accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line of the lot immediately to the rear of the reversed corner lot. 
D.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than fifteen (15) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such rear yard need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
E.  Lot Area. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of less than six-thousand (6,000) square feet in area; provided, however, that where a lot has less area than herein required and was of record at the time this Article became effective, the lot may be improved by not more than a one (1) family dwelling unit. 
F.  Lot Width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
G.  Lot Depth. Each lot shall a depth of not less than one-hundred (100) feet. 
H.  Density. There shall be no more than one (1) dwelling unit for each twenty-nine hundred four (2,904) square feet of lot area, or one (1) mobile home, which dwellings may be occupied by not more than one (1) family each. If the aggregate number of dwellings allowed pursuant to this density results in a fraction of a unit, the closest whole number of dwelling units above or below one-half (½) shall be used. 
I.  Additions. Building additions, garages and carports as permitted and required, shall be constructed so as to match the exterior composition of the principal dwelling with regard to architectural theme/design, roof pitch, colors, textures and materials or the entire structure remodeled in a single style. 
J.  Second Story. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the exterior wall of the second story on a new dwelling or an addition to an existing dwelling shall be set back a minimum of two (2) times the required side-yard setback and one and one-half (1½) times the front yard setback not including uncovered decks or balconies. Openings on a second story exterior wall located on a side yard set back shall use translucent glazing or celestial windows to allow illumination while protecting privacy. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (9), (10), 1999)  
Part C. - R-3: Multiple Family Zone 
 
10440 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for high density residential use. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated R-3 (Multiple Family Zone) unless otherwise provided in this Article.  
10441 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
A.  One family dwellings; 
B.  Two family dwellings; 
C.  Multiple family dwellings; 
D.  Private greenhouses and agricultural collections, public parks, flower and vegetable gardens, and fruit trees; 
E.  The keeping of not more than one (1) adult dog and one (1) adult cat and their litters up to the age of ten (10) weeks, and any combination of rabbits, poultry, fowl, bird, reptile, or rodent so long as they are kept in cages and do not exceed a combined total of two (2); provided, further, that livestock, as defined in the Animal Control Ordinance of the County of Ventura, and roosters are strictly prohibited; 
F.  Community care facilities as defined in Section 1502 of the California Health and Safety Code which include, but are not limited to: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, small family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center; provided, however, that the aforementioned uses serve six (6) or fewer persons; 
G.  Small family day care homes; 
H.  Supportive housing; and 
I.  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 8, 11-5-12)  
10442 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-3 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352 of this Article; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said permit: 
A.  Boarding houses and lodging houses (among factors to be considered by the City Council in determining whether to approve, deny, or conditionally approve an application for a Development Permit for a boarding or lodging house is the maximum number of residents proposed for the boarding or lodging house as compared to the average number of residents residing in residential structures on lots of the same size in the same zone); 
B.  Community care facilities serving seven (7) or more persons which include but are not limited: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Community care facilities and child day care facilities (excluding foster family homes and residential care facilities for the elderly) shall be separated by a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the outside walls of other structures housing such facilities so as not to impair the integrity of residential neighborhoods. 
2.  Hours of operation for child day care facilities are limited to 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
3.  Facilities must comply with the provisions of Title 22, Divisions 6 and 12, of the California Administrative Code. 
4.  Off-street parking is required pursuant to Section 10301(B)(1)(a). 
5.  Development Review for a large family day care homes shall be processed pursuant to Section 1597.46(3) of the California Health and Safety Code. 
C.  Mobile home parks, not including recreational vehicles, commercial coaches, or factory-built "modular" housing as defined in the California Health and Safety Code; 
D.  Schools; 
E.  Community centers; 
F.  Private recreation clubs; 
G.  Churches, temples, or similar places of worship; 
H.  Mobile home park; and 
I.  Hospitals and medical office buildings (at least fifty (50) percent of the leased space occupied by medical or dental facilities and the remainder of the leased space to be approved by the City Council). 
J.  Government and public utility facilities; and 
K.  Single room occupancy (SRO) housing. SRO Housing shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Twenty-four-hour on-site management must be provided at an SRO. The applicant will provide a copy of the proposed rules and residency requirements governing the SRO. The management will be solely responsible for the enforcement of all rules that are reviewed and approved by the City Council as part of a conditional use permit. 
2.  A Management Plan to address operations, safety and security and building maintenance must be submitted to the Development Review Committee for review. 
3.  Off-street parking must be provided at a rate of one parking space per two units, inclusive of guest parking. 
4.  The building shall contain a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet of common space such as recreation areas, lounges, and living spaces. An additional ten (10) square feet of common space is required per rooming unit over eleven (11). Bathrooms, laundries, hallways, the main lobby, vending areas, and kitchens shall not be counted as common space. 
5.  Garbage disposal and receptacles are to be provided by the property owner. Garbage receptacles must be located on the lot or property in a manner that does not hinder access to any required off-street parking or loading spaces. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (6), 1999; Ord. 579 § 6 (2)(part), 1992) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 8, 11-5-12)  
10443 - Development standards. 
In addition to the Land Use Provisions and Development Standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated R-3 shall be subject to the following Development Standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of forty (40) feet nor be more than three (3) stories. 
B.  Front Yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such yard need not exceed twenty (20) feet. However, where lots comprising forty (40) percent or more of the frontage of the block are developed with buildings having an average front yard with a variation of not more than six (6) feet, no building hereafter erected or structurally altered on such block shall project beyond the average front yard line so established; provided, however, in no case shall a front yard of more than forty (40) feet be required. 
C.  Side Yard. On interior lots with buildings not exceeding two and one-half (2½) stories in height, there shall be a side yard on each side of the building of not less than ten (10) percent of the width of the lot, provided that such side yard shall not be less than five (5) feet in width. For lots with buildings exceeding two and one-half (2½) stories in height, each side yard shall be increased on foot in width for each additional story, or a fraction thereof, above the second floor. On corner lots, the side yard regulations shall be the same as for interior lots except in the case of the reversed corner lot. In the case of a reversed corner lot, there shall be a side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot of not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard of the lot immediately to the rear of such reversed corner lot and no accessory building on said reversed corner lot shall project beyond the front yard line of the lot immediately to the rear of the reversed corner lot. 
D.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the depth of the lot, provided such rear yard need not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
E.  Lot Area. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of less than six-thousand (6,000) square feet; provided, however, that a lot having less area than required herein and of record when this Article became effective, the lot may be improved by no more than a one (1) family dwelling unit. 
F.  Lot Width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
G.  Lot Depth. Each lot shall have a depth of not less than one-hundred (100) feet. 
H.  Density. There shall be not more than one (1) dwelling unit for each seventeen hundred forty-two (1,742) square feet of lot area which dwellings may be occupied by not more than one (1) family each. If the aggregate number of dwellings allowed pursuant to this density results in a fraction of a unit, the closest whole number of dwelling units above or below one-half (½) shall be used. 
I.  Building additions, garages and carports as permitted and required, shall be constructed so as to match the exterior composition of the principal dwelling with regard to architectural theme/design, roof pitch, colors, textures and materials or the entire structure remodeled in a single style. 
J.  Second Story. A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the exterior wall of the second story on a new dwelling or an addition to an existing dwelling shall be set back a minimum of two (2) times the required side yard setback and one and one-half (1½) the front yard setback not including uncovered decks or balconies. Openings on a second story exterior wall located on a side yard setback shall use translucent glazing or celestial windows to allow illumination while protecting privacy. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (11), (12), 1999)  
Part D. - R-4: Mixed Use Residential Zone 
 
10460 - Purpose. 
The purpose of the R-4 Mixed Use Residential Zone is to encourage retail, commercial and office activities in conjunction with residential uses in order to create convenience and an active street life environment, enhance personal safety by ensuring the presence of people on the streets at different times, and promote the vitality of businesses in the City. Attention must be given to the design of mixed-use projects to ensure that the potential noise, traffic and safety impacts of commercial activities will not adversely affect the quality of life for residents of a project. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999)  
10461 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereinafter erected or structurally altered in the R-4 Zone except for one or more of the following uses: 
A.  One-family dwellings; 
B.  Two family dwellings; 
C.  Condominiums, apartments or townhouses; 
D.  Community care facilities as defined in Section 1502 of the State Health and Safety Code which include, but are not limited to: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, small family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, and child day care center; provided, however, that the aforementioned uses serve six (6) or fewer than persons; 
E.  Small family day care homes; 
F.  Supportive housing; and 
G.  Transitional housing. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 9, 11-5-12)  
10462 - Conditional uses. 
The following rises may be permitted in the R-4 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated including a finding that any proposed residential uses will not be exposed to offensive noise, especially from traffic or late-night activity or obnoxious odors generated on-site or in the immediate vicinity; provided, further, that the development permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of such permit: 
A.  Uses permitted by Sections 10481 and 10482 (General Commercial Zone) and Section 10501 (Special Commercial Zone) within any building below any story thereof wholly or partly occupied by residential activities, when conducted in a building containing residential activities; 
B.  The following residential uses within a building containing commercial uses when located above the first floor and only if the entire first floor is used for nonresidential purposes: 
1.  One or more dwelling units, 
2.  A residential care facility which serves six (6) or fewer persons; 
C.  Office or commercial activities conducted within any building on the same story or above any story thereof occupied wholly or partly by residential activities; 
D.  Parking lots and buildings used by residents and guests of a permitted use. 
E.  Residential units may be developed on Key Development Site 1 in Area K — Channel Islands as a part of a mixed-use development, only if the residential uses are developed concurrently with a minimum of nineteen thousand (19,000) square feet of ground floor commercial of which three thousand three hundred (3,300) square feet may consist of live/work space. All ground floor square footage fronting Victoria Avenue shall only be developed with commercial space. A lease or rental agreement shall be required for all tenant(s) of live/work space, limiting the use of such space to solely live/work. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 714, § 3, 4-7-14)  
10463 - Development standards. 
In addition to the land use provisions and development standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated R-4 shall be subject to the following development standards: 
A.  Permitted Uses. All permitted residential uses of this Chapter shall comply with the development standards which apply to uses within an R-3 (Multiple Family Zone) as specified in Section 10443 of this Article; provided, however, that these residential standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article. 
B.  Conditional Uses. All conditional uses approved pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with the following development standards: 
1.  Maximum Floor Area Ratio. No building hereinafter erected or structurally altered in the R-4 Mixed Use Residential Zone shall exceed a floor area ratio of 0.5 if the building's square footage is devoted to commercial activities. 
2.  Maximum Building Height. No building hereinafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet, or sixty (60) feet if at least one-third ( 1/3 ) of the building's square footage is devoted to residential activities. 
3.  Maximum Site Coverage. No building hereinafter erected or structurally altered within an R-4 Mixed Use Residential Zone shall exceed a maximum site coverage of ninety (90) percent. 
4.  Density. There shall be not more than one dwelling unit for each one thousand seven hundred forty-two (1,742) square feet of lot area. If the aggregate number of dwellings allowed pursuant to this density results in a fraction of a unit, the closest whole number of dwelling units above or below one-half (½) shall be used. 
5.  Lot Area No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of less than six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
6.  Lot Width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
7.  Lot Depth. Each lot shall have a depth of not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
8.  Front Yard. No front yard shall be required except as necessary to conform with off-street parking and landscape standards pursuant to Chapter 3, Part A, of this Article. 
9.  Rear and Side Yards. There shall be a side and rear yard of not less than five (5) feet for each lot which abuts upon the side of a lot in any R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zone. Where the rear of a reversed corner lot abuts upon the rear of a lot in any R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zone, the side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot shall be not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot. In all other cases, a side yard for an R-4 property shall not be required. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999)  
10464 - Design standards. 
All conditional uses approved pursuant to this Chapter shall incorporate and provide the following design standards: 
A.  Nonresidential and residential uses located on the same floor shall not have common entrance hallways or entrance balconies. 
B.  The residential units shall have a separate and secured entrance and exit that is directly accessible to the parking. 
C.  Common walls, floors and ceilings between residential and nonresidential uses shall be constructed so that vibration is minimized and residential unit interior noise levels do not exceed fifty (50) decibels. 
D.  Parking spaces for nonresidential and residential uses shall be specifically designated by posting, pavement marking and/or physical separation. 
E.  The floors devoted to residential units shall provide an exterior appearance and character which denotes it as housing and is visibly different from the commercial floors through the use of patios, balconies, changes in fenestration, and appropriate levels of detail, while maintaining a cohesive quality. 
F.  The residential units shall provide and maintain a refuse storage container separate from that used by the commercial uses. Such container shall be clearly marked for residential use only and use by commercial businesses is prohibited. 
G.  All outdoor lighting associated with commercial uses shall be shielded and directed away from surrounding residential uses. Such lighting shall not blink, flash, oscillate or be of unusually high intensity of brightness. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999)  
10465 - Performance standards. 
No conditionally permitted use listed in Section 10462 shall involve any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly germane to the use listed and is incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises and provided that no more than five (5) persons are employed in the manufacture, processing or treatment of products; provided, further, that no conditionally permitted use shall be allowed which involves any operation which is objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration or other similar causes. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999)  
10466 - Pre-existing nonconforming uses. 
Uses within the R-4 (Mixed Use Residential) Zone existing as of the effective date of this Chapter which are nonconforming to the permitted uses listed in Section 10461, may be continued or changed to a comparable nonconforming use provided that there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming uses nor any increase in the intensity of such uses and provided, further, that such uses were, on the effective date of this Chapter, in conformance with the underlying zone classification in effect immediately prior thereto provided, further, that nonresidential uses existing as of the effective date of this Chapter shall not be changed to residential uses without a conditional use permit having first been issued pursuant to Section 10462. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (43) (part), 1999)  
Part D-1. - R-5: Transitional Residential/Coastal-Related Industry Zone 
 
10470 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for the gradual and orderly transition of residential and commercial uses to those of a coastal-related nature. Under the provisions of this Chapter, it is intended that coastal-related uses be allowed to develop in accordance with General Plan and Local Coastal Program land use policies without depriving property owners of reasonable use concurrent with protecting the health, safety and general welfare of the public. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated R-5 (Transitional Residential/Coastal-Related Industry Zone) unless otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (40a) (part), (40c), 1999)  
10471 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereinafter erected or structurally altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
A.  One family dwellings; 
B.  Two family dwellings; 
C.  Condominiums, apartments or townhouses; 
D.  Community care facilities as defined in Section 1502 of the State Health and Safety Code which include but are not limited: group quarter supportive housing, group quarter transitional housing, residential facility, adult day care facility, day treatment facility, foster family home, small family home, social rehabilitation facility, community treatment facility, residential care facility for the elderly, child day care facility, and day care center; provided, however, that the aforementioned uses serve six (6) or fewer persons; 
E.  Small family day care homes; 
F.  Supportive housing; 
G.  Transitional housing; 
H.  Private greenhouses and horticultural collections, public parks, flower and vegetable gardens, and fruit trees; and 
I.  The keeping of not more than two (2) adult dogs and two (2) adult cats and their litters up to the age of ten (10) weeks, and any combination of rabbits, poultry, fowl, bird, reptile, or rodent so long as they are kept in cages and do not exceed a combined total of four (4); provided, further, that livestock, as defined in the Animal Control Ordinance of the County of Ventura, and roosters are strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (40a) (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 10, 11-5-12)  
10472 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the R-5 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said Permit: 
A.  Harbor-Related Office Uses. Offices and establishments doing business with coastal-dependent industries including: 
1.  Business offices of port users; and 
2.  Professional and general offices of establishments doing business with the port or its users, or with the U.S. Naval Construction Battalion Center and Naval Civil Engineering Laboratory. 
B.  Harbor-Related Storage/Warehousing. The storage and warehousing of products in transit to or from the Port of Hueneme. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this ___, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
C.  Marine Science/Research. Laboratory, research, and other facilities related to analysis and evaluation of the ocean, marine life, and man's relation to it. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (40a), (part), (40d), 1999)  
10473 - Development standards. 
In addition to the Land Use Provisions and Development Standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated R-5 shall be subject to the following Development Standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Permitted Uses. All permitted uses of this Chapter shall comply with the development standards which apply to uses within an R-2 (Limited Multifamily Zone) as specified in Section 10422 of this Article; 
B.  Conditional Uses. All conditional uses approved pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with the development and performance standards which apply to uses within a M-PR (Port-Related Industry Zone) as specified in Sections 10563 and 10564 of this Article; provided, however, that the building height limitations, yard requirements and lot area standards applicable to the R-2 (Limited Multifamily Zone) shall supersede those standards specified in Section 10564 of this Article; provided, further, that land proposed for conversion to permitted industrial/storage uses be permitted only on a full block-by-block basis. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (40a) (part), (40e), (40f), 1999)  
Part E. - C-1: General Commercial Zone 
 
10480 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for general business and commercial uses within the City. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated C-1 (General Commercial) Zone unless otherwise provided in this Article.  
10481 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
A.  The following specified uses are allowed: 
1.  Antique store; 
2.  Auctions and auctioneers; 
3.  Automobile service station; 
4.  Bakery (employing not more than five (5) persons on premises); 
5.  Barber shop or beauty shop; 
6.  Bank; 
7.  Blueprinting and photocopying; 
8.  Book or stationery store; 
9.  Cleaning and pressing establishments using non-inflammable and non-explosive cleaning fluid; 
10.  Confectionery store; 
11.  Conservatory of music; 
12.  Department store; 
13.  Dressmaking and sales or millinery store; 
14.  Drug store; 
15.  Dry goods or notions store; 
16.  Florist shop; 
17.  Funeral parlor; 
18.  Furniture store; 
19.  Garage, commercial (excepting truck repair); 
20.  Grocery or fruit store; 
21.  Hardware store; 
22.  Interior decorating store; 
23.  Jewelry store; 
24.  Laundry or clothes cleaning agency; 
25.  Liquor store; 
26.  Meat market or delicatessen store; 
27.  Medical laboratory; 
28.  Music store; 
29.  News stand or newspaper vending; 
30.  Nursery, flower or plants; 
31.  Offices, business or professional; 
32.  Pet shop; 
33.  Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges; 
34.  Radio and television store; 
35.  Restaurant, tearoom, or cafe (excluding dancing or entertainment); 
36.  Service station occupying less than 150 feet of frontage on any one street; 
37.  Shoe store or shoe repair shop; 
38.  Storage garage; 
39.  Studio, photography or film developing; 
40.  Tailor, clothing or wearing apparel shop; 
41.  Theater or auditorium; 
42.  Trade school; 
43.  Uses of structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in the zone; and 
44.  Retail stores and businesses not otherwise specified above.  
10482 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C-1 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said Permit: 
A.  Car wash; 
B.  Establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises except Beverage Control Act Type 41 licenses which may be permitted by issuance of an administrative permit pursuant to Section 10353. 
C.  Hospital and medical office buildings; 
D.  Hotels, motels and boatels; 
E.  Kennels and Veterinarian Hospitals; 
F.  Trailer and mobile home sales; 
G.  Trailer and equipment sales and rentals; 
H.  Used car sales; 
I.  Permitted uses which do not otherwise comply with the provisions of Section 10484; and 
J.  Arcades, as defined in Section 10031, this code subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Place. Arcades shall be prohibited within five-hundred (500) feet of the property boundary of any public or private school, church, or park. 
2.  Hours of Operation. The hours of operation of an arcade may be between 3:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, and 9:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m. on Saturdays, Sundays, and on holidays as designated in Section 6702 of the California Government Code. 
3.  Bicycle Racks. Bicycle racks shall be placed on site in locations approved by the Director of Community Development. Bicycle racks shall provide one bicycle stall for every three (3) amusement devices, as the term "amusement device" is defined in Section 5003(a) of this code. 
4.  Exterior Walls. All exterior walls shall have a sound transmission class rating of fifty-four (54). 
5.  Liquor. No alcoholic beverages of any kind, including, but not limited to, wine and beer, shall be sold, served, consumed, or permitted to be sold, served, or consumed in any arcade to or by any person. 
6.  Tokens. Amusement devices as defined in Section 5003(a) of this code, shall be operated only by tokens which may be purchased on the premises of the arcade. 
7.  Restrooms. Separate public restroom facilities for males and females shall be provided on the arcade premises. 
8.  Supervision. At least one adult shall be in attendance at all times that the arcade is open and shall provide adequate management and control over the activities at the arcade premises. Such adult shall not have any duties of selling tokens or repairing the amusement devices, as defined in Section 5003(a) of this code, while the arcade is open. 
9.  Lighting. A minimum of two (2) foot candle illumination must be maintained in all parts of the arcade when the arcade is open. 
10.  Revocation of Permit. Operation of a business in violation of any condition attached to the Development Permit shall be grounds for revocation or non-renewal of any license, permit, or other entitlement previously issued by the City, for the privilege of engaging in such business and shall be grounds for denial of any further license, permit or other entitlement authorizing the conduct of such business or any other business, if the business includes the operation of an arcade. The applicant shall include with the application for a Development Permit a certified copy of any license which is required to be secured from any governmental agency in order to use the property for an arcade. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (20), 1999)  
10483 - Development standards. 
In addition to the Land Use Provisions and Development Standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated C-1 shall be subject to the following development standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Height. No building hereinafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  Front Yard. No front yard shall be required except as necessary to conform with off-street parking and landscaping standards pursuant to Chapter 3, Part A of this Article. 
C.  Side Yard. There shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet for each C-1 lot which abuts upon the side of a lot in any R-1, R-2, or R-3 Zone. Where the rear of a reversed corner lot abuts upon a lot in any R-1, R-2, or R-3 Zone, the side yard on the street side of the reversed corner lot shall be not less than fifty (50) percent of the front yard required on the lots in the rear of such corner lot. In all other cases, a side yard for a C-1 property shall not be required. 
D.  Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
E.  Lot Area. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot of less than six-thousand (6,000) square feet in area. 
F.  Lot Width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
G.  Lot Depth. Each lot shall have a depth of not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
H.  Floor Area Ratio. There shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0.55:1. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (23), (24), 1999) 
I.  On-Site Improvements. 
1.  Fences, Hedges and Walls. 
a.  Wherever off-street parking areas are situated across the street from property in a residential district, landscaping and/or a berm three (3) feet in height shall be erected between the landscaped area required pursuant to Section 10302, and the parking area so as to adequately screen said parking from residential properties. 
b.  A solid masonry fence of not less than six (6) feet in height shall be built and maintained on those sides of the property that adjoin an R-1, R-2, R-3 Zone, school or park. 
c.  All mechanical equipment, including heating and air conditioning units shall be completely screened from the surrounding properties by use of a wall or fence constructed of a material compatible with the main building, or shall be enclosed entirely within the building. 
d.  Walls or fences of sheet or corrugated iron, steel, aluminum, asbestos, or security chain link fencing are specifically prohibited. 
2.  Landscaping. 
a.  All building sites shall have a minimum landscape coverage of ten (10) percent of the net buildable area. 
b.  An automatic underground sprinkler system for all landscaped areas shall be required. 
c.  All planting areas are to be kept free of weeds and debris. 
d.  All plantings are to be kept in a healthy and growing condition. Fertilization, cultivation and tree pruning shall be part of the regular maintenance. 
e.  Irrigation systems shall be kept in a working condition. Adjustments, replacements, repairs and cleaning shall be part of the regular maintenance. 
3.  Storage and Refuse Collection Areas. 
a.  All outdoor storage and refuse collection areas shall be screened so that materials stored within these areas shall not be visible from any access street or adjacent property. 
b.  A trash enclosure shall be provided for all storage and refuse collection areas, unless the proposed location of such areas are completely enclosed by walls or buildings. The freestanding trash enclosure shall be constructed of masonry block and designed so as to screen all trash stored within; provided, however, that such enclosures shall be constructed to a height of not greater than six (6) feet. 
4.  Sheet Metal Walls. No building or structure having exterior walls or corrugated sheet metal shall be erected, altered, enlarged, or moved into the C-1 Zone except under the following circumstances: 
a.  Said metal building is an accessory building to the principal commercial building and all uses therein are incidental to the permitted use of the property; 
b.  Said metal building is substantially screened from public view; and 
c.  Said metal building is allowed by a Development or Administrative Permit, issued pursuant to Sections 10352 or 10353, or a modification thereto.  
10484 - Performance standards. 
No permitted use listed in Section 10481 shall involve any kind of manufacture, processing or treatment of products other than that which is clearly germane to the use listed and is incidental to the retail business conducted on the premises and provided that no more than five (5) persons are employed in the manufacture, processing, or treatment of products; provided, further, that no permitted use shall be allowed which involves any operation which is objectionable due to noise, odor, dust, smoke, vibration, or other similar causes.  
Part F. - C-S: Special Commercial Zone 
 
10500 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for beach and port related commercial, recreational, and visitor-serving uses in response to the provisions of the California Coastal Act of 1976, in order that public opportunities for coastal recreation be enhanced, as provided by Sections 30221 and 30222 of the California Public Resources Code. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated C-S (Special Commercial) Zone unless otherwise provided in this Article.  
10501 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
A.  Visitor-Serving Facilities. Development which provides accommodations, food, or services for tourists, visitors and residents, including: 
1.  Restaurants, fast food establishments, delicatessens, confectionery and ice cream stores; 
2.  Hotels, motels and boatels; 
3.  Museums; and 
4.  Music and theatre/entertainment establishments. 
B.  Commercial-Recreational Facilities. Facilities which provide, serve or enhance recreational needs, including: 
1.  Sportfishing ticket offices and related facilities; 
2.  Racquetball, tennis and related sport participant facilities; 
3.  Sporting equipment rental shops; 
4.  Marine hardware establishments; 
5.  Bait/tackle supplies and sporting good stores; 
6.  Retail fish markets; 
7.  Sport fish cleaning services; and 
8.  Ice supply shops.  
10502 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the C-S Zone; provided, further, that no Development Permit shall be required under the provisions of Section 10352 of this Article so long as the use or uses proposed do not involve any physical alteration of land or structure other than improvements which are clearly incidental or accessory to the use including, but not limited to, furnishings, equipment, and signs; provided, further that such improvements may be allowed only if they do not constitute a major modification as defined in Section 10352(H)(2) and are otherwise consistent with the provisions on any pre-existing development permit which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Section 10352 and 10353 of this Article: 
A.  Limited General Commercial Uses. General commercial uses of a professional, service-oriented or specialized retail nature may be permitted in the C-S Zone; provided, further, that such uses may only be comprised of the following: 
1.  Bakeries; 
2.  Barbershops; 
3.  Financial institutions; 
4.  Florist shops; 
5.  Delicatessens; 
6.  Newsstands; 
7.  Confectionery stores; 
8.  Art and photo studios; 
9.  Office, professional or business; 
10.  Travel agencies; 
11.  Antique shops; and 
12.  Specialty retail shops. 
a.  Harbor-Related Office Uses. Offices and establishments doing business with coastal-dependent industries may be permitted in the C-S Zone; provided, further, that such uses may only be comprised of the following: 
13.  Business offices of port users; and 
14.  Professional and general offices of establishments doing business with the port or users, or with the Naval Construction Battalion Center. 
(Ord. 644 § 2, 2003)  
10503 - Development standards. 
Minimum development standards applicable to the C-S Zone shall be the same standards as apply to the C-1 (General Commercial) Zone as prescribed in Section 10483; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article; provided, further, that underlying development standards for the C-S Zone shall have a maximum building height of thirty-five (35) feet and a maximum floor area ratio of 0.50:1. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (22), 1999)  
10504 - Pre-existing nonconforming uses. 
Uses within the C-S (Special Commercial) Zone existing as of the effective date of this Chapter which are nonconforming to the Permitted Uses listed in Section 10501, may be continued or changed to a comparable nonconforming use provided that there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space, or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming uses nor any increase in the intensity of such uses and provided, further, that such uses were, on the effective date of this Chapter, in conformance with the underlying zone classification in effect immediately prior thereto.  
Part G. - P-R: Park Reserve Zone 
 
10520 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for public and quasi-public recreational uses, buildings and related human resources. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated P-R (Park Reserve) Zone unless otherwise provided in this Article.  
10521 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
A.  Public park; 
B.  Recreational buildings and facilities; 
C.  Public parking; and  
10522 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the P-R Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if the potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said Permit: 
A.  Community centers; 
B.  Assembly buildings for public and private use; and 
C.  Commercial uses and buildings which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses listed in Sections 10521 or 10522.  
10523 - Development standards. 
In addition to the Land Use Provisions and Development Standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated P-R shall be subject to the following Development Standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone (hereinafter PD) designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Height. No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of three (3) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. 
B.  Setbacks. All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the midline between the main walls of building structures situated on adjoining lots not otherwise zoned P-R. 
C.  Building Site Coverage. A maximum building site coverage of twenty-five percent (25%) of the net area of all contiguous lots zoned P-R shall be allowed. 
D.  Floor Area Ratio. There shall be a maximum floor area ratio of 0.50:1. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (25), (26), 1999)  
Part H. - M-1: Light Industrial Zone 
 
10540 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a zone for coastal-related industrial uses other than those requiring direct water adjacency together with selected commercial/industrial uses. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone unless otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (45) (part), 1999)  
10541 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one (1) or more of the following uses: 
A.  Harbor-Related Manufacturing/Processing. The manufacturing, assembling, or processing of products in transit to or from the Port of Hueneme; 
B.  Harbor-Related Storage/Warehousing. The storage and warehousing of products in transit to or from the Port of Hueneme; 
C.  Industrial/Office. Administrative offices directly related to the operation of permitted industrial uses, excluding offices not engaged in operating industrial uses located on the property; 
D.  Marine Science/Research. Laboratory and other facilities related to analysis and evaluation of the ocean, marine life, and man's relation to it. 
E.  Miscellaneous. In addition, the following specified uses are allowed: 
1.  Appliance manufacturing, 
2.  Audio/visual products manufacturing, 
3.  Beverage or brewery production, 
4.  Bicycle manufacture, 
5.  Distribution plant, 
6.  Electronics manufacturing, 
7.  Emergency shelters, 
8.  Food processing, 
9.  Foundry manufacture, 
10.  Home improvement center, 
11.  Laboratories, research, 
12.  Lodge or fraternal hall, 
13.  Marine supply store, 
14.  Motion picture studio, 
15.  Newspaper printing and distribution, 
16.  Optical products manufacture, 
17.  Orthopedic manufacture, 
18.  Parcel delivery terminal, 
19.  Plastics manufacture, 
20.  Radio/television broadcasting studio, 
21.  Recording studio, 
22.  Refrigeration plants, 
23.  Rubber products manufacture (except tires), 
24.  Scientific instruments manufacturing, 
25.  Testing laboratories, 
26.  Tools manufacturing, 
27.  Transfer, moving and storage, 
28.  Uses of structures which are incidental or accessory to any of the uses permitted in the zone. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (45) (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 11, 11-5-12)  
10542 - Conditional uses. 
The following uses may be permitted in the M-1 Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of such permit: 
A.  Fish processing; 
B.  Auto transport preparations; 
C.  Storage or warehousing of automobiles, lumber, offshore oil, exploration equipment, boats and other marine vessels in dry dock, and open storage of any product, where such storage constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the total site area; 
D.  Energy, government and public works facilities including marshaling areas, maintenance yards and public utilities; 
E.  Uses other than those listed herein which have been approved as part of the Port Hueneme Master Plan certified by the Coastal Commission, as amended; 
F.  Laboratory, research and manufacturing uses not otherwise specified above; and 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (45) (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 11, 11-5-12)  
10543 - Development standards. 
In addition to the land use provisions and development standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated M-1 shall be subject to the following development standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Lot Area. 
1.  Each lot shall have a minimum of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
2.  The maximum building site coverage shall be seventy-five (75) percent of the net area of the site (FAR 0.75:1). 
B.  Setbacks. 
1.  Street Setbacks. Setbacks from streets shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the ultimate right-of-way. 
2.  Side Setbacks. The side setbacks for all uses shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet except that the side setback for interior lots may be zero feet provided the main building structure on same lot line of the abutting parcel is setback at zero feet, and both parcels are developed at the same time. 
3.  Residential Adjacency. No structure shall be located closer to an adjacent residentially zoned parcel than at a distance equal to twice the height of the structure. 
4.  Architectural Feature Setback Exceptions. 
a.  Roof overhangs may project six (6) feet into a twenty (20) foot or greater setback and three (3) feet into any setback less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  Steps and open and unenclosed staircases may project into the setback area. 
c.  No building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall exceed a height of thirty-five (35) feet or two (2) stories. 
C.  Emergency Shelters. In addition to the standards specified in subsections A and B of this Section 10543, emergency shelters shall also be subject to the following development standards: 
1.  Each resident shall be provided a minimum of fifty (50) gross square feet of personal living space per person, not including space for common areas. In no case shall occupancy exceed sixty (60) residents at any one (1) time. Bathing facilities shall be provided in quantity and location as required in the California Plumbing Code (Title 24 Part 5), and shall comply with the accessibility requirements of the California Building Code (Title 24 Part 2). 
2.  Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in Section 10301, except that the number off-street parking spaces provided shall be one (1) parking space per ten (10) adult beds, plus one (1) parking space per employee on the largest shift. Notwithstanding this requirement, the required number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed the spaces required for similar uses of the same size in the M-1 Zone. 
3.  Outdoor activities such as recreation, drop-off and pick-up of residents, or similar activities may be conducted at the facility. Staging for drop-off, intake, and pick-up should take place inside a building, at a rear or side entrance, or inner courtyard. Emergency shelter plans must show the size and location of any proposed waiting or resident intake areas, interior or exterior. 
4.  Prior to commencing operation, the emergency shelter provider must have a written management plan, which shall be approved by the Director of Community Development. The management plan must include, but is not limited to, provisions for staff training, resident identification process, neighborhood outreach, policies regarding pets, the timing and placement of outdoor activities, temporary storage of residents' personal belongings, safety and security, loitering control, management of outdoor areas, screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at the facility, and training, counseling and social service programs for residents, as applicable. 
5.  No more than one (1) emergency shelter is permitted within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from another emergency shelter. 
6.  Individual occupancy in an emergency shelter is limited to six (6) months in any twelve-month period. 
7.  Exterior lighting shall be provided at all building entrances and outdoor activity areas, and shall be activated between sunset and sunrise of each day. All exterior lighting shall comply with Section 10304. 
8.  Each emergency shelter shall have an on-site management office, with at least one (1) employee present at all times the emergency shelter is in operation or is occupied by at least one (1) resident. 
9.  Each emergency shelter shall have on-site security employees, with at least one (1) security employee present at all times the emergency shelter is in operation or is occupied by at least one (1) resident. 
10.  Facilities must provide a storage area for refuse and recyclables that is enclosed by a six-foot high landscape screen, solid wall or fence, which is accessible to collection vehicles on one (1) side. It must be large enough to accommodate the number of bins that are required to provide the facility with sufficient service so as to avoid the overflow of material outside of the bins provided. 
11.  The emergency shelter facility may provide one (1) or more of the following specific facilities and services, including but not limited to: 
a.  Commercial kitchen facilities designed and operated in compliance with the California Retail Food Code; 
b.  Dining area; 
c.  Laundry; 
d.  Recreation room; 
e.  Support services (e.g., training, counseling); and 
f.  Child care facilities. 
12.  Applications for emergency shelters shall be submitted to the Community Development Director, and if the application meets all applicable standards, including design, development, and any other state or local requirement, the application shall be approved ministerially by the Director. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (45) (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 11, 11-5-12)  
10544 - Design standards. 
In addition to the land use provisions and development standards specified in Chapters 2 and 3 of this Article, all property designated M-1 shall be subject to the following design standards; provided, however, that these standards may be superseded under a Planned Development Zone designation pursuant to Section 10582 of this Article: 
A.  Perimeter Screening. 
1.  When a lot abuts a residential zone, a six (6) foot solid masonry wall and/or some other screening approved by the City, shall be erected on the zone boundary. 
2.  A solid wall and/or some other screening approved by the City may be required along the perimeter of all areas which by reason of the condition of the property or physical hazards are considered by the Development Review Committee/City Council to be dangerous to the public health or safety. 
3.  A solid wall shall be erected surrounding any area devoted to open storage. 
4.  Walls or fences of sheet or corrugated iron, steel, aluminum, asbestos or security chain-link fencing are specifically prohibited except as security chain-link fencing may be permitted when combined with redwood battens or a similar aesthetic treatment. 
5.  Perimeter screening shall not be required if deemed unnecessary by the Development Review Committee/City Council, based upon its approval of submitted development and landscaping plans which establish to its satisfaction that attractive development will occur in keeping with the intended residential/recreational nature of the community. 
B.  Required Landscaping. 
1.  General. 
a.  All improved building sites shall have a minimum landscape coverage of five (5) percent. Landscaping shall consist of an effective combination of sculpturing, street trees, groundcover and shrubbery. 
b.  Dry landscape materials may be used inside in rear setback areas only. All unpaved, nonwork areas (excluding vacant lots) shall be landscaped. 
c.  An automatic underground sprinkler system for landscaped areas shall be provided. 
d.  No usage or storage is permitted within the required landscaped areas. 
2.  Boundary Areas. Perimeter landscaping shall be required for all lots fronting a public right-of-way. The landscaping shall be placed along the entire length of these property lines and shall be of sufficient width to accommodate the number of trees required. One tree per fifteen (15) linear feet of lot frontage on a public right-of-way, which may be clustered or grouped, shall be planted in the boundary area in addition to required groundcover and shrub material. 
3.  Driveway and Parking Areas. 
a.  Driveway and parking areas shall be separated from adjacent landscaping by a wall or curb at least four (4) inches high but no more than two and one-half (2 ½) feet high. 
b.  Parking areas shall be screened so as to minimize the effect from all adjacent access streets and other properties. Plant materials used for screening shall consist of bermed, linear or grouped masses of shrubs and/or trees of a sufficient size and height to meet this requirement. 
c.  One tree per each five (5) parking stalls, which may be clustered or grouped, shall be installed within the parking area. Boundary planting will not be counted toward this requirement. Trees shall be placed so as to give relief to the monotony of the rows of parked vehicles. 
4.  Undeveloped Areas. Undeveloped areas will be maintained in a weed-free condition. 
5.  Landscaping Maintenance. 
a.  Lawn and groundcover are to be trimmed or mowed regularly. All planting areas are to be kept free of weeds or debris. 
b.  All planting areas are to be kept in a healthy growing condition. Fertilization, cultivation and tree pruning shall be a part of regular maintenance. 
c.  On a continuing basis, all dead and/or missing plants shall be replaced. 
d.  Irrigation systems shall be kept in good working condition. Adjustment, replacement, repairs and cleaning shall be a part of regular maintenance. 
e.  Stakes, guides and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for correct functioning. Ties are to be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks or branches. 
C.  Access. Vehicular access to lots fronting on a primary or secondary thoroughfare shall be such that there shall be a paved turning area on the lot or a device to permit motor vehicles to head into the street. Such turning device or area shall be in accordance with the standards described by the Development Review Committee. 
D.  Storage and Refuse Collection Areas. 
1.  All outdoor storage areas and refuse collection areas shall be screened so that the materials stored within these areas shall not be visible to access streets, freeways and adjacent properties. 
2.  Outdoor storage shall include all company owned and operated motor vehicles, except for passenger vehicles. 
3.  Storage or refuse collection areas shall not be permitted within setback areas. 
E.  Loading Areas. Street side loading, on other than special landscaped streets, will be allowed providing the loading is set back a minimum of seventy (70) feet from the street right-of-way line. Such loading areas shall be screened from view of adjacent streets. 
F.  Telephone and Electrical Service Facilities. All on-site telephone and electrical lines twelve (12) KV or less will be placed underground. Transformer or terminal equipment will be screened from view of adjacent streets and properties. 
G.  Other. So as to provide local access for the users and prevent congestion and other hazards related to the use of land permitted in the M-1 Zone, the following improvements are deemed necessary, and these must be guaranteed by a bond or amount of money satisfactory to the City filed before any building or use permit may be issued. The Development Review Committee/City Council may waive these requirements where their application is impractical. 
1.  Streets shall have been improved to the standards approved by the Development Review Committee/City Council. 
2.  Sidewalks shall have been installed. 
3.  Alleys shall have been paved. 
H.  Exterior Lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be shielded and directed away from surrounding residential properties. Such lighting shall not blink, flash, oscillate or be of unusually high intensity of brightness. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (45) (part), 1999)  
10545 - Pre-existing nonconforming uses. 
Uses within the M-1 (Light Industrial) Zone existing as of the effective date of this Chapter which are nonconforming to the permitted uses listed in Section 10541, may be continued or changed to a comparable nonconforming use provided that there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming uses nor any increase in the intensity of such uses and provided, further, that such uses were, on the effective date of this Chapter, in conformance with the underlying zone classification in effect immediately prior thereto. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (45) (part), 1999)  
Part I. - M-PR: Port-Related Industry Zone 
 
10560 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide and regulate a single zoning classification for property contiguous to the Port of Hueneme which is governed by a certified Port Master Plan approved by the California Coastal Commission. The regulations specified in this Chapter shall apply to all property designated M-PR (Port-Related Industry) Zone unless otherwise provided in this Article. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
10561 - Permitted uses. 
No building or land shall be used and no building shall be hereafter erected or structurally altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
A.  Coastal-related or coastal-dependent development as defined in the California Coastal Act of 1976, as amended, or as otherwise approved as part of the Port Master Plan for the Port of Hueneme certified by the California Coastal Commission; 
B.  Seawall and waterfront access facilities together with recreation and visitor serving facilities, so long as such facilities are consistent with and further the intent of the Hueneme Beach Master Plan as set forth in the Land Use Plan of the Local Coastal Program; provided, further, that such facilities shall be the only uses permitted in the M-PR Zone on the ocean revetment itself and, together with port-related access, the only uses permitted in the M-PR Zone on a strip of land fifty (50) feet in width abutting north along the length of the ocean revetment. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
10562 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Categorical Exclusions. The following uses may be permitted in the M-PR Zone to the extent that they are fully consistent with the performance standards specified in Section 10563 and so long as the use or uses proposed do not involve any intensification or physical alteration of land or improvements as to constitute a major modification as defined in Section 10352(H)(2); provided, further, that such uses shall be exempt from the development review requirements of Chapter 3: 
1.  Receiving, storage and distribution of petroleum and bulk fuel products; 
2.  Receiving, storage, distribution, transportation and movement of general cargo including, but not limited to, automobiles; 
3.  Ingress and egress to sport fishing and commercial fishing shallow draft berths; 
4.  Internal traffic circulation, including the central gate at the intersection of Ponoma Street and Hueneme Road; 
5.  Off-street parking; 
6.  Storage of equipment and related activities by persons holding cargo handling permits; 
7.  Storage of equipment and other personal property such as forklifts, stevedoring gear, bins, truck modules, truck chassis, containers and similar items used in loading, unloading, transportation and movement of cargo for supplying the off-shore oil industry; 
8.  Fabrication, assemblage and manufacturing of oil modules and/or platforms, provided, however, that such activities shall be limited to Mondays through Saturdays, excepting holidays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except in case of emergency; 
9.  Any permitted use specified in Section 10561 so long as the use or uses proposed do not involve any physical alteration of land or structure other than improvements which are clearly incidental or accessory to the proposed use or uses including, but not limited to, furnishings, equipment and signs. 
B.  Administrative Permits. Permitted uses and categorical exclusions which are not otherwise exempt from the development review requirements of Chapter 3 by operation of Section 10562(A) may be permitted in the M-PR Zone subject to the issuance of an Administrative Permit pursuant to Section 10353; provided, however, such permit may only be issued so long as the use or uses proposed do not involve any intensification or physical alteration of land or as to exceed the following thresholds: 
1.  An increase of more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of building area or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land area; 
2.  An increase of more than ten (10) percent in cargo throughput or surface traffic; 
3.  Creation of any significant environmental effect as defined in Title 14, Division 6, Chapter 3 of the California Code of Regulations. 
C.  Development Permits. Uses other than those governed by subsections A and B of this section may be permitted in the M-PR Zone subject to the issuance of a Development Permit pursuant to Section 10352; provided, however, that the applicant shows that the use or uses proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use or uses will be situated; provided, further, the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
10563 - Performance standards. 
A.  General. In addition to the use regulations and maintenance standards specified in Chapter 2, Parts A and B of this Article, all property designated M-PR shall be subject to the performance set forth in this section. 
B.  Petroleum Products. No new facility or expansion of any existing facility involving the receiving or distribution of petroleum bulk fuel products, whether they be temporary or permanent, shall be allowed except or unless a Development Permit is otherwise granted pursuant to Section 10562(C). 
C.  Hazardous Materials. The storage and transportation of fissionable or radioactive materials, and storage and transportation of explosive materials as defined by the Secretary of Commerce of the United States of America effective April 9, 1941, and identified as Classes A, B and C shall be strictly prohibited. 
D.  Exterior Storage. No equipment or material of any kind, including, but not limited to offshore modules and/or platforms as permitted pursuant to Section 10562 shall exceed the height of any perimeter masonry screen wall unless set back from the interior boundary of such wall a distance equal to twice the height any such equipment, vehicle, cargo or material. 
E.  Fabrication and Manufacturing. Except as provided in Section 10562(A)(8), no fabrication or manufacturing activities of any kind shall be allowed except or unless such activities are wholly contained within a fully enclosed building and a Development Permit is granted therefore pursuant to Section 10562(C). 
F.  Vehicular and Pedestrian Access. Except as otherwise provided by Development Permit, all ingress and egress to the Port of Hueneme shall be strictly limited to the central gate at the intersection of Hueneme Road and Ponoma Street. 
G.  Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Section 10301; in the absence of standards for specific uses, one parking space shall be required for each employee, both part- and full-time, casual and permanent, plus an amount reasonably required to accommodate customers and visitors, inclusive of parking required for staging and cargo handling operations. 
H.  Miscellaneous. Exterior lighting, where provided, shall be accomplished in such a manner as not to illuminate adjacent properties or streets; all designated parking and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete and suitably striped so as to clearly indicate intended use of same; all site improvements and landscaping shall be maintained in a continuous state of good condition and repair, free of all trash and rubbish. 
I.  Governmental Laws. All buildings, uses and improvements on property designated M-PR shall comply with the certified Port Master Plan and applicable provisions of the Code including, without limitation, Noise Control (Article III, Chapter 5), Building Regulations (Article VIII), Land Use Provisions (Article X, Chapter 2), and Land Development Provisions (Article X, Chapter 3). 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
10564 - Development and design standards. 
Development and design standards within the M-PR Zone shall be those which apply to the M-1 Zone. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
10565 - Pre-existing nonconforming uses. 
Uses within the M-PR (Port-Related Industry) Zone existing as of the effective date of this Chapter which are nonconforming to the Permitted Uses listed in Section 10561, may be continued or changed to a comparable nonconforming use provided that there is no increase or enlargement of the area, space or volume occupied or devoted to such nonconforming uses nor any increase in the intensity of such uses and provided, further, that such uses were, on the effective date of this Chapter, in conformance with the underlying zone classification in effect immediately prior thereto. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
10566 - Pre-existing nonconforming buildings. 
Except as otherwise allowed as part of an approved Development Permit issued under Chapter 3 of this Article, no building or other structure situated within the M-PR (Port-Related Industry) Zone located seaward of the westerly prolongation of Port Hueneme Road may be reconstructed, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any such building or structure be used or improved by any person, corporation or governmental entity, other than the government of the United States of America for the purpose of maintaining and operating the U.S. Coast Guard Lighthouse or Foghorn, without an Administrative Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10353 of this Article. 
A.  Standards of Review. In addition to those procedures found in Section 10353, an Administrative Permit under this Section shall not be issued unless it meets the following requirements: 
1.  No building shall be reconstructed, altered, used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose other than a pre-existing nonconforming use or use permitted in the M-PR zone. 
2.  No building shall be reconstructed, altered, used, designed or intended to be used for any purpose until the Development Review Committee, in consultation with the Port Hueneme Building Official and Fire Department, determines and makes findings pursuant to Section 10353(D) that the building or structure will be safe for its intended use and occupancy using the codes in effect at the time of original construction. If it cannot be determined what codes were in effect at the time of original construction, the Port Hueneme Building Official shall determine which codes are the appropriate ones to be used to evaluate the building or structure for the purposes hereof. To assist the Development Review Committee in making such determination and findings, the applicant shall allow the Building Official and Fire Department to inspect or cause to be inspected, the building or structure for compliance with code in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
3.  Any project approval or modification and approval pursuant to 10353(D) of this Article involving remedial work to ensure that time building or structure will not be hazardous to life safety, fire safety, health or sanitation based upon its intended use and occupancy, shall be completed or satisfactorily assured prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. 
(Ord. 626 § 2 (44) (part), 1999)  
Part J. - PD: Planned Development Zone 
 
10580 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide a superimposed zone which may be attached to the various zoning districts within the City so as to provide for flexibility in development, creative and imaginative design, and the development of parcels of land as coordinated projects involving a mixture of residential densities and housing types, community facilities and commercial and industrial uses.  
10581 - Location of zone. 
The PD (Planned Development) Zone designation applies to all property so designated on the Zoning Map of the City as of the date of this Chapter and as may subsequently be added by ordinance of the Council. In addition, all property described below is hereby placed in the PD Zone: 
A.  All parcels contained within the Coastal Zone as set forth on the Post LCP Certification Permit and Appeal Jurisdiction Map referenced in Section 10356(A) of this Article. 
B.  All parcels not zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 which abut land contained within an R-1 Zone.  
10582 - Development standards. 
The development standards prescribed herein apply solely to residential and commercial properties zoned PD which contain not less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. The development standards of the underlying districts within which the aforementioned properties are located are superseded by the standards prescribed herein and additional standards which may be imposed pursuant to Section 10352(F); provided, however, that the provisions of this Section in no way change or supersede the uses permitted in the underlying zone district within which such properties are located nor do the provisions of this Section supersede the Development Standards specified in Chapter 3, Part A of this Article, Use and Maintenance Standards specified in Chapter 2, Part B of this Article, or Use Regulations specified in Chapter 2, Part A of this Article. 
A.  Conventional Single-Family Planned Developments. 
1.  Lot Area. A minimum lot area of four-thousand (4,000) square feet per dwelling unit shall be allowed; provided, however, that the average lot area in a single planned development shall be five-thousand (5,000) square feet. 
2.  Front and Rear Yard. A minimum front and rear yard setback of fifteen (15) feet shall be allowed. 
3.  Side Yard. No side yard setback shall be required; provided, however, that a minimum of ten (10) feet is maintained between a structure on the immediately adjacent lot. This minimum standards shall be maintained unless one of the following conditions prevail: 
a.  Structures which abut private areas such as a plaza, park, mall or other permanent open space may abut the common property line and have openings onto such appurtenances; or 
b.  An attached or detached garage or carport may abut a side property line or another structure; provided, however, that no garage openings are located on the abutting surface. 
4.  Garages. A minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from the ultimate street right-of-way and front-on garages shall be required; provided, however, that this minimum standard may be decreased to within ten (10) feet of this ultimate street right-of-way if the garage is side loaded. Sectional doors with automatic garage door openers shall be required where necessary to provide parking on site or safe travel on driveways. All garage doors shall have architectural treatment or detail. 
5.  Building Site Coverage. Building site coverage shall include all areas under a roof excluding trellis areas and shall be limited by setback requirements only. 
6.  Height. A maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet shall be allowed for any one building and the overall average height for all buildings within a single project shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
7.  Density. The number of dwelling units allowed within a single planned development shall be governed by the density standards applicable to the underlying zone district within which the property is situated. 
8.  Utility Meters. All wall-mounted utility meters shall be screened or integrated into the building design. 
B.  Townhouse, Condominium, and Apartment Planned Developments. 
1.  Setbacks. 
a.  General Provisions. As used in this Section, the following definitions and provisions shall apply: 
1)  Setback. The term "setback" shall mean the shortest horizontal distance between a structure and the relevant reference point. In cases of unique building or site design, minimum average setbacks for all structures within a project pursuant to Section 10582(B)(1)(c) shall be determined by the Director of Community Development on the basis of predominant exterior building features rather than the closest point of a structure to a relevant reference point; provided, further, that setbacks between structures which abut a common driveway or which are separated by a street shall not be included within the computation of minimum project averages. 
2)  Structure. The term "structure", as defined in Section 10110, shall include the outermost limits of a lot or dwelling including patios, balconies, entry courts, and other such similar features germane to such lot or dwelling. 
3)  Right-of-Way. The term "right-of-way", as it applies to private streets, shall mean the outermost improved limits of a street as measured from curbface to curbface. 
b.  Building Minimums. The following setbacks constitute the minimum required for all structures: 
1)  Off-Street Parking. Five (5) feet from open, unenclosed off-street parking; 
2)  Interior Streets. Ten (10) feet from interior street rights-of-way; 
3)  Perimeter Boundaries. Ten (10) feet from property lines where such boundaries do not otherwise abut a perimeter street; 
4)  Perimeter Streets. Fifteen (15) feet from perimeter street rights-of-way; and 
5)  Building Separations. Fifteen (15) feet between on-site structures. 
c.  Project Averages. The following setbacks constitute the minimum average required for all structures, collectively, within a single planned development: 
1)  Off-Street Parking. Ten (10) feet from open, unenclosed off-street parking; 
2)  Interior Streets. Fifteen (15) feet from interior street rights-of-way; 
3)  Perimeter Boundaries. Fifteen (15) feet from property lines where such boundaries do not otherwise abut a perimeter street; 
4)  Perimeter Streets. Twenty (20) feet from perimeter street rights-of-way; and 
5)  Building Separations. Twenty (20) feet between on-site structures. 
2.  Exceptions. These minimum setback standards shall be maintained unless one of the following conditions prevail: 
a.  Structures which abut public areas such as a plaza, park, mall or other permanent open space may abut the common property line and have openings onto such appurtenances; or 
b.  An attached or detached garage or carport may abut a side property line or another structure; provided, however, that no garage openings are located on the abutting surface. 
3.  Garages. A minimum setback of twenty (20) feet from the ultimate street right-of-way and front-on garages shall be required; provided, however, that this minimum standard may be decreased to within ten (10) feet of the ultimate street right-of-way if the garage is side loaded. Sectional doors with automatic garage door openers shall be required where necessary to provide parking on site or safe travel on driveways. All garage doors shall have architectural treatment or detail. 
4.  Building Site Coverage. Building site coverage, including all areas under a roof excluding trellis areas, shall not exceed sixty-five (65) percent of the net site area. 
5.  Height. A maximum height of forty-five (45) feet shall be allowed for any one building and the overall average height for all buildings within a single project shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
6.  Density. The number of dwelling units allowed within a single planned development shall be governed by the density standards applicable to the underlying zone district within which the property is situated. 
7.  Storage Areas. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a storage area of a minimum of 225 cubic feet which may be included in the garage area, but may not intrude into the minimum garage dimensions. 
8.  Utility Meters. All wall-mounted utility meters shall be screened or integrated into the building design. 
C.  Commercial Planned Developments. 
1.  Setbacks. 
a.  Perimeter Boundaries. A minimum setback of five (5) feet shall be maintained from all street rights-of-way and property lines; provided, however, that this minimum shall be increased by five (5) feet for each story above the second floor. 
b.  Residential Adjacency. No structure shall be located closer to an adjacent residentially zoned parcel than at a distance equal to one-half (½) the height of the structure. 
2.  Height. A maximum height of seventy-five (75) feet shall be allowed for all buildings. 
3.  Landscaping. 
a.  General. A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the net site area shall be allowed for landscaping. Landscape improvements shall consist of an effective combination of sculpturing, street trees, ground cover, and shrubbery, and shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system. Dry landscape materials may be used in side and rear yard areas only. All unpaved, non-work areas (excluding vacant lots) shall be landscaped. 
b.  Boundary Areas. Boundary landscaping shall be required on all interior property lines which abut property not otherwise zoned C-1 or C-S. The landscaping shall be placed along the entire length of these property lines and shall be of a sufficient width to accommodate a number of trees required. One (1) tree per thirty (30) linear feet of each interior property line, which may be clustered or grouped, shall be planted in the boundary area in addition to required ground cover and shrub material. 
c.  Screening. Landscaping shall be used to screen storage areas, trash enclosures, parking areas, public utilities and other similar land uses or elements which do not contribute to enhancement of the surrounding area. A combination of fences, hedges and walls shall be employed to adequately buffer commercial properties from residential districts which adjoin or are adjacent to such properties. 
d.  Maintenance. All landscaped areas shall be kept free of weeds and debris. Lawn and ground cover is to be trimmed and/or mowed regularly. All plantings are to be kept in a healthy and growing condition. Fertilization, cultivation, and tree pruning shall be part of regular maintenance. Irrigation systems shall be kept in working order. Adjustments, replacements, repair and cleaning shall be part of regular maintenance. Stakes, guys and ties on trees shall be checked regularly for corrective action. Ties are to be adjusted to avoid creating abrasions or girdling on trunks and branches. 
4.  Parking. 
a.  General. Parking may be located on a continuous site; provided, however, that an agreement recorded with the County Recorder's Office shall be executed providing for reservation of the use of the contiguous site for parking. This agreement shall be signed by the owner(s) of the contiguous site and filed with the Department of Community Development. 
b.  Landscaping. Planter area curbs may be used in place of wheel stops; provided, however, that such planter areas are not less than six (6) feet in width. 
5.  Signs. 
a.  General. In addition to those signs permitted in Section 10303(D), additional monument and special identification signs may be allowed under the circumstances delineated in Sections 10582(C)(5)(b) and 10582(C)(5)(c) below and provided that such additional signs are compatible with the design features applicable to a commercial planned development. 
b.  Monument Signs. In a shopping center or multiple business property which has a second or third ingress/egress from a street other than the right-of-way which serves as the property's principal frontage, which ingress/egress is separated from the principal frontage by one or more separate parcels of record and which provides access to secondary business entrances and parking areas, an additional monument sign with an area of one-half (½) square foot of sign area per linear foot of street frontage is permitted subject to all other conditions specified in this Section; provided, further, that the additional monument sign allowed herein may only be erected adjacent to the secondary or tertiary ingress/egress which serves such property. 
c.  Special Identification Signs. In a shopping center or multiple business property which has a second or third ingress/egress from a street other than the right-of-way which serves as the property's principal frontage, a special identification sign may be permitted, which signs may include, but are not limited to, thematic towers and roof mounted structures; provided, however, such signs may be used only to identify the property as a whole as differentiated from advertising signs which incorporate the names or products associated with individual businesses. 
6.  Refuse Collection and Loading Areas. 
a.  Location. Storage or refuse collection shall not be permitted within front or side yard areas. Street side loading may be allowed; provided, however, that such areas are screened from view of adjacent streets. 
b.  Screening. All outdoor storage and refuse collection areas shall be screened so materials stored within these areas shall not be visible from any access street, freeway, or adjacent property. Outdoor storage of all company owned and operated motor vehicles, except for passenger vehicles, shall be screened from view from all access streets, freeways, and adjacent properties. 
D.  Architectural Guidelines. The following colors, materials, and related architectural elements are generally illustrative of compatible and incompatible design features applicable to both residential and commercial planned developments: 
1.  Compatible Design Features. 
a.  Earth-tone colors and materials such as off-white, off-red, and beige; subdued yellow or orange, orange-red, red, burnt red, and brown; and natural greens. 
b.  Heavy wood beams; stucco, stained concrete and slumped stone finishes; wood siding, masonry veneers, split-face block, brick, used-brick, and cast concrete. 
c.  Tile, concrete tile, shake, shingle, slate, and clay roofs. 
d.  Hip or gable roofs on small one (1) story structures. 
e.  Wood-capped fences, ornaments, railings, and fixtures. 
f.  Arches and overhanging eaves. 
g.  Careful and creative landscaping to enhance, to highlight and to strengthen the design characteristics of on-site improvements. 
h.  Low profile monument signs. 
i.  Patterned concrete walkways, street entries, and driveway approaches. 
2.  Incompatible Design Features. 
a.  Bright, shiny, or non-textured metal or exterior surfaces; porcelain, plastic or similar surfaces of non-earthen hues. 
b.  Bright, fluorescent type or non-earthen tone colors. 
c.  Exposed mechanical equipment, including vents and exhausts; above ground telephone and electrical lines of twelve (12) KV or less; unscreened transformer or terminal equipment. 
d.  Nondescript or boxy buildings without facade or other recognizable characteristic or distinctive style or theme; any building design that is dominated or intended to be dominated by signs or commercial advertising. 
e.  Lighting accentuating or intending to accentuate advertising or not shielded and not arranged to reflect away from any adjoining property. 
f.  Paper, cloth, plastic, and metal flags or other similar devices reflecting display purposes. 
g.  Extensive chain link fencing without offsetting landscaping features. 
h.  Unscreened or unobstructed loading docks and trash and service areas. 
i.  Plastic or artificial plants or landscaping. 
E.  Exceptions. In cases of unique building or site design, minor deviations in the Development Standards prescribed in this Section 10582 may be allowed at the discretion of the Director of Community Development where, on the basis of predominant exterior building and site features, the strict application of this section may work contrary to the intent of this Chapter.  
10583 - Reserved.  
10584 - Development review. 
A.  Applicability. All projects involving property situated within a PD Zone are subject to the Development Review Procedures specified in Chapter 3, Part B of this Article; provided, however, that the following classes of development shall be exempt: 
1.  Improvements to Existing Developed Properties. Improvements to existing developed properties shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as such properties and improvements meet all of the following criteria: 
a.  Qualification of Property. The property upon which improvements are proposed: 
1)  Has, as of the effective date that such property was initially zoned PD, been developed in accordance either with the development standards of the underlying zone district within which the property is situated or in accordance with those development standards prescribed in Section 10582 of this Chapter; and 
2)  Is not governed by a pre-existing development permit issued by the City which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10532 and 10533 of this Article. 
b.  Qualification of Improvements. The improvements proposed do not constitute a major modification as defined in Section 10352(H)(2) nor constitute reconstruction, alteration or use of a pre-existing nonconforming building as defined in Section 10546. 
2.  Repair and Maintenance. Repair and maintenance of existing developed properties and unimproved vacant land shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as such repair and maintenance does not result in an addition to, or enlargement or expansion of, the object of such repair or maintenance. 
3.  Permitted Uses of Existing Developed Properties. Permitted uses of existing developed properties shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as all of the following criteria is met: 
a.  Use Limitation. The use or uses proposed consist of permitted uses as listed in the underlying zone district within which the property is situated. 
b.  Improvement Limitation. The use or uses proposed do not involve any physical alteration of land or structure other than improvements which are clearly incidental or accessory to the use including, but not limited to, furnishings, equipment and signs; provided, further, that such improvements may be allowed only if they do not constitute a major modification as defined in Section 10352 (H)(2) and are otherwise consistent with the provisions of any pre-existing development permit which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article. 
c.  Code Compliance. The use or uses proposed are in compliance with the Development Standards specified in Chapter 3, Part B of this Article, Use and Maintenance Standards specified in Chapter 2, Part B of this Article, and Use Regulations specified in Chapter 2, Part A of this Article. 
4.  Replacement Due to Natural Disaster. Replacement of any structure, other than a public works facility, destroyed by natural disaster shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as all of the following criteria is met: 
a.  Use Limitation. The replacement structure is to be for the same use as the destroyed structure. 
b.  Improvement Limitation. The replacement structure does not exceed either the floor area, height, or bulk of the destroyed structure by more than ten (10) percent and is to be sited in the same location on the affected property as the destroyed structure. 
c.  Code Compliance. The replacement structure is in compliance with the development standards applicable in the underlying zone district within which the affected property is situated. 
d.  General Provisions. As used in this Section, the following definitions and provisions apply: 
1)  Natural Disaster. The term "natural disaster" shall mean any situation in which the force or forces which destroyed the structure to be replaced were beyond the control of its owner. 
2)  Bulk. The term "bulk" shall mean the total interior cubic volume as measured from the exterior surfaces of a structure. 
5.  Abatement of Nuisances. Abatement of public nuisances under the provisions of Chapter 2, Part B of this Article shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as curative actions are limited to: 
a.  Repair, Rehabilitation, Vacation and Removal. Repair, rehabilitation, vacation or removal of the conditions which constitute the public nuisance to the extent necessary to remedy the same. 
b.  Demolition. Demolition of the premises wherein the conditions which constitute the public nuisance endanger the life, limb, health, property, safety, or welfare of the public or occupants thereof. 
6.  Categorical Exclusions. 
a.  Single Family Residences. The construction of a single-family residence shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as all of the following criteria is met: 
1)  Qualification of Property. The property upon which construction is proposed: 
a)  Is not governed by a pre-existing development permit issued by the City which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Section 10352 and 10353 of this Article; 
b)  Is limited to an existing, single legal lot of record, not in conjunction with the construction of two (2) or more single-family residences; and 
c)  Is not located in or on nor is comprised of any of the following: 
1/  Tide or submerged land, beaches, or lots immediately adjacent to the inland extent of any beach, or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach; or 
2/  Land or water subject to the public trust. 
2)  Qualification of Construction. The use and improvements proposed: 
a)  Consist solely of permitted uses and improvements as listed in the underlying zone district within which the property is situated; and 
b)  Conform with the development standards applicable to the underlying zone district within which the property is situated. 
b.  Demolition. The demolition of structures shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as all of the following criteria is met: 
1)  Qualification of Property. The property upon which demolition is proposed: 
a)  Is not governed by a pre-existing development permit issued by the City which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article; 
b.  Is not situated within a Park Reserve (P-R) Zone nor is it deemed to be of historical, archaeological or architectural significance; and 
c)  Is not located in or on nor is comprised of any of the following: 
1/  Tide or submerged land, beaches, or lots immediately adjacent to the inland extent of any beach, or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach; or 
2/  Land or water subject to the public trust. 
2)  Qualification of Structure. The demolition proposed: 
a)  Is limited to the following: 
1/  Single-family residences not in conjunction with the demolition of two (2) or more units; 
2/  Apartments and duplexes designed for not more than four (4) dwellings units if not in conjunction with the demolition of two (2) or more such structures; 
3/  Stores and offices if designed for an occupant load of twenty (20) persons or less, if not in conjunction with the demolition of two (2) or more such structures; 
4/  Accessory (appurtenant) structures including garages, carports, patios, swimming pools and fences; or 
5/  A combination of the foregoing, not in conjunction with more than one (1) legal lot of record; and 
b)  Is excluded from the replacement requirements of Section 65590 of the California Government Code. 
c.  Public Works Projects. Public works projects, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 30114, which do not otherwise meet the criteria specified in Sections 30610, 30610.5, 30611 or 30624 of said Code, shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapter 3, Part B of this Article so long as all of the following criteria is met: 
1)  Qualification of Property. The property involved as part of the public works project: 
a)  Is not governed by a pre-existing development permit issued by the City which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article; and 
b)  Is not located in or on nor is comprised of any of the following: 
1/  Tide or submerged land, beaches, or lots immediately adjacent to the inland extent of any beach, or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is not beach; or 
2/  Land or water subject to the public trust. 
2)  Qualification of Improvements. The public works project is limited to the following: 
a)  Public Facilities and Improvements. Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation or installation of public facilities and improvements under the following circumstances: 
1/  Replacement and Upgrading. The facilities and improvements replaced or upgrade existing facilities and improvements without more than a minimal change in use, size, capacity, or location to the extent that such facilities and improvements do not constitute a major modification as defined in Section 10352(H)(2) of this Article (e.g., replacement of water or sewer lines, undergrounding of utilities, public housing modernization, reconstruction of curbs and sidewalks, repaving streets, rehabilitation of public buildings); and 
2/  Furnishings and Equipment. The facilities and improvements furnish or equip a site where its replacement and use is consistent with the use of that site and the action will not change the use, size, capacity, or character of the site (e.g., landscaping, street furniture, play equipment for established parks and playgrounds, fire protection equipment, street medians). 
b.  Removal of Architectural Barriers. Special projects directed to the removal of material and architectural barriers which restrict the mobility and accessibility of elderly or handicapped persons to publicly owned and privately owned buildings, facilities, and improvements. 
B.  Determinations of Exemption. Determinations as to whether a project is exempt from the requirements of Chapter 3, Part B of this Article under the provisions of Section 10583(A) shall be made by the Director of Community Development or his designated representative no later than the time which application is customarily made for either a business license or building permit; provided, further, that the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Qualification of Property. Where a project involves property which is governed by a pre-existing development permit which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article, such projects shall be processed as permit amendments in accordance with the provisions of Sections 10352(H) and 10353(F), as applicable. 
2.  Qualification of Improvements. Where it is determined that a project is not exempt and the property involved is not governed by a pre-existing development permit which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article, such projects shall require the issuance of new permits in accordance with the aforesaid Sections, as applicable. 
3.  Ministerial and Special Use Permits. Where it is determined that a project is exempt under the provisions of Section 10583(A), yet the project constitutes an action for which either a Ministerial or Special Use Permit is otherwise required, such projects shall be subject to the requirements of Sections 10354 and 10355, as applicable. 
C.  Retroactivity. All property situated within a PD Zone which is governed by a pre-existing development permit issued by the City and which serves the same general purpose and function of that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article, shall, as of the effective date of this Chapter, be deemed to be in conformance with the development standards prescribed in Section 10582 of this Chapter and the development standards of the underlying zone district within which such property is situated; provided, however, that such property must otherwise be in compliance with the terms and conditions of the development permit issued pursuant thereto; provided, further, that all future improvements to such property must hereinafter comply, in all respects, with the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. 611 § 1(6), 1996)  
Part K. - Flood Hazard (FH) Overlay Zone 
 
10590 - In general. 
A.  Intent and Relation to Other Provisions of the LCP. The Flood Hazard (FH) Overlay Zone is intended to provide additional provisions and requirements for new development within mapped flood hazard areas. The provisions and requirements of the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone shall be in addition to all other provisions of the certified Local Coastal Program. In the event that any requirement or definition of the Flood Hazard Overlay Zone conflicts with any other requirement or definition of the certified Local Coastal Plan, then the provisions of the certified Local Coastal Program shall apply. 
B.  Purpose. This Part is adopted in accordance with Government Code Sections 6530, 65560, and 65800 for the purpose of providing minimum standards and criteria to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating land use in the areas of special flood hazards. The areas of special flood hazard, as indicated by the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Ventura County, California and Incorporated Areas," dated January 20, 2010, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM's), and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFM's) dated January 20, 2010, and all subsequent amendments and revisions are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Chapter. The FIRM's and FBFM's are on file with the City's Department of Community Development. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 2, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 2, 7-19-10)  
10591 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions will govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this Part: 
A.  Base Flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceed in any given year. For purposes of this Chapter, the Base Flood shall be the same as the 100-year flood. 
AA.  Basement. Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. 
AAA.  Development. In addition to the definition of development in the City's Local Coastal Program Zoning Ordinance Section 10356, within areas of the Flood Hazard Overlay, development shall also include any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, without limitation, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
B.  Flood or Flooding. Means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the unusual or rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (2) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a body of water as a result of the erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this Definition. 
C.  Flood Hazard (FH) Zone. An overlay zone whose boundaries are the same as the Special Flood Hazard Area as defined in Section 10591(H). 
D.  Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
DD.  Flood Insurance Study. Means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
E.  Flood Proofing. Means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes and adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate potential flood damage to real estate or improved property. 
EE.  Floodway. Means the channel of a river or other water course and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. Also referred to as "Regulatory Floodway." 
F.  Functionally Dependent Use. Means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out close to the water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
FF.  Highest Adjacent Grade. Means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface before construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
FFF.  Historic Structure. Means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
FFFF.  Lowest Floor. Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. 
G.  Mean Sea Level. Means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of the 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
GG.  New Construction. Means for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after September 24, 1984 (when the City entered the regular phase of the National Flood Insurance program), and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
GGG.  Recreational Vehicle. Means a vehicle that is: (1) built on a single chassis; (2) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
H.  Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). Means an area having special flood hazards as shown on the City Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zone "A". 
HH.  Start of Construction. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the local government building permit was issued, provided the actual start date of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
HHH.  Structure. Means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
HHHH.  Substantial Damage. Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
I.  Substantial Improvement. Means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is started; or (2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
J.  Violation. Means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this Part. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this Part is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 3, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 3, 7-19-10)  
10592 - Permitted uses. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards as identified in the latest Federal Insurance Rate Map as of the date of this Chapter. In addition, all property seaward of the reach of mean high tide is hereby placed in the FH (Flood Hazard) zone.  
10593 - Development review. 
Any new development, including repair and maintenance, within the flood hazard overlay zone requires a coastal development permit pursuant to Section 10356 unless such development complies with the applicable exemption provisions of the certified LCP. All new development, in addition to any standards required pursuant to the Flood Hazard Overlay, must comply with all applicable policies and provisions of the Local Coastal Program. All projects involving property situated within the FH zone are subject to the Development Review and Permit Procedures specified in Sections 10352, 10356, and 10357; provided, however, that the following classes of development shall be exempt as follows: 
A.  Improvements to Existing Developed Properties. Improvements to existing developed properties shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10535 of this Article so long as such properties and improvements meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  Qualification of Property. The property upon which improvements are proposed: 
a.  Has, as of the effective date that such property was zoned FH, been developed in accordance either with the development standards of the underlying zone district within which the property is situated or in accordance with those development standards prescribed in Section 10594 of this Chapter; and 
b.  Is not governed by a pre-existing development permit issued by the City which serves the same general function and purpose as that prescribed in Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article. 
2.  Qualification of Improvements. The improvements proposed do not constitute a major modification as defined in Section 10353(H)(2). 
B.  Repair and Maintenance. Repair and maintenance of existing developed properties and unimproved vacant land shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 10352 and 10353 of this Article so long as such repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure does not exceed 50% of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is started; or (2) if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
C.  Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 10590, the Community Development Director must obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available form a federal or state agency, or other source in order to administer Section 10594. 
D.  Alteration of a Watercourse. The Community Development Director must notify the County Watershed Protection District and the California Department of Water Resources before physical ground alteration or relocation of a watercourse by the City and assure that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 4, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 4, 7-19-10)  
10594 - Development standards. 
The Development standards prescribed herein apply solely to properties located within the FH Zone, though these development standards are not necessarily the sole standards applicable to properties in that location. The development standards of the underlying districts within which the aforementioned properties are located are superseded by the standards prescribed herein and additional standards which may be imposed pursuant to Section 10352(F); provided, however, that the provisions of this Section in no way change or supersede the coastal resource protection policies and provisions of the certified Land Use Plan and the Zoning Ordinance or the uses permitted in the underlying zone district within which such properties are located not do the provisions of this Section supercede Development Standards specified in Chapter 3, Part A, Use and Maintenance Standards specified in Chapter 2, Part B, or Use Regulations specified in Chapter 2. 
A.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed of materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall use methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All elements including mechanical equipment that function as part of the structure shall be elevated to the same elevation as the building. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with Section 10594(C)(1), or together attendant utility and sanitary facilities: 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
3.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one-foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit for flood waters. 
4.  Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 10594(C)(3). 
D.  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect must certify that the standards of Section 10594 are satisfied. 
E.  Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into systems. 
2.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into the flood waters. 
3.  On-site waste disposal systems shall not be permitted. 
F.  The City's Director of Community Development or his designated representative is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this Part K by granting or denying development permits (but not including coastal development permits) in accord with its provisions. The Director shall obtain and maintain the following records: (1) certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed structure complies with Section 10594; (2) the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such structures contain a basement; and (3) that all other required city, state, and federal permits, including coastal development permits, have been obtained. 
G.  Base Flood Elevation Changes. Within six (6) months of information becoming available for project completion, whichever comes first, the Community Development Director shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 5, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 5, 7-19-10)  
10595 - Subdivisions. 
All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres in size, whichever is the lesser, must: (1) identify the Special Flood Hazard Areas and base Flood Elevations; (2) identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans; (3) if the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure must be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a Letter of Map revisions based on fill to the Community Development Director with the following information: (a) lowest floor elevation; (b) pad elevation; and (c) lowest adjacent grade. All subdivision proposals and other proposed development must be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage including location and construction of proposed public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to minimize flood damage and provision of adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 6, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 6, 7-19-10)  
10596 - Appeal procedures. 
The Director of Community Development or his designated representative shall review applications described in Section 10393(A), and shall provide a determination, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the Flood Hazard (FH) Zone where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. Upon receipt by the Director of Community Development of an appeal filed by a person aggrieved by a decision pursuant to Section 10596, the Director of Community Development shall promptly give written notice to the applicant and the appellate that an appeal has been taken and that the matter will be considered and heard by the City Council at a regular or adjourned regular meeting, the date of which shall be set forth in the Notice, but in no event to be more than thirty (30) days or less than ten (10) after such notice is mailed to the applicant and appellate. A copy of this notice shall be circulated at the time and manner as prescribed in Section 10352(F)(1). The City Council, at the time of such hearing, shall consider all matters appurtenant thereto, and by its next meeting after such hearing the City Council shall render its decision either upholding or reversing the determination of the Director of Community Development and/or modifying the Director of Community Development's determination. Written notice thereof, unless waived by the applicant and/or appellate at the time of the hearing, shall promptly be mailed to the applicant and appellate by the Director of Community Development. The decision of the City Council shall be deemed final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 579 § 6 (2 (part)), (29), 1992)  
10597 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific considerations. Larger floods can and will occur. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. Thus Chapter does not imply that the land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Port Hueneme, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.  
10598 - Coastal development. 
Nothing herein shall be construed as to limit or extend the Coastal Commission's jurisdiction with regard to Coastal Developments which are located in Flood Hazard (FH) zones and in an area within which the Coastal Commission retains original permit jurisdiction. All such coastal developments either initiated or approved by the City shall be conditioned as to require Coastal Commission approval prior to commencement of use or construction. Where building permits are required, no such permit shall be issued without evidence of Coastal Commission approval.  
10599 - Variance. 
Issuing a variance under this Part is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and cannot be modified by the granting of a variance. Variances may be considered pursuant to the limitations set forth in Section 10005. 
A.  General. A variance may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed work will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. A variance cannot be issued within any mapped floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. A variance cam only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this Part. 
B.  Administration. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted must be given written notice by the Director of Community Development that: (1) issuing a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will likely result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and (2) such construction below the base flood level increase risks to life and property. 
C.  Record. The Community Development Director must maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances to FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 7, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 7, 7-19-10)  
10599.1 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This Part is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair and existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Part and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions prevails. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 8, 1-4-10; Ord. No. 701, § 8, 7-19-10)  
Part L. - DR: Development Reserve Overlay Zone 
 
10600 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the orderly planning and development of property within the City which is currently exempt from local land use control by virtue of its ownership by the Government of the United States of America but may, at some future date, be removed from federal ownership for private or public development. This chapter creates the Development Reserve (DR) Overlay Zone to act as a holding zone for all lands currently owned by the Federal Government upon removal from federal ownership for private or public development. Upon such removal, this zone shall apply until appropriate land use and zoning classifications have been adopted by the City and certified by the Coastal Commission pursuant to Section 10003 (Amendments) of this Article. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (6), 1992)  
10601 - Location of zone. 
The DR (Development Reserve) zone designation becomes immediately effective upon the divestiture of federally owned lands and applies to all such property owned by the Government of the United States of America as of the date of adoption of this Chapter. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (6), 1992)  
10602 - Planning and development. 
No property situated within the DR (Development Reserve) Zone may be used or improved by any person, corporation or governmental entity, other than by the Government of the United States of America, without a Development Permit having first been issued therefore by the City pursuant to Section 10352 of this Article. Except as provided below, the procedures specified in Section 10352 shall be the procedures by which Development Permits may be issued pursuant to this Chapter. 
A.  Standards of Review. No existing improvements or uses shall be expanded or intensified nor shall any new development be allowed pursuant to this Chapter unless and until a land use and zoning designation for the site has been adopted by the City and certified by the Coastal Commission. Upon certification, no development shall occur unless a Development Permit is first approved and issued by the City; provided, however, that the approving body finds that the proposed use or improvement is consistent with the certified Coastal Land Use Plan and Ordinances; and that the applicant shows that the use(s) or improvement(s) proposed will not be injurious or detrimental to the public health, safety or to property in the vicinity or zone in which the use(s) or improvement will be situated; provided, further, that the Development Permit may be issued if potentially injurious or detrimental effects can be mitigated by the imposition of conditions requisite to issuance of said Permit. In discharging its discretionary powers of approval with respect to said Permits, the City shall evaluate the whole of an action, which has a potential for resulting in a physical change in the environment, directly or ultimately. No Development Permits shall be issued for any use or improvement of property governed by this Chapter which constitutes a change or an intensification of a pre-existing nonconforming use or structure unless such nonconforming use or structure is made to conform with the provisions of Article X of the Port Hueneme Municipal Code or other suitable means of mitigating same are imposed as conditions of approval. 
B.  Boundary Changes. Prior to issuance of Development Permits pursuant to this Chapter, land use and zoning classifications shall be adopted by the City pursuant to Municipal Code Section 10004. No Development Permit shall be approved until after certification of land use and zoning classifications. Any Boundary Change approved pursuant to this Chapter which affects the use of any property situated within the California Coastal Zone, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 30103, shall constitute amendment of the Local Coastal Program of the City of Port Hueneme. No such Boundary Change shall become final until approval is granted in accordance with the provisions of Title 14, Division 20, Article 2, as amended, of the Public Resources Code of the State of California. 
C.  Public Hearing. The public hearing required pursuant to Municipal Code Section 10352(F) shall be conducted at the convenience of the City Council and may be continued as the Council deems necessary; provided, however, that if no action is taken within one (1) year of the date of filing pursuant to Municipal Code Section 10352(D), the project shall be deemed to be approved unless a single ninety (90) day extension is granted by mutual consent of the applicant and City. The decision of the City Council made with respect to Development Permits and corresponding Boundary Changes pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed final and conclusive except where decisions are appealable to the Coastal Commission as provided in Section 10356 of this Article. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (6), 1992)  
Chapter 5 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
10700 - Compliance. 
All departments, officials, or public employees vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses where required by law, shall conform to the provisions of this Title. No such license or permit for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this Title shall be issued. Any such license or permit, if issued in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall be null and void. Any uses contrary to the provision of this Title are declared unlawful. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (7), 1993)  
10701 - Judicial review of coastal development. 
Any person, including an applicant for a permit or the Coastal Commission of the State of California, aggrieved by a decision or action of the City on a discretionary project affecting property within the Coastal Zone, which project is not otherwise appealable pursuant to the provisions of Section 10356, shall have a right to judicial review of such decision or action by filing a petition for writ of mandate in accordance with the provisions of Section 1094.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State of California within sixty (60) days after the decision or action has become final. The Coastal Commission may intervene in any such proceeding upon a showing that the matter involves a question of the conformity of a discretionary project within the City's certified Local Coastal Program, which intervention may be initiated upon request of the City. Notice of any such action against the City shall be filed with the Coastal Commission within five (5) working days of the filing of such action. When an action is brought challenging the validity of the City's certified Local Coastal Program, a preliminary showing shall be made prior to proceeding on the merits as to why such action should not have been brought pursuant to the provisions of Section 30801 of the Public Resources Code of the State of California. 
(Ord. 583 § 1 (7), 1992)  
10702 - Reasonable accommodation for disabled or handicapped individuals. 
A.  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section, pursuant to Fair Housing Laws, to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in the application of the City's rules, policies, practices and procedures, as necessary to ensure equal access to housing. The purpose of this section is to provide a process for individuals with disabilities to make requests for, and be provided, reasonable accommodation, when reasonable accommodation is warranted based upon sufficient evidence, from the various City laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City, including land use and zoning regulations. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  Applicant. A person, business, or organization making a written request to the City for reasonable accommodation in the strict application of land use or zoning provisions of this Title. 
2.  City. The City of Port Hueneme. 
3.  Code. The Port Hueneme Municipal Code. 
4.  Department. The City's Community Development Department. 
5.  Director. The City's Director of Community Development. 
6.  Disabled or Handicapped Person. An individual who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one (1) or more of that person's major life activities; anyone who is regarded as having such impairment; or anyone who has a record of having such an impairment; but not including an individual's current, illegal use of a controlled substance. 
7.  Fair Housing Laws. The "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988" (42 U.S.C. Section 3601, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required by 42 U.S.C. Section 3604 (f)(3)(B), and the "California Fair Employment and Housing Act" (California Government Code Section 12900, et seq.), including reasonable accommodation required specifically by California Government Code Sections 12927(c)(1) and 12955 (l), as any of these statutory provisions now exist or may be amended from time to time. 
8.  Reasonable Accommodation. Any deviation requested and/or granted from the strict application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City, in order to afford disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. Deviations may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements for special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls, and screening; requirements for installation and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures; regulation of vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation; regulation of signs; regulation of hours or other characteristics of operation; requirements for maintenance of landscaping and other improvements; establishment of development schedules or time limits for performance or completion; requirements for periodical review by the Director; and such other conditions as the Director may deem necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  Notice to the Public of Availability of Accommodation Process. The Department shall prominently display in the public areas of the Community Development Department at City Hall a notice advising those with disabilities or their representatives that they may request a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the procedures established in this section. City employees shall direct individuals to the display whenever they are requested to do so or reasonably believe that individuals with disabilities or their representatives may be entitled to a reasonable accommodation. 
D.  Requesting Reasonable Accommodation. 
1.  In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, a disabled person or representative may request reasonable accommodation, pursuant to this section, relating to the application of various land use, zoning, or building laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures of the City. 
2.  If an individual or representative needs assistance in making a request for reasonable accommodation, or appealing a determination regarding reasonable accommodation, the Department will endeavor to provide the assistance necessary to ensure that the process is accessible to the applicant or representative. The applicant may be represented at all stages of the proceeding by a person designated by the applicant as his or her representative. 
3.  A request for reasonable accommodation in laws, rules, policies, practices and/or procedures must be filed on an application form provided by the Department, shall be signed by the owner of the property, and shall include the following information: 
a.  A description of how the property will be used by the disabled individual(s); 
b.  The basis for the claim that the Fair Housing Laws apply to the individual(s) and evidence satisfactory to the Director supporting the claim, which may include a letter from a medical doctor or other licensed health care professional, a handicapped vehicle license plate, or other appropriate evidence which establishes that the individual(s) needing the reasonable accommodation is disabled/handicapped pursuant to the Fair Housing Laws; 
c.  The specific reason the requested accommodation is necessary to make particular housing available to the disabled individual(s); and 
d.  Verification by the applicant that the property is the primary residence of the person for whom reasonable accommodation is requested. 
e.  No filing fee for an original application is required. For appeals, an administrative appeal filing fee must be paid to process the appeal. 
E.  Decision on Application. 
1.  The Director shall have the authority to consider and act on any application for a reasonable accommodation. The Director shall issue a written determination within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of a completed application and may (1) grant the accommodation request (provided the Director can reasonably make the findings listed in subsection F of this Section 10702), (2) grant the accommodation request subject to specified nondiscriminatory conditions (provided the Director can reasonably make the findings listed in subsection F of this Section 10702), (3) deny the request, or (4) may refer the matter to the City Council, which shall render a decision on the application in the manner set forth for appeals herein. Notice of the Director's hearing on the application shall be made in writing ten (10) days prior to the Director's action on the application. Notice of the Director's meeting to review and act on the application shall be made in writing, ten (10) calendar days prior to the meeting and shall be mailed first class and postage pre-paid to the applicant and the abutting property owners. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  All written determinations shall give notice of the right to appeal and the right to request reasonable accommodation on the appeals process, if necessary. The notice of determination shall be sent to the applicant by first class mail. 
4.  If necessary to reach a determination on any request for reasonable accommodation, the director may request further information from the applicant consistent with this section, specifying in detail what information is required. In the event a request for further information is made, the 30-day period to issue a written determination shall be stayed until the applicant responds to the satisfaction of the Director to the request. 
5.  If, based upon all of the evidence presented to the Director, the findings required in this section may reasonably be made, the Director, shall grant the requested reasonable accommodation. 
6.  A reasonable accommodation that is granted pursuant to this section shall not require the approval of any variance as to the reasonable accommodation. 
7.  The reasonable accommodation shall be subject to any reasonable conditions imposed on the approval that are consistent with the purposes of this section to further fair housing. Such conditions may generally include, but are not limited to the following restrictions: 
a.  That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to particular individual(s); and 
b.  That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to the specific use for which application is made; and 
c.  That any change in use or circumstances which negates the basis for the granting of the approval shall render the reasonable accommodation null and void and/or revocable by the City; and 
d.  That the reasonable accommodation involving an exterior physical improvement or structure shall be designed to be substantially similar to the architectural character, colors, and texture of materials in the neighborhood or planned unit development in which it is situated; and 
e.  That the reasonable accommodation is subject to any and all Building Code Permit and inspection requirements of the City. 
8.  If the requested accommodation is granted, other required approvals of the Local Coastal Plan, such as Coastal Development Permit requirements of Section 10356, still apply. 
F.  Required Findings. The following findings must be made in order to approve a request for reasonable accommodation: 
1.  The parcel and/or housing, which is the subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be occupied as the primary residence by an individual protected under the Fair Housing Laws. 
2.  The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to one (1) or more individuals protected under the Fair Housing Laws. 
3.  The requested reasonable accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City. 
4.  The requested accommodation will not require a fundamental alteration of the zoning or building laws, policies and/or other procedures of the City including those implementing the City's Local Coastal Program. 
G.  Appeals. 
1.  Within ten (10) days of the date the Director issues a written determination, any person aggrieved or affected by a decision on an application requesting the accommodation may appeal such determination in writing to the City Council. 
2.  All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. 
3.  No such appeal shall be accepted unless there is, paid contemporaneously with the filing of such letter, an Administrative Permit Appeal processing fee in a sum to be set by resolution of the City Council. Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, together with the filing and processing fee, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a de novo hearing before the City Council at its next reasonably available public meeting. 
4.  The City Council shall hear the matter and render a determination as soon as reasonably practicable, but in no event later than sixty (60) days after an appeal has been filed, or after an application has been referred to it by the Director. All determinations shall address and be based upon the same findings required to be made in the original determination from which the appeal is taken. 
5.  An applicant may request reasonable accommodation in the procedure by which an appeal will be conducted. 
H.  Waiver of Time Periods. Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this Section or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the City of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the City, shall not constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt decisions on applications, and shall not be a violation of any required time period set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 6-15-09) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 2, 11-5-12)  
Chapter 6 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
 
10800 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the maintenance, improvement and expansion of housing affordable to persons of low and moderate income in furtherance of State law and Housing Element policies of the Port Hueneme General Plan. 
(Ord. 626 § 3 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 12, 11-5-12)  
10801 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Affordable Housing Agreement" means a legally binding, written agreement between the City and a developer, in form satisfactory to the City Attorney, ensuring the compliance of the requirements of this article. 
"Affordable housing costs" shall be defined as in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or any successor statute or regulation. 
"Affordable units" mean the units reserved for lower, low or moderate income households or senior households in order for the project to be eligible for the density bonus and incentives. 
"Childcare facility" means a facility other than a small or large family day care home, including but not limited to, infant centers. 
"Common interest development" means any of the following as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 such as but not limited to: condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperative. 
"Density bonus" means a density increase in the amount specified in California Government Code, Section 65915(b)(1) and any other applicable Federal and State laws that is over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the General Plan as of the date of application to the City. The density bonus shall not be included when determining the number of housing units equal to the percentage of the total specified in the statute. The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than required by the statute. 
"Density bonus units" mean the residential units granted pursuant to the provisions of this article, which exceed the maximum residential density for the development site. 
"Developer" means the project applicant for a development or coastal development, as such terms are defined elsewhere in this section. 
"Development" and "coastal development" shall have the meaning assigned to these terms in Section 10356(B)(4) and (B)(5), in Article X of this code. 
"Director" means the Community Development Director of the City of Port Hueneme or his/her designee. 
"Feasible" shall have the meaning assigned to this term in Section 65590(g)(3) of the California Government Code; that is, capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time taking into account economic, environmental and technical factors. 
"Low income households" mean households whose income does not exceed the lower income limits applicable to Ventura County, as published and periodically updated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Low income units" mean housing units restricted to occupancy by low income households at affordable housing cost. 
"Lower income households" mean the inclusion of both low income and very low income households. 
"Moderate income households" mean households whose income does not exceed the moderate income limits applicable to Ventura County, as published and periodically updated by the California Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code or any successor statute or regulation. 
"Moderate income units" mean housing units restricted to occupancy by moderate income households at affordable housing cost. 
"Primary housing unit" means the main residential structure containing one dwelling unit located on a single-family lot. 
"Qualifying household," for the purpose of Section 10803, means persons and families whose total income qualifies as being very low income or low income, and senior citizens, as defined in Section 51.2 of the California Civil Code. "Qualifying household," for the purpose of Section 10804, means persons and families whose total income qualifies as being low or moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Secondary housing unit" means a second attached dwelling unit which provides complete, independent living facilities for up to two (2) persons on a lot zoned R-1 (Single Family), and shall include permanent provisions for living encompassing sleeping quarters, a bathroom and a kitchen constructed within or added onto an existing primary residence. A second unit is subordinate to and smaller than the primary residence. 
"Senior housing" means a residential development that has been "designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens", and which otherwise qualifies as "housing for older persons", as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and its implementing regulations, and as that phrase is used in California Civil Code Section 51.3 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act. 
"Ventura County Area Median Income (AMI)" means the annual median income for Ventura County, adjusted for household size, as published in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Section 6932, or its successor provision. 
"Very low income households" mean households whose income does not exceed the very low income limits applicable to Ventura County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
"Very low income units" mean housing units restricted to occupancy by very low income households at affordable housing cost. 
(Ord. 626 § 3 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 12, 11-5-12)  
10802 - Accessory dwelling units. 
A.  Purpose. The California State Legislature has identified in Government Code Section 65852.2 that the need exists for new housing to shelter California's population. The legislature has further declared that the state should increase housing resources and reduce the barriers to the provisions for affordable housing opportunities. Creating the opportunity to provide accessory dwelling units on existing residential property with single-family dwelling units is beneficial and would provide an additional resource for affordable housing within the community. 
B.  Definitions. The following definitions apply specifically to this Section: 
1.  Accessory Dwelling Unit, or ADU. An accessory dwelling unit or ADU (also known as "secondary dwelling unit" or "granny flat") will have the meaning set forth in Government Code Section 65852.2, which is an attached or detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons, and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the primary single-family dwelling is situated. In addition, the accessory dwelling unit is a housing alternative designed to offer an affordable living opportunity. The term "ADU" also includes an "Efficiency" Unit" as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1 and a "Manufactured Home" as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007. 
2.  Attached ADU. An attached ADU means an ADU that is attached to the existing single-family dwelling unit. 
3.  Detached ADU. A detached ADU means an ADU that is detached from the existing single-family dwelling unit. 
4.  Integrated ADU. An integrated ADU means an ADU that is located entirely within the living area of an existing single-family dwelling. 
5.  Primary housing unit. A primary housing unit (or "primary dwelling unit") means any single-family residence proposed or existing on the lot where an ADU would be located. 
6.  Public Transit. Public transit means a fixed bus route with regular service covering a significant portion of the City that is not a subscription service. 
C.  Location. Accessory dwelling units shall be permitted on all property within an underlying zone classification of R-1 (single-family). 
D.  Development Standards. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed on a single lot of record, provided, further, that a Ministerial Permit for such shall only be granted if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The lot on which the primary housing unit and proposed accessory dwelling unit are located must be a minimum of six thousand (6,000) square feet. 
2.  A legal, conforming primary housing unit shall exist or be proposed on the lot where the accessory dwelling unit is proposed. Establishment of a secondary housing unit shall not add to, increase or create a nonconforming use or structure. Any building code violations existing in the primary dwelling unit shall be corrected prior to occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit. 
3.  The accessory dwelling unit is either attached or located within the living area of the proposed or existing primary dwelling or detached from the proposed or existing primary dwelling and located on the same lot as the proposed or existing primary dwelling. 
4.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the lesser of six hundred forty (640) square feet of gross floor area or fifty (50) percent of the primary housing unit's living area, excluding carports or garages, and must be constructed on a permanent foundation. 
5.  The accessory dwelling unit shall conform to the height, setback, lot coverage and other development standards applicable to the construction of primary dwelling units in the R-1 Zone, except that: 
a.  No setback will be required for an existing garage that is converted to an ADU; 
b.  Detached ADUs not located above a detached garage shall not exceed a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet consistent with the development standards for accessory structures in the R-1 zone; and 
c.  An ADU located above and within the footprint of an existing detached garage may be located no closer than five (5) feet to the side and rear property lines. 
6.  The architectural treatment and exterior composition of the unit must be of the same materials, colors and architectural styling of the primary housing unit, or the entire structure primary dwelling unit must be to match the proposed architecture of the ADU. In addition, the ADU shall conform to the R-1 requirements of Section 10403(1) of this Chapter. 
7.  If the accessory dwelling unit has a separate entrance form the primary housing unit, the entrance of accessory dwelling unit cannot face the front property line or must otherwise be oriented so as to be clearly subordinate to the primary entrance of the primary housing unit. No accessory dwelling unit will be required to provide a new passageway from the accessory dwelling unit to the street. 
8.  Off-street parking: 
a.  One (1) covered or uncovered off-street parking space, in addition to that required for the primary housing unit, shall be provided. The parking space shall meet the access, paving and other applicable requirements contained in Section 10301 of Chapter 3. 
b.  Said parking may be located in an existing driveway, in a required setback, or as a tandem design, but shall not impede access to the required parking for the primary residence nor be out of compliance with other development standards applicable to the construction of primary dwelling units in the R-1 Zone. The ADU must be served by the same driveway access to the street as the primary dwelling unit. 
c.  When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an ADU, the conversion shall not eliminate any off-street parking required for the primary housing unit, or if eliminated, the required spaces shall be replaced and may be located in any configuration on the same lot as the accessory dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, as covered spaces, uncovered spaces, or tandem spaces, or by the use of mechanical automobile parking lifts. 
d.  Said parking shall be waived when the ADU is located in any of the following circumstances: 
1)  Within one-half (1/2) mile of public transit; 
2)  Within an architecturally and historically significant historic district; 
3)  Entirely within an existing or proposed primary residence; 
4)  When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit; 
5)  Within five-hundred (500) feet of a City-approved and designated car share location. 
9.  Either the primary housing unit or accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied by the property owner. Beginning one (1) year after the approval date of the ADU, and annually thereafter, the owner must file an annual report with the Community Development Department listing the occupants of the primary dwelling unit and ADU in order to ensure compliance with this condition. 
10.  An accessory dwelling unit shall not contain more than one (1) bedroom. 
11.  Either the primary housing unit or the accessory dwelling unit may be rented, but not both at the same time. Rental terms shall be 30 days or longer. The ADU shall not be sold separately from the primary housing unit. 
12.  The accessory dwelling unit shall conform to all other building, housing and zoning requirements stipulated in the Municipal Code. 
13.  The accessory dwelling unit shall contain its own kitchen facility and bathroom facility separate from the primary dwelling unit. The kitchen facility shall include at least one (1) of each of the following features: Sink; refrigerator of more than five (5) cubic feet capacity; and a range or cooktop. 
14.  Utilities: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit must have adequate public utility facilities to serve it, including, but not limited to, sewer, water and streets, as certified by the Public Works Director. 
b.  Accessory dwelling units shall not be considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating City and County connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. 
c.  When the ADU is located entirely within the existing residence, a new or separate utility meter shall not be required and a related connection or capacity fee may not be charged. 
d.  When the ADU unit is attached to the primary residence or detached, a new or separate utility meter may be required. Any connection or capacity fee shall be proportionate to the burden of the proposed accessory dwelling unit based upon either its size or number of plumbing fixtures for a water or sewer system. 
15.  Accessory dwelling units shall not be required to provide fire sprinklers if they are not required for the primary residence. 
E.  Deed Restriction Covenant and Affordable Housing Agreement. 
1.  Deed Restriction Covenant. To ensure compliance with the conditions of Section D above, prior to occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit, the property owner shall file with the County Recorder upon approval by the City Attorney as to form and content, a deed restriction covenant containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the present owner and stating that: 
a.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold from the primary dwelling unit; 
b.  The accessory dwelling unit is restricted to the approved site; 
c.  The Ministerial Permit for the accessory dwelling unit shall be in effect so long as either the primary housing unit or the accessory dwelling unit is occupied by the owner of the lot on which the accessory dwelling unit is located, except for bona fide temporary absences. The Ministerial Permit shall remain valid if disability or infirmity require the institutionalization of the owner; 
d.  The Ministerial Permit, and any standards imposed by such permit, shall lapse upon removal of the accessory dwelling unit; 
e.  The accessory dwelling unit shall not be rented for a period of less than thirty (30) days; and 
f.  The above declarations are binding upon any successors in ownership of the property. 
2.  Affordable Housing Agreement. In that the state of California has found that accessory dwelling units are an affordable type of residence to address the housing needs in California, prior to occupancy of the ADU, the property owner shall file with the County Recorder upon approval by the City Attorney as to form and content an affordable housing agreement. 
a.  The affordable housing agreement shall: 
1)  Be for a minimum term of fifty-five (55) years, with automatic renewal, or until the accessory dwelling unit is removed, and such restriction shall run with the land; 
2)  Be rented to "low" or "very low" income households as defined by the most currently published United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Income Limits for Ventura County. 
b.  Beginning on the first anniversary of the occupancy of the accessory dwelling unit and annually thereafter, the property owner shall submit a report to the Community Development Department demonstrating that the tenant's income is in compliance with the requirements of the affordable housing agreement. 
c.  In lieu of being rented as an affordable unit, the accessory dwelling unit may be rented to person(s) over the age of sixty-two (62), caregivers for a resident of one (1) of the units on the property, persons and persons with disabilities who do not meet the income limitations set forth herein. The property owner shall still submit a report to the Community Development Department demonstrating that the tenant's residing in the accessory dwelling unit in compliance with the requirements of the affordable housing agreement. 
F.  Review Process. Applications for ADUs shall be submitted to the Community Department for review. If the proposal meets all of the requirements of the Municipal Code, then within one hundred twenty (120) days of deeming the application complete, the Director of Community Development of his designated representative shall issue an Ministerial Permit without discretionary review or a public hearing. 
G.  Revocation. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy any property which fails to comply with the provisions of this Section. Noncompliance may result in the revocation of the Ministerial Permit. 
(Ord. 648 § 2 Exh. A, 2003; Ord. 626 § 3 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 12, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 752, § 2 (Exh. A), 3-4-19)  
10803 - Density bonus. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the incentive programs provided in the State density bonus regulations (Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918) in order to provide additional opportunities for the provision of affordable housing within the City of Port Hueneme. The intent of the following regulations is to ensure that, to the maximum extent feasible, the provisions of Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918 are implemented (1) in a manner that is consistent with the policies of the Port Hueneme General Plan, and (2) in the Coastal Zone, in a manner that is consistent with the certified local Coastal Program land use policies and zoning ordinance provisions. 
B.  Applicability. This section applies to any residential development of five (5) or more units, or thirty-five (35) or more units for a senior housing project, when an applicant proposes a density increase above the maximum residential density. In exchange for the density, a portion of the units shall be reserved for lower income households, senior households, or moderate income households (in a common interest development) as provided in this section. All such projects shall be subject to development review requirements of Chapter 3, including the Coastal Development Permit requirements. 
C.  Protection of Coastal Resources. Within the Coastal Zone, any housing development approved pursuant to Government Code Section 65915 (as modified to include a density bonus, incentives, or concessions) shall be consistent with all applicable certified Local Coastal Program policies and development standards. Further, the City shall grant the incentive or concession to accommodate the density increase in compliance with this section unless the requested incentive or concession will have an adverse effect on coastal resources. If, however, the City determines that the requested incentive or concession will have an adverse effect on coastal resources, before approving a density increase, the City shall identify all feasible alternative incentives and concessions and their effects on coastal resources. The City shall grant one or more of those alternatives that avoids adverse impacts to coastal resources to the extent feasible. 
D.  Determination of Density Bonus. Qualified projects that meet the eligibility requirements set forth in this section shall be granted a density bonus as outlined below. 
1.  In all density calculations, fractional units shall be rounded to the next whole number. 
2.  The density bonus shall not be included when determining the percentage of affordable units. 
3.  The developer can request a lesser density bonus than the project is entitled to, but no reduction shall be permitted in the number of required affordable units. 
4.  Unless otherwise specified, each residential development is entitled to only one (1) density bonus, and density bonuses from more than one (1) category may not be combined. 
5.  The granting of a density bonus and its subsequent incentive(s) shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zone change, or other discretionary approval. 
6.  Condominium/apartment conversions are not eligible for a density bonus if the original residential development received a density bonus, or other incentive, pursuant to this article. 
Income Group 	Minimum Set-Aside of Affordable Units 	Bonus Granted 	Each Additional 1% adds: 	Maximum Bonus under State Law 	% Affordable Units Needed to Reach Maximum Bonus 
Very Low Income 	5% 	20% 	2.5% 	35% 	11% 
Lower Income 	10% 	20% 	1.5% 	35% 	20% 
Moderate Income 
(Common Interest Development Only) 	10% 	5% 	1.0% 	35% 	40% 
Senior Citizen Housing Development 	100% 35-unit minimum project size) 	20% 	— 	20% 	NA 
Land Donation (very low income projects only) 	10% 	15% 	1% 	35% 	30% 
Condominium/Apartment Conversions 	33% low-to- 
moderate income 	25% 	NA 	25% 	NA 
	15% very low income 				
 
Example Calculation of a Density Bonus 
	Very Low Income 	Lower Income 	Moderate Income 	Senior Housing 
Initial Project Size 	20 units 	20 units 	20 units 	35 units 
Affordable Units 	5% 	10% 	10% 	100% 
Density Bonus 
Qualified 	20% 	20% 	5% 	20% 
Total Project Units 	24 units 	24 units 	21 units 	42 units 
Distribution Of 
Project Units 	1 Very Low Income 
23 Market-Rate 	2 Lower Income 
22 Market-Rate 	2 Moderate Income 
19 Market-Rate 	42 units 
 
E.  Specific Requirements. 
1.  Senior Citizen Housing Requirements. 
a.  Senior citizen housing development projects shall have a minimum of thirty-five (35) units and shall meet the requirements described in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code or any successor statute or regulation. 
b.  Mobile home parks shall limit residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 of 799.5 of the Civil Code, or any successor statute or regulation. 
2.  Land Donation Requirements. An applicant for a tentative map, parcel map or any other discretionary approval required to construct a residential development in the City shall receive a fifteen (15) percent density bonus for the residential development when the applicant donates land to the City as provided in this Section. This fifteen (15) percent bonus shall be in addition to any other density bonus provided for in this Section, up to a total combined density bonus of thirty-five percent. Applicants are eligible for the fifteen (15) percent land donation density bonus if all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The developer shall donate and transfer land to the City prior to approval of the final map or other discretionary approval required for the residential development. 
b.  The transferred land shall have the appropriate acreage and General Plan and zoning designation to permit development of affordable housing for very low income households. 
c.  The transferred land shall be at least one (1) acre or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) residential units. 
d.  The transferred land shall be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure. 
e.  The transferred land and the very low income units constructed shall have a deed restriction recorded with the County Recorder, to ensure continued affordability of the units. The deed restriction shall be recorded on the property at the time of dedication. 
f.  The transferred land shall be conveyed in fee simple to the City or to a housing developer approved by the City. 
g.  The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed residential development, or no more than approximately one-quarter (¼) mile from the boundary of the qualified project, if the City so approves. 
h.  No later than the date of approval of the final map or other discretionary approval required for the residential development the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land. 
3.  Child Care Facility Requirements. 
a.  The City shall grant either of the following to a density bonus project that includes a child care facility located on the premises, or adjacent to, the project: 
i.  An additional density bonus in an amount equivalent to the square footage of the childcare facility; or 
ii.  An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
b.  In order to receive the additional child care density bonus, the project shall comply with the following requirements: 
i.  The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as, or longer, than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable. 
ii.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the percentage of children of very low income, low income, or moderate income households shall be equal to, or greater than, the percentage of affordable units. 
c.  Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the City shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate child care facilities. 
F.  Standards. A density bonus shall only be granted in conjunction with a Development or Administrative Permit and shall only be granted if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The housing costs of units made available to qualifying households must not exceed the limits of affordability established pursuant to Section 50052.5 and 50053 of the California Health and Safety Code. Determinations of affordability for housing made available for sale or rent to qualifying households shall be governed by the regulations set forth in Title 25, Section 6910 et seq., of the California Code of Regulations. 
2.  The housing costs of units made available to qualifying households must not exceed the limits of affordability established pursuant to Section 50052.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. Determinations of affordability for housing made available for sale or rent to qualifying households shall be governed by the regulations set forth in Title 25, Section 6910 et seq., of the California Code of Regulations. 
3.  Housing units made available to qualifying households must remain available to such households, at affordable rates, for a minimum of thirty (30) years, or such longer period of time specified in loan agreements or subsidy programs associated with the development project. Deed restrictions, in form and content acceptable to the City to ensure unit affordability, must be recorded on the property prior to project commencement to assure compliance with the affordability requirements of this section. 
4.  The developer shall verify income data for each qualifying household for the purpose of establishing eligibility and affordable housing costs. The criteria and methods used in verifying income shall conform to the standards prescribed for the Section 8 Existing Housing Payments Program and administered by the Port Hueneme Housing Authority. In determining eligibility, the income schedule (then in effect) adopted pursuant to Title 25, Section 6932 of the California Code of Regulations, shall be used at the time each unit is initially occupied by a qualifying household. 
5.  Housing units which are made available to qualifying households shall be constructed so as to resemble and be compatible with all other units in the same development. Affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with the market-rate units and be dispersed throughout the project, unless both the City Council and developer agree to an alternative construction schedule and distribution pattern. 
G.  Incentives. All developers qualifying for a density bonus under this section may be entitled to at least one (1) of the following incentives according to the following schedule: 
Target Group 	Target Units 
Very Low Income 	5% 	10% 	15% 
Lower Income 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Moderate Income (Common Interest Development Only) 	10% 	20% 	30% 
Incentives * 	1 	2 	3 
Child care facility: When a qualified project includes a child care facility, the applicant shall receive one (1) additional incentive. 
 
1.  The City Council may approve the requested incentives for a proposed project if the applicant provides a written financial statement detailing that the incentive(s) is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible and will sufficiently reduce the cost of the housing development. The City Council may deny one (1) or more of the requested incentives if, based on substantial evidence, it makes either one (1) of the following written findings: 
a.  The incentive is not required to ensure housing costs meet the affordability standards, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5, or any successor statute or regulation, or to ensure rents in the affordable units meet the requirements of this Article. 
b.  The incentive would have a specific adverse impact, as defined in Government Code Section 65589.5(d)(2), upon: 
i.  Public health and safety; or 
ii.  Physical environment; or 
iii.  Any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources; or 
iv.  Resource protection policies of the Local Coastal Program; and 
v.  There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate income households. 
2.  Menu of Incentives. 
a.  Relaxation or other modification of zoning standards regulating such items as setbacks height limitations, distances between buildings, required parking, parking development standards, projections into yards, and the like. No separate variance application will be required for any modification of standards. However, the approved plans and application shall identify the zoning standards modifications which have been incorporated into the project. 
b.  Modification of architectural regulations ordinarily applied to a residential development project. 
c.  Shared participation in public improvements, environmental documentation and impact mitigation, and similar costs associated with project development. 
d.  Regulatory concessions resulting in identifiable cost reductions including, but not limited to, fee waivers, expedited permit processing and reduction of off-site improvements. 
e.  Additional density bonus above the bonus incentives as required by Section 65915(b)(1) of the Government Code, as long as the overall bonus received for the project does not exceed one hundred ten (110) percent for SRO or one-bedroom units and fifty (50) percent for two-bedroom and above units. 
f.  The assignment of Section 8 housing assistance payments, as available, to the applicants for the targeted housing units. 
g.  Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City which result in identifiable project cost reductions. 
H.  Project Review Procedures. All project applications for which a density bonus is being requested shall be subject to the issuance of a Development or Administrative Permit pursuant to Chapter 3 of this Article; provided, further, that the following additional project review procedures shall be imposed: 
1.  A pre-application shall be made by the project applicant pursuant to Section 10352(B) of this Article. The purpose of the meeting will be to review any preliminary development plans prepared by the developer and to discuss the additional project incentives sought by the developer. 
2.  In the event the developer requests a waiver or modification of zoning standards pursuant to subsection (E)(2)of this section of this Chapter, the developer shall be required to show that the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. 
3.  No special application for density bonus shall be required. However, in the project record, the Planning Agency shall note that a density bonus has been granted, and the approved plans and application shall identify concessions granted and any special conditions imposed on the project to ensure unit affordability. 
(Ord. 626 § 3 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 711, § 12, 11-5-12)  
10804 - Inclusionary housing. 
A.  Applicability. The inclusionary housing provisions of this section shall apply to all coastal development involving the construction or conversion of ten (10) or more residential dwellings. All such projects shall be subject to the development review requirements of Chapter 3. 
B.  Standards. At a minimum twenty-five (25) percent of all newly constructed or converted housing to which this section applies shall be made exclusively available to persons and families whose total income, all members inclusive, qualifies as being low or moderate income. The provision of such housing to qualifying households shall be governed by the requirements of Section 10703 (B)(2)—(B)(5). 
C.  In-Lieu Fees. In lieu of the requirements of subsection A of this section, the developer may pay a fee to defray the costs associated with housing assistance programs administered by the City, the various provision of which, in aggregate, will result in the purchase, maintenance, rehabilitation or construction of equivalent number of housing units for qualifying households which would otherwise be required. The amount of such fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. 
D.  Project Feasibility. All or part of the requirements of this section may be waived, at the City's sole discretion, in the event that the application of such requirements render a project infeasible. The burden of proving feasibility shall rest with the developer and the determination shall be rendered by the City in conjunction with issuance of a Development or Administrative Permit for the project, as the case may be. 
(Ord. 626 § 3 (part), 1999) 
