Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 FRANCHISES
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 ENVIRONMENT
Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 18 ZONING
TABLE C CITY OF PICO RIVERA RANCHO DE BARTOLO SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENT (SP 400)

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.10 CITY LOGO
Chapter 1.12 POSTING OF PUBLIC NOTICES
Chapter 1.16 CITY OFFICE HOURS AND HOLIDAYS
Chapter 1.20 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.30 PARKING VIOLATIONS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted by reference the Pico Rivera Municipal Code as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and accept those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 755 § 1, 1989)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation— Reference.
    This code shall be known as the “Pico Rivera Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Pico Rivera Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 755 § 2, 1989)

 

1.01.030 Codification authority.
    This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Pico Rivera, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 755 § 3, 1989)

 

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to code adoption.
    The last ordinance included in this code was ordinance No. 750, passed October 3, 1988. (Ord. 755 § 4, 1989)

 

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Pico Rivera Municipal Code” or to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 755 § 5, 1989)

 

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
    Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. (Ord. 755 § 6, 1989)

 

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are specifically designated in this code by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 755 § 7, 1989)

 

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment by the ordinance codified in this chapter of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any license, fee or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 755 § 8, 1989)

 

1.01.090 Effective date.
    This code became effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code by reference as the “Pico Rivera Municipal Code” became effective. (Ord. 755 § 9, 1989)

 

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 755 § 10, 1989)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Rules of construction.
    Unless the provisions of the context otherwise require, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions shall govern the construction of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and promote justice. (Prior code § 1300)

 

1.04.020 Definitions.
    As used in this code:

    A.  “City” means the city of Pico Rivera.

    B.   “Council” means the city council of the city.

    C.   “County” means the county of Los Angeles.

    D.  “Goods” means and includes wares or merchandise.

    E.   “Oath” means and includes affirmation.

    F.   Office. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance of the city of Pico Rivera.

    G.  “Operate” means and includes carry on, keep, conduct or maintain.

    H.  “Owner,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land.

    I.    “Person,” as used in this code or in any uniform code adopted hereby, means and includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company or corporation, and any municipal, political or governmental corporation, district, body or agency, other than the city of Pico Rivera.

    J.    “Sale” means and includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale.

    K.  “State” means the state of California.

    L.   “Street” means and includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, sidewalks, parkways, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

    M.  “Tenant” or “occupant,” applied to a building or land, means and includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. (Ord. 694 § 3, 1985; prior code §§ 1313 — 1325)

 

1.04.030 Interpretation of language.
    As used in this code:

    A.  Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.

    B.   Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

    C.   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

    D.  Shall and May. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. (Prior code §§ 1309 — 1312)

 

1.04.040 Article and section headings.
    Article and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any article or section hereof. (Prior code § 1301)

 

1.04.050 Writing and language.
    Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language, unless it is expressly provided otherwise. (Prior code § 1305)

 

1.04.060 Jurisdiction—Acts or omissions.
    This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the city, and to that territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property. (Prior code § 1302)

 

1.04.070 References to amendments.
    Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinance of the city, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (Prior code § 1306)

 

1.04.080 Acts by deputies.
    Whenever a power is granted to or duty is imposed upon a public officer or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance, or by an officer of the county of Los Angeles, or by a deputy or employee of such officer, when by contract with the city of Pico Rivera such officer is obligated and has agreed to perform certain duties on behalf of the city, unless the code expressly provides otherwise. (Prior code § 1304)

 

1.04.090 Prohibited acts—Aiding and abetting.
    Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing such act or omission. (Prior code § 1303)

 

1.04.100 Notice service procedure.
    Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified, or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his or her last known business or residence address, as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (Prior code § 1307)

 

1.04.110 Proof of giving notice.
    Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 1308)

Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
1.08.010 Official seal adopted—Description.
    The city shall have and does hereby adopt an official seal, which is described as follows:

    A circular sunburst reflecting the family as the central focus of the community; surrounded by symbols depicting the various components necessary to the making of a city: the crossed swords and helmet of conquistador ancestors who traveled this land centuries ago; the fruits and vegetables which brought prosperity to the farmlands before homes were built; the entities of church, industry and schools complete the circle of services offered to the community. The seal is comprised of a sky-blue background with the sunburst and family in gold, the community symbols in white; and black lettering. The seal may be reproduced in its colors of blue and gold, or may, from time to time, be reproduced in a single color format.



 

(Ord. 1008 § 1, 2004; prior code § 2603)

 

1.08.020 Use of seal.
    The impression of the city seal shall be made and used upon all official documents executed by the city or its authorized officials and it may, from time to time, be used on any materials or clothing as authorized by city officials, only. Any unauthorized use is prohibited. (Ord. 1008 § 1, 2004; prior code § 2604)

 

1.08.030 Custodian of seal.
    The city clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal. (Prior code § 2605)

Chapter 1.10 CITY LOGO
1.10.010 City logo adopted and added—Descriptions.
    The city hereby adopts a city logo, which is described as follows:

    A symbolic sunburst crowned by a semi-circular arch with the words PICO RIVERA in capital letters enclosed therein. Above the sunburst and beneath the semi-circular arch are pictograms depicting people of the city. A rectangular box containing a pictogram depicting a mission bell flanks each side of the semi-circular arch. The logo may be reproduced in its colors of navy blue, burgundy and gold, or any color variation thereof, or may, from time to time, be reproduced in a single color format.

 

  

 

    The city hereby adopts and adds a city logo, which is described as follows:

    A symbol of the city’s present identity, simplified in a modern strong logo. The imagery brings the historical unification of the city into one symbol, joining Pico and Rivera as one. The strong capital P and R are blended as an optical illusion where in first impressions, either letter stand out first. It’s bold statement, making the city stand out among the region. The logo uses the default color of blue and gold and red as a message of strength and leadership. PICO RIVERA in caps runs vertically on the left side. The colors may be repurposed appropriate to the concept and publication, for example blue for city council.

 

  

 

(Ord. 1139 § 1, 2020; Ord. 1009 § 1, 2004)

 

1.10.020 Use of city logo.
    The impression of the city logo may be made and used on official documents executed by city officials or depicted on materials or clothing as authorized by city officials only. Any unauthorized use is prohibited. (Ord. 1139 § 1, 2020; Ord. 1009 § 1, 2004)

 

1.10.030 Custodian of city logo.
    The city clerk shall be the custodian of the city logo. (Ord. 1139 § 1, 2020; Ord. 1009 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 1.12 POSTING OF PUBLIC NOTICES
1.12.010 Locations for posting notices.
    A.  The city council finds and determines that, where public notice is required by law or this code, or motion, order, resolution or ordinance of the city council, the same shall be posted in the following five public places most likely to give notice thereof:

    1.   City Hall, 6615 Passons Boulevard;

    2.   United States Post Office, 6320 Passons Boulevard;

    3.   Rivera Park;

    4.   Pico Park;

    5.   Smith Park.

    B.   All such notices, orders, resolutions and ordinances so required to be posted shall be posted at such places. (Ord. 694 § 1, 1985; prior code § 1107)

Chapter 1.16 CITY OFFICE HOURS AND HOLIDAYS
1.16.010 Location of city offices— Hours and holidays.
    A.  The general city offices, commonly known as City Hall, shall be at that place designated by the city council by resolution. The general offices of the city shall be open to the public for business from thirty minutes after seven a.m. to thirty minutes after five p.m. on Mondays through Fridays, except when closed on advertised alternate Fridays and, notwithstanding Sections 6700 and 6702 of the Government Code, when closed by the following holidays herein set forth, said holidays to be not less than eighty-eight hours and not more than ninety hours in a fiscal year:

    1.   New Year’s Day (January 1st);

    2.   Martin Luther King’s Birthday (third Monday in January);

    3.   President’s Day (third Monday in February);

    4.   Memorial Day (last Monday in May);

    5.   Independence Day (July 4th);

    6.   Labor Day (first Monday in September);

    7.   Veteran’s Day (November 11);

    8.   Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November);

    9.   Day after Thanksgiving Day (fourth Friday in November);

    10. One-half of Christmas Eve Day (beginning at noon);

    11. Christmas Day (December 25th);

    12. One-half of New Year’s Eve Day (beginning at noon).

    B.   Holidays that occur on a Sunday will be observed on Monday. Holidays that occur on Saturday will be observed on Friday, except Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve.

    C.   If Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve fall on a Saturday or Sunday, the preceding Friday will be observed. If Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve fall on a Friday, the preceding Thursday will be observed.

    D.  If a holiday falls on a Friday when City Hall is closed, the eight hours normally considered as holiday hours will be otherwise distributed throughout the year in such a manner as to retain the minimum eighty-eight hours and maximum ninety hours per year holiday parameters. (Ord. 818 § 1, 1992; prior code § 2602)

Chapter 1.20 GENERAL PENALTY
1.20.010 Penalties for code violations—Public nuisance abatement.
    A.  No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. Any person violating any provisions, or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, city authorities may prosecute any violation of this code in the name of the people of the state of California. Prosecuting authorities may reduce any violation under the code from a misdemeanor to an infraction.

    B.   Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or both such fine and imprisonment.

    C.   Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of an ordinance is punishable by:

    1.   First violation, a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars;

    2.   Second violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a violation of the same ordinance within one year;

    3.   Third violation, a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a violation of the same ordinance within one year.

    D.  Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.

    E.   In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be by this city summarily abated as such, and each day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Ord. 1129 § 2, 2019; Ord. 850 § 1, 1994; Ord. 732 § 1, 1987; prior code § 1200)

 

1.20.020 Violations by city officers or employees.
    The violation of any administrative provisions of this code by any officer or employee of the city may be deemed a failure to perform the duties under or observe the rules and regulations of the department, office or board, within the meaning of the rules and regulations of the city. (Ord. 694 § 2, 1985; prior code § 1201)

 

1.20.030 Violation—Notice to appear in court.
    If any person is arrested for a violation of a provision or section of this code, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is prescribed in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court. The notice shall be given in the time and manner specified in the Penal Code, and in accordance with the provisions therein contained. (Prior code § 1202)

 

1.20.040 Failure to appear—Misdemeanor.
    Any person wilfully violating his or her written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties specified in Section 1.20.010, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. (Prior code § 1203)

 

1.20.050 Failure to appear—Warrant for arrest.
    When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear, and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853.1 of the State Penal Code, or any other provisions of the Penal Code pertaining thereto, the magistrate shall, in accordance with the provisions of Section 853.3 of the Penal Code, have issued and delivered for execution a warrant for the arrest of such person within twenty days after his or her failure to appear as promised; or, if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date on which he or she promised to appear, then, within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. (Prior code § 1204)

Chapter 1.30 PARKING VIOLATIONS
1.30.010 Parking violation— Procedure.
    A.  Any violation of any regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle under this chapter, the State of California Vehicle Code (CVC) or federal statute or regulation, is subject to a civil penalty. The enforcement of those civil penalties shall be governed by the civil administrative procedures set forth in this chapter.

    B.   Except as provided in Section 40209 of the CVC, the registered owner and driver, rentee, or lessee of a vehicle cited for any violation of any regulation governing the parking of a vehicle under this chapter, the CVC or under any federal statute or regulation, shall be jointly liable for parking penalties imposed under this chapter, unless the owner can show that the vehicle was used without consent of that person, express or implied. An owner who pays any parking penalty, civil judgment, costs, or administrative fees pursuant to this chapter shall have the right to recover the same from the driver, rentee, or lessee.

    C.   The driver of a vehicle who is not the owner thereof, but who uses or operates the vehicle with the express or implied permission of the owner, shall be considered the agent of the owner to receive notices of parking violations served in accordance with this chapter and may contest the notice of violation. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.020 Contest of parking violation notice.
    A.  For a period of twenty-one days from the issuance of the notice of parking violation or ten days from the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, a person may request review by the processing agency, or at the discretion of the processing agency, by the city, of the issuance of a notice of parking violation or a notice of delinquent parking violation by written request, telephone, or in person. If the person is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the person may contest through an administrative review process the notice of parking violation or notice of delinquent parking violation, by depositing with the processing agency, by the tenth day following the mailing to that person of the results of the processing agency’s administrative investigation, the full amount of the parking penalty and a written explanation of the reason for contesting the parking violation. The processing agency shall provide, through administrative policy, a procedure for contesting notices of parking violations and notices of delinquent parking violations for persons who can provide verifiable and substantial proof of their inability to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty. If a vehicle has been immobilized or impounded for unpaid parking violations, the processing agency shall, provided that the vehicle remains under the control of the immobilizing or impounding agency, permit the registered owner of the vehicle to contest the parking violations related to the seizure of that vehicle without requiring the deposit of the parking penalties. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.030 Notice of parking violation.
    A.  If a vehicle is unattended during the time of the violation, the peace officer or person authorized to enforce parking laws and regulations shall securely attach to the vehicle a notice of parking violation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the CVC or of the local ordinance or federal statute or regulation so violated, the approximate time thereof, and the location where the violation occurred and fixing a time and procedure for the registered owner or the lessee or rentee to deposit the parking penalty or, pursuant to Section 1.30.130, contest the citation. The notice of parking violation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date if they are visible, the last four digits of the vehicle identification number, if that number is visible through the windshield, the color of the vehicle, and, if possible, the make of the vehicle. The notice of parking violation, or copy thereof, shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the issuing agency and the processing agency and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.

    B.   If, during the issuance of a notice of parking violation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driven away prior to attaching the notice to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the notice with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail, within fifteen days of issuance of the notice of parking violation, a copy of the notice of parking violation to the registered owner.

    C.   If, after a copy of the notice of parking violation is attached to the vehicle, the issuing officer determines that, in the interest of justice, the notice of parking violation should be canceled, the issuing agency may recommend, in writing, that the charges be canceled. The recommendation shall cite the reasons for the recommendation and shall be filed with the processing agency.

    D.  If the processing agency makes a finding that there are grounds for cancellation, the finding shall be entered on the record and the notice of parking violation shall be canceled pursuant to Section 1.30.130(A)(1). (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.040 Establishment and collection of penalty.
    The schedule of parking penalties for parking violations, late payment penalties, administrative fees, and other related charges for parking violations shall be established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.050 Payment of penalty.
    If the parking penalty is received by the person authorized to receive the deposit of the parking penalty and there is no contest as to that parking violation, the proceedings under this chapter shall terminate. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.060 Contesting penalty.
    If a person contests the parking violation, the processing agency shall proceed in accordance with Section 1.30.140. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.070 Notice of delinquent violations.
    A.  If the payment of the parking penalty is not received by the person authorized to receive a deposit of the parking penalty by the date fixed on the notice of parking violation under Section 1.30.050, the processing agency shall deliver to the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking violation.

    B.   Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking violation under this section may be made by personal service or by first-class mail addressed to the registered owner, as shown on records of the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.080 Copy of original notice of violation.
    A.  Within fifteen days of request, by mail or in person, the processing agency shall mail or provide to any person who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, or his or her agent, a photostatic copy of the original notice of parking violation or an electronically produced facsimile of the original notice of parking violation. The issuing agency may charge a fee sufficient to recover the actual cost of providing the copy, not to exceed two dollars. Until the city complies with a request for a copy of the original notice of parking violation, the processing agency may not proceed pursuant to subdivision (i) of Section 22651 or Section 22651.7 of the CVC or Section 40220.

    B.   If the description of the vehicle on the notice of parking violation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registration card for that vehicle, the processing agency shall, on written request of the person, cancel the notice of parking violation without the necessity of an appearance by that person. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.090 Contents of notice of delinquent violation.
    The notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain the information specified in Section 1.30.030, and, additionally, shall contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking penalty or contests the citation within ten days after mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation or completes and files an affidavit of nonliability which complies with Section 1.30.100 or 1.30.110, the renewal of the vehicle registration shall be contingent upon compliance with the notice of delinquent parking violation. If the registered owner, by appearance or by mail, makes payment to the processing agency within ten days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, the parking penalty shall consist of the amount of the original penalty without any additional administrative fees or charges. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.100 Affidavit of nonliability— Leased or rented vehicle.
    If the affidavit of nonliability is returned to the processing agency within thirty days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, together with the proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer, which identifies the rentee or lessee and provides the driver’s license number, name, and address of the rentee or lessee, the processing agency shall serve or mail to the rentee or lessee identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking violation. If payment is not received within fifteen days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency may proceed against the rentee or lessee pursuant to Section 1.30.140. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.110 Affidavit of nonliability— Vehicle sold or transferred.
    A.  If the affidavit of nonliability is returned with evidence that the registered owner served has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation, the processing agency shall obtain verification from the DMV that the registered owner has complied with Section 5602 of the CVC.

    B.   If the registered owner has complied with said Section 5602, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of delinquent parking violation with respect to the registered owner.

    C.   If the registered owner has not complied with said Section 5602, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation shall be paid in full or contested pursuant to Section 1.30.020. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency shall proceed pursuant to Section 1.30.140. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.120 Processing of delinquent parking violations.
    A.  If the registered owner, or an agent of the registered owner, or a rentee or lessee who was served with the notice of delinquent parking violation pursuant to Section 1.30.070 or Section 1.30.100, or any other person who presents the notice of parking violation or notice of delinquent parking violation after the notice of delinquent parking violation has been issued for delivery under Section 1.30.070, deposits the parking penalty with a person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall do both of the following:

    1.   Deliver a copy of the notice of delinquent parking violation issued under Section 1.30.070 or an electronically reproduced listing of the citation information presented in a notice of delinquent parking violation to the person and record the name, address, and driver’s license number of the person actually given the copy in the records of the issuing agency.

    For the purposes of this paragraph, a copy of the notice of delinquent parking violation may be photostatic copy;

    2.   Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the DMV pursuant to of Section 1.30.140(B) or a civil judgment has been entered pursuant to Section 1.30.140.

    B.   If the notice of delinquent parking violation has not been filed with the department or judgment entered and payment of the parking penalty and any applicable assessments is received, the proceedings under this chapter shall terminate. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.130 Contesting parking violation—Procedure.
    A.  If a person contests a notice of parking violation or a notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency shall do the following:

    1.   The processing agency shall either investigate with its own records and staff or request that the city investigate the circumstances of the citation with respect to the contestant’s written explanation of reasons for contesting the parking violation. If, based upon the results of that investigation, the processing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur or that the registered owner was not responsible for the violation, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of parking violation and make an adequate record of the reasons for canceling the notice. The processing agency shall mail the results of the investigation to the person who contested the notice of parking violation or the notice of delinquent parking violation;

    2.   If the person contesting a notice of parking violation or notice of delinquent parking violation is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for in paragraph 1 of this subsection, the person may, within fifteen days of the mailing of the results of the investigation, deposit the amount of the parking penalty and request an administrative review.

    B.   Administrative review procedure described in subsection (A)(2) of this section shall consist of the following:

    1.   The person requesting an administrative review shall indicate to the processing agency his or her election for a review by mail or personal conference;

    2.   If the person requesting a hearing is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for a parking violation without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against that person in the same manner as if that person were an adult;

    3.   The administrative review shall be conducted before an examiner designated to conduct the review by the city council or the city manager. In addition to any other requirements of employment, an examiner shall demonstrate those qualifications, training, and objectivity prescribed by the city council or city manager as are necessary and which are consistent with the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. The examiner’s continued employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits shall not be directly or indirectly linked to the amount of fines collected by the examiner;

    4.   The officer or person authorized to issue a notice of parking violation shall not be required to participate in an administrative review. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the notice of parking violation or copy thereof, and information received from the DMV identifying the registered owner of the vehicle. The documentation in proper form shall be considered prima facie evidence of the violation;

    5.   The review shall be conducted in accordance with the written procedure established by the city which shall ensure fair and impartial review of contested parking violations. The city’s final decision may be delivered personally to the person by the examiner or to the person by first-class mail. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.140 Disposition of delinquent parking violation.
    Except as otherwise provided in Sections 1.30.150 and 1.30.160, the processing agency shall proceed under only one of the following options in order to collect an unpaid parking penalty:

    A.  File an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and administrative and service fees with the DMV for collection with the registration of the vehicle pursuant to CVC Section 4760.

    B.   If more than four hundred dollars in unpaid penalties and fees have been accrued by any person or registered owner, proof thereof may be filed with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution may be levied and other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of an unpaid civil judgment entered against a defendant in an action on a debtor. The court may assess costs against a judgment debtor to be paid upon satisfaction of the judgment. The processing agency shall send a notice by first-class mail to the person or registered owner indicating that a judgment shall be entered for the unpaid penalties, fees, and costs and that, after thirty days from the date of the mailing of the notice, the judgment shall have the same effect as an entry of judgment against a judgment debtor. The person or registered owner shall also be notified at that time that execution may be levied against his or her assets, liens may be placed against his or her property, his or her wages may be garnished, and other steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 6850) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code to collect the amount of that judgment. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the processing agency shall pay the established first paper civil filing fee at the time an entry of civil judgment is requested.

    C.   If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the DMV pursuant to CVC Section 4760, file proof of unpaid penalties and fees with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment as provided in subsection B of this section. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.150 Prohibition against filing complaint with court.
    The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the court relating to a parking violation which has been filed with the DMV unless the processing agency has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for sixty days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been collected by the department pursuant to CVC Section 4760. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.180 Processing other violations.
    A.  An equipment violation entered on the notice of parking violation attached to the vehicle under Section 1.30.030 shall be processed in accordance with this chapter. All of the violations entered on the notice of parking violation shall be noticed in the notice of delinquent parking violation delivered pursuant to Section 1.30.070, together with the amount of civil penalty.

    B.   Whether or not a vehicle is in violation of any regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle but is in violation of subdivision (a) of CVC Section 5204, a person authorized to enforce parking laws and regulations shall issue a written notice of violation, setting forth the alleged violation. The violation shall be processed pursuant to this section.

    C.   The civil penalty for an equipment violation is thirty dollars, except that upon proof of the correction to the processing agency, the penalty shall be reduced to ten dollars. The civil penalty for a violation of CVC Section 5204 is sixty dollars. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

 

1.30.200 Notice of appeal to court—Hearing—Fees.
    A.  Within twenty days after the mailing of the final decision described in Section 1.30.130(B), the contestant may seek review by filing an appeal to the justice or municipal court, where the same shall be heard de novo, except that the contents of the processing agency’s file in the case shall be received in evidence. A copy of the notice of parking violation shall be admitted into evidence as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. A copy of the notice of appeal shall be served in person or by first-class mail upon the processing agency by the contestant. For purposes of computing the twenty-day period, Section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall be applicable.

    B.   The fee for filing the notice of appeal shall be twenty-five dollars. If the appellant prevails, this fee, together with any deposit of parking penalty, shall be promptly refunded by the processing agency in accordance with judgment of the court.

    C.   The conduct of the hearing or appeal under this section are subordinate judicial duties which may be performed by traffic trial commissioners and other subordinate judicial officials at the direction of the presiding judge of the court.

    D.  If no notice of appeal of the processing agency’s decision is filed within the period set forth in subsection A of this section, the decision shall be deemed final.

    E.   If the parking penalty has not been deposited and the decision is adverse to the contestant, the processing agency may, promptly after the decision becomes final, proceed to collect the penalty under Section 1.30.140. (Ord. 841 § 1, 1993)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.12 CITY OFFICERS
Chapter 2.16 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.20 CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.24 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.28 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Chapter 2.32 TAX ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR
Chapter 2.36 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC ENGINEER
Chapter 2.44 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.52 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
Chapter 2.53 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Chapter 2.54 SISTER CITY COMMISSION
Chapter 2.56 LOBBYING FOR CABLE TELEVISION

Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
2.04.010 Form of government.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 34322 of the Government Code of the state, a majority of the votes cast at the special election for the incorporation of Pico Rivera as a general law city on January 7, 1958, were in favor of a city manager form of government, and therefore, in accordance with the provisions of Section 34322, the city shall operate under the city manager form of government. (Prior code § 2120)

 

2.04.020 Appointment—Term.
    The city manager shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the city council. (Prior code § 2121)

 

2.04.030 Consolidation with office of city clerk.
    A.  The offices of city manager and city clerk may be consolidated in the same person by the resolution appointing a city manager-city clerk. In such an event, the city manager-city clerk shall have all the duties and responsibilities of both the city manager and the city clerk, as established by general law and the ordinances of the city.

    B.   Reference in this code to the city manager or the city clerk shall mean the city manager-city clerk when the city council, by resolution, has appointed one person to the office of city manager-city clerk. (Prior code § 2122)

 

2.04.040 Absence of manager—Acting manager.
    In the case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some duly qualified person to perform the duties of city manager during the absence or disability of the city manager, subject, however, to such person, if he or she is not already a city officer, furnishing the bond and taking the oath of office as required by the provisions of this title. The city council may at any time, by resolution, even though the city manager then is not absent or disabled, designate a city officer who shall act as city manager during such absence or disability. (Prior code § 2123)

 

2.04.050 Suspension or removal conditions.
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 36506 of the Government Code of the state, the city manager shall hold office during the pleasure of the city council. However, in order to provide some protection to the city manager in respect to suspension and removal from office, in addition to those provisions provided elsewhere by the law governing general law cities, the city manager shall not be removed until the city council has adopted a preliminary resolution setting forth the reason for his or her removal, and thirty days have elapsed thereafter. By the preliminary resolution, the city council may suspend the city manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid to him, with due and owing, his or her monthly salary or any portion thereof to and through one calendar month following the adoption of the preliminary resolution. The requirement herein of a preliminary resolution shall not be deemed or construed to constitute or signify that the removal of the city manager must be upon specified grounds or cause, the city council having full, complete and uncontrolled discretion in respect to the suspension or removal of the city manager, with its action thereon being final and not dependent upon any particular showing or degree of proof. The city manager shall be entitled to a public hearing in respect to his or her removal, if he or she so desires, in accordance with the provisions of the general law governing cities of the state of California. (Prior code § 2124)

 

2.04.060 Compensation.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2.16.050, when by resolution the same person is appointed to the office of city manager-city clerk, the full and entire compensation for such person shall be the compensation fixed for the city manager by resolution pursuant to Section 2.12.060 of the Pico Rivera Municipal code. In addition to any compensation so fixed by the resolution, the city manager shall be reimbursed for his or her actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duty, or incurred when traveling on business pertaining to the city under the direction of the city council, and provided, further, that an itemized statement pertaining to the same has been filed with and approved by the city council. (Prior code § 2125)

 

2.04.070 Coordination of city government.
    The city manager, subject to the policy determination of the city council, shall coordinate the activities of the municipal government and of the various departments thereof, and act as an administrative head in respect to all municipal functions. As such, he or she shall have the powers and duties specified in the Government Code of the state and in this code. The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all of the affairs of the city as the chief executive and administrative officer of the city government, shall be responsible for the enforcement of the laws of the city, and shall require the faithful performance of all administrative duties, and in addition shall have the powers and duties designated in Sections 2.04.080 through 2.04.190. (Prior code § 2126)

 

2.04.080 General duties.
    A.  The city manager shall have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to him or her by state law, by the ordinances of the city and by any legislative action or direction of the city council. He or she shall be charged with, as chief administrative officer of the city council, the responsibility of ascertaining that the laws of the state of California pertaining to the city, and all laws and ordinances of the city, are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed.

    B.   The city manager shall devote his or her entire time to his or her duties in the interest of the city.

    C.   It shall be the responsibility of the city manager to present to the city council all memorandums of understanding, side-letters and other labor or personnel related agreements to the city council for review and approval at an open and public meeting of the city council. All such MOUs, side-letters and/or agreements shall be signed by the mayor in order to take effect. (Ord. 1133 § 1, 2019; prior code §§ 2126(a), (m))

 

2.04.090 Legislative and executive action.
    As a chief administrative officer and advisor of the city council, the city manager shall at all times advise the city council as to all legislative, executive and administrative duties and responsibilities of the city council, and shall recommend to the city council such measures, ordinances or procedures as he or she shall deem necessary or expedient to carry out the purposes of the municipal government. In this regard, the city manager shall:

    A.  Prepare and submit to the city council the annual budget and administer it after adoption;

    B.   Prepare and recommend to the city council a salary plan;

    C.   Make investigations into the affairs of the city in any department or division thereof, in any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the city;

    D.  Investigate all complaints in relation to the matters concerning the administration of the government of the city, and in regard to the service maintained by public and private agencies in the city; and

    E.   Exercise all general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, public streets and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the city council. (Prior code § 2126(e))

 

2.04.100 Council meetings.
    The city manager shall attend all meetings of the city council, shall keep the council informed as to the affairs of the city and shall recommend to the council such action as may be necessary or expedient to the welfare of the city. (Prior code § 2126(b))

 

2.04.110 Commissions and committees.
    Unless specified otherwise by the provisions of this code, the city manager shall be an ex officio member of all commissions, committees and boards created by the city council or established by the provisions of the state law, with the right to participate in all deliberations or actions by such commissions, committees or boards, but without the right of vote. The city manager shall attend all meetings of such commissions, committees or boards, as necessary in his or her discretion, and may delegate the responsibility of his or her attendance to any subordinate employee. (Prior code § 2126(d))

 

2.04.120 Subordinate employees.
    In accordance with the provisions of Section 34856 of the Government Code of the state of California, the city manager may appoint and dismiss all subordinate appointive officers and employees, including the position of city treasurer, to positions created by the city council, except the city attorney and the city clerk. The decision as to the appointment or removal of the city clerk and city attorney is hereby retained by the city council and, except as herein provided, the offices of city clerk and city treasurer shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the city manager. In accordance with the foregoing, the city manager shall appoint, promote, discipline, demote and remove all subordinate officers and employees, subject to the aforementioned limitations and exceptions. The city manager may transfer employees from one department to another, and consolidate or combine offices, positions or units under his or her jurisdiction in one person, provided the performance of the duties of separate offices by one person would not be inconsistent or unlawful. The city manager shall appoint competent and qualified officers and employees, and shall be responsible to the city council as a chief administrative officer for the exercise of all the powers and duties herein contained. (Ord. 1004 § 1, 2003; Ord. 694 § 5, 1985; prior code § 2126(c))

 

2.04.130 Purchasing officer powers.
    The city manager is designated the purchasing officer of the city. All purchases made on behalf of the city shall be made in accordance with the terms and provisions of Chapter 3.20 of this code, and shall be approved and confirmed by the city council before the city council or the city shall be obligated thereon, except where provided otherwise by Chapter 3.20 of this code. (Prior code § 2126(f))

 

2.04.140 Contract supervision.
    The city manager shall examine all proposed contracts to which the city may be a party, and may sign on behalf of the city any contract authorized by the city council, excepting where the council directs that some other officer or officers shall do so. In case of the reasonable unavailability of the mayor to sign contracts previously approved by the city council, the mayor pro-tem is authorized to sign such contracts and in cases of the reasonable unavailability of the mayor and the mayor pro-tem the city manager is authorized to sign such contracts. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that all terms of any contract to which the city is a party are fully performed by all parties thereto. (Ord. 1076 § 5, 2013; prior code § 2126(h))

 

2.04.150 Inventory of city property.
    The city manager shall keep a current inventory showing all real and personal property of the city in its location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such property, including the equipment, buildings, parks and all other city property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for care and control. (Prior code § 2126(i))

 

2.04.160 Annual report.
    The city manager shall prepare and submit to the city council an annual report of the city affairs, including a summary or reports of department heads or other city officers, a statement of financial condition and needs of the city, and such other reports as the city council shall require. (Prior code § 2126(g))

 

2.04.170 Posting of notices—Election duties.
    Where the offices of city manager and city clerk are consolidated in the same person, it shall be the duty of the manager to see to the publication of all notices, ordinances and other documents, where required by law or direction of the city council, as well as the posting of the same, where required by law or as directed by the city council.

    A.  The manager-city clerk shall prepare and cause to be given, posted or published, as required, all notices as required by law or direction of the city council.

    B.   The manager-city clerk shall prepare and be responsible, in accordance with the provisions of the Election Code of the state, for the conducting of all municipal elections.

    C.   The manager, as city clerk, shall prepare and have custody of all municipal records required by law to be kept by the city clerk and by the city, and where not required to be kept by any other specified officers. (Prior code § 2126(j))

 

2.04.180 Civil defense duties.
    The manager shall serve as local director of civil defense where not inconsistent with any contract or other arrangement with the city. (Prior code § 2126(k))

 

2.04.190 Implied powers.
    The city manager shall perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be necessary in order to carry out the foregoing, and as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance, resolution or direction of the city council. (Prior code § 2126(l))

Chapter 2.08 CITY COUNCIL
2.08.010 Meetings.
    There shall be two regular meetings of the city council during each calendar month, and such meetings shall be held at the time and place or places within the city as designated by resolution of the city council. If the date of any such regular business meeting falls on a holiday, such regular meeting shall be held at the same hour as specified in such resolution on the next succeeding day which is not a holiday or Saturday or Sunday. (Ord. 1076 § 6, 2013; Ord. 1033 § 1, 2007; prior code § 2600)

 

2.08.020 Minutes and records.
    A.  The minutes of the city council shall be taken, retained and distributed by the city clerk or authorized representative in the manner, form and fashion as specified by resolution of the city council.

    B.   Minutes of other boards and commissions of the city shall be taken, retained and distributed as authorized by resolution of the city council.

    C.   Shorthand, stenotype or mechanical or electrical recordings of the proceedings of the city council, or any meeting or hearing of any board or commission of the city, shall be made, taken, kept and distributed as directed by the city council by resolution or motion. Any person interested may request, by five days’ written notice prior to any public meeting of the city council, any city commission or board, that the proceedings of such public meeting be recorded by shorthand, stenotype or mechanical or electrical recording, provided such person agrees in writing to reimburse the city for the cost of recording said minutes, and for the cost of any copies of the minutes requested by the person. (Prior code § 2606)

 

2.08.030 Compensation.
    City councilmembers shall be compensated for their services in the sum of eight hundred twenty-two dollars and fourteen cents per month each, which salary shall be a charge against the city and payable each and every month during said term or terms of office. (Ord. 987 § 1, 2002; Ord. 956 § 1, 2000; Ord. 910 § 1, 1998; Ord. 750 § 1, 1988; Ord. 722 § 1, 1986; Ord. 693 § 1, 1985; prior code § 2300.1)

 

2.08.040 Expense reimbursement.
    Upon the submission of an itemized account, any councilmember may be reimbursed for his or her actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duty. “Actual and necessary expenses” shall be those actually and necessarily performed in carrying out the city’s business, and computed in accordance with standard accounting practices and the city council’s general policy. Only those expenses incurred by reason of the performance of official and public duty or by reason of the performance of duty imposed by the city council shall be subject to reimbursement. (Prior code § 2300)

 

2.08.050 Rules of decorum for meetings.
    A.  Decorum. Meetings of the city council shall be conducted in an orderly manner to ensure that the public has a full opportunity to be heard and that the deliberative process of the council is retained at all times. The presiding officer of the council, who shall be the mayor, mayor pro tempore or, in their absence, other member so designated by the council, shall be responsible for maintaining the order and decorum of meetings.

    B.   Rules of Decorum. While any meeting of the city council is in session, the following rules of order and decorum shall be observed:

    1.   Persons Addressing the Council. Public oral communications at the city council meetings should not be a substitute for any item that can be handled during the normal working hours of the municipal government. The primary purpose of oral communications is to allow citizens the opportunity to formally communicate with the city council as a whole, for matters that cannot be handled during the regular working hours of the city government. Each person who addresses the council shall do so in an orderly manner and shall not make personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks to any member of the council, staff or general public. Any person who makes such remarks, or who utters loud, threatening, personal or abusive language, or engages in any other disorderly conduct which disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any council meeting shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the council, be barred from further audience before the council during that meeting.

    2.   Members of the Audience.

    a.   No person in the audience at a council meeting shall engage in disorderly or boisterous conduct, including the utterance of loud, threatening or abusive language, whistling, stamping of feet or other acts which disturb or otherwise impede the orderly conduct of any council meeting. Any person who conducts himself in the aforementioned manner shall, at the discretion of the presiding officer or a majority of the council, be barred from further audience before the council during that meeting.

    b.   In the event that any meeting is wilfully interrupted by a group or groups of persons so as to tender the orderly conduct of such meeting unfeasible and order cannot be restored by the removal of individuals who are wilfully interrupting the meeting, the members of the legislative body conducting the meeting may order the meeting room cleared and continue in session. Only matters appearing on the agenda may be considered in such a session. Representatives of the press or other news media, except those participating in the disturbance, shall be allowed to attend any session held pursuant to this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the legislative body from establishing a procedure for readmitting an individual or individuals not responsible for wilfully disturbing the orderly conduct of the meeting.

    C.   Addressing the Council. A person wishing to address the council during the period set aside for oral communications may seek recognition by the presiding officer of the council. No person shall address the council without first being recognized by the presiding officer. The following procedures shall be observed by persons addressing the council:

    1.   Prior to the start of oral communication, each person shall submit a request to speak on a form provided by the city clerk. During oral communications, each person shall step up to the podium provided for the use of the public and shall state their name;

    2.   During the “oral communications” any subject which is not deemed relevant shall be precluded;

    3.   Each person shall limit his or her remarks to a combined total of three minutes in conjunction with oral communication presented by that person to the Pico Rivera redevelopment agency, housing assistance authority, water authority and/or public financing authority oral communication;

    4.   All remarks shall be addressed to the presiding officer and not to any single member of the council, unless in response to a question from said member.

    D.  Enforcement of Decorum. The rules of decorum set forth in subsections B and C of this section shall be enforced in the following manner:

    1.   Warning. The presiding officer shall request that a person who is breaching the rules of decorum be orderly and silent. If, after receiving a warning from the presiding officer, a person persists in disturbing the meeting, the presiding officer shall order him or her to leave the council meeting. If such person does not remove him or her or herself, the presiding officer may order any law enforcement officer who is on duty at such meeting as sergeant-at-arms of the council to remove that person from the council chambers.

    2.   Removal. Any law enforcement officer who is serving as sergeant-at-arms of the council shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instruction of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to remove from the council meeting any person who is disturbing the proceedings of the council.

    3.   Resisting Removal. Any person who resists removal by the sergeant-at-arms shall be charged with a violation of this section.

    4.   Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, pursuant to Section 1.20.010 of this code, be guilty of a misdemeanor.

    5.   Motion to Enforce. If the presiding officer of the council fails to enforce the rules set forth in this section, any member of the council may move to require him or her to do so, and an affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall require him or her to do so. If the presiding officer of the council fails to carry out the will of a majority of the council, the majority may designate another member of the council to act as presiding officer for the limited purpose of enforcing any rule of this section which it wishes enforced.

    6.   Adjournment. If a meeting of the council is disturbed or disrupted in such a manner as to make infeasible or improbable the restoration of order, the meeting may be adjourned or continued by the presiding officer or a majority of the council, and any remaining council business may be considered at the next meeting. (Ord. 1020 §§ 1, 2, 2006; Ord. 822 § 1, 1992; Ord. 783 § 2, 1990)

 

2.08.060 City election dates.
    Pursuant to Section 1301 of the California Elections Code, the city municipal election date shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year, commencing on November 6, 2018 to coincide with the statewide election.

    Those elected officers of the city of Pico Rivera whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, expired following the November, 2017 general municipal election, shall, instead, continue in their respective offices until the certification of the 2018 election results by the city council.

    Those elected officers of the city of Pico Rivera whose terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, expired following the November, 2019, general municipal election, shall instead, continue in their respective offices until the certification of the election results by the city council for the 2020 general municipal election of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 1103 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1034 § 1, 2007; Ord. 853 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 2.12 CITY OFFICERS
2.12.010 Oath of office.
    No city officer or employee shall enter the duties of his or her office until he or she has taken the oath required by law, as well as the Constitution oath of office, and has filed the same with the city clerk. (Prior code § 2105)

 

2.12.020 Bond requirements.
    A.  The following city officers, before entering upon the duties of their office, shall execute a bond conforming to the provisions of the Government Code relating to bonds of public offices, and in conformity with the provisions of Section 36518 and Chapter 3 of Division 4 of Title 1 of the Government Code pertaining to official bonds, in the penal sum as recommended by the city attorney, and adopted by resolution of the city council; provided, however, that the amounts of the bonds shall not be less than as follows:

    1.   City clerk and city manager, one hundred thousand dollars;

    2.   City treasurer and director of finance, one hundred thousand dollars;

    3.   Deputy city clerk, one hundred thousand dollars.

    B.   In accordance with the provisions of Section 36519 of the Government Code and Section 1481 of the Government Code, the legislative body determines it expedient and necessary to require all other city officers and employees, before entering upon the duties of their office, to execute a bond to the city in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 3, Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code, which bond will be in the sum of ten thousand dollars, a sum to be determined by the city council, and shall be a master bond covering all other city officers and employees. (Ord. 694 § 4, 1985; prior code § 2106)

 

2.12.030 Hiring of other officers.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36501 of the Government Code of the state and any other provision of the law of the state providing for subordinate officers or employees, the city council may, by resolution or ordinance, hire and retain such other officers or employees therein, specifying his or her duties and compensation. Such other officer or employee shall not have any of the rights or duties specified in this title unless expressly stated or implied herein. (Prior code § 2191)

 

2.12.040 Hiring of special services.
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Government Code of the state and Section 37102 thereof, the city council may from time to time specify, hire and retain additional city officers not specified in this title for special services and advice regarding financial, economical, accounting, engineering, legal and administrative matters, by contract, ordinance or resolution. Such officers, unless specifically enumerated in a category of officers and employees by this title, shall not have any rights or duties specified in this title unless expressly stated or implied herein. (Prior code § 2190)

 

2.12.050 Subordinate officers’ duties.
    It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, as well as the city clerk if this office is not consolidated with the city manager, the city treasurer and the city attorney, to cooperate with and assist the city manager in administrating the affairs of the city most efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties, and as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the city. (Prior code § 2126.1)

 

2.12.060 Compensation for employees and officers.
    The salaries and compensation of other officers and employees shall be fixed by the city council by resolution appointing such officer or employee, or as thereafter amended by resolution or motion of the council. Salaries, compensation or benefits of city employees or officers shall only be paid from salary schedules, MOUs, side-letters or other agreements which are approved by the city council at an open and public meeting and shall be signed by the mayor. If such salary schedules, MOUs, side-letters or other agreements are not approved by the city council at an open and public meeting or are not signed by the mayor, such salary schedules, MOUs, side-letters or other agreements are void and have of no force or effect. (Ord. 1133 § 4, 2019; prior code § 2304)

Chapter 2.16 CITY CLERK
2.16.010 Office created—Powers and duties.
    The office of city clerk is hereby created. The city clerk shall have those duties bestowed upon him or her by the provisions of the Government Code of California and by the ordinances of the city council. In addition, the city clerk shall perform those duties as designated by the city council. Where duties are bestowed upon the city clerk by the provisions of the Government Code or by ordinances of the city, the city clerk shall be responsible for the performance of such duties by himself or his or her assistants, and shall be answerable directly to the city council for their performance. Where not inconsistent with the foregoing, the city clerk and his or her assistants shall be subject to the executive direction and management of the city manager, as the representative of the city council. Any application required to be filed with the city or fees required to be paid to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall be filed with or paid to the city clerk unless otherwise provided by this code. (Prior code § 2102.3)

 

2.16.020 Appointment.
    The city clerk shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the will of the city council, unless the city council shall by ordinance invest the power of appointments to the city manager pursuant to the provisions of Section 34856 of the Government Code. (Prior code § 2103.2)

 

2.16.030 Deputies.
    Subject to approval of the city council, the city clerk may appoint a chief deputy city clerk, and such deputy city clerks as the city council shall designate. The deputies shall hold office at the pleasure of the city clerk, and shall receive compensation as provided by the city council. (Prior code § 2103.1)

 

2.16.040 Pro tem officers—Bond.
    Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to the contrary, the city clerk pro tem and deputy city clerk pro tem shall enter into the duties of their office upon the incorporation of the city even though they have not yet given bond to the city as required by this code, provided the bond is secured and given within a reasonable time thereafter. (Prior code § 2303.1)

 

2.16.050 Compensation.
    The city clerk shall receive a monthly salary or compensation as fixed by ordinance of the city council, with the exception that the salary of the first city clerk retained by the city as a city clerk pro tem may, pursuant to the authority of this section, or any city clerk-city manager, be fixed at that salary fixed for the city manager by resolution of the city council (Prior code § 2303)

 

2.16.060 Election filing fee.
    A.  There is set and established a filing fee of twenty-five dollars to defray, in part, the cost to the city of processing nomination papers for councilmanic elections in the city. The filing fee shall be payable in respect to each such nomination filed and shall be paid upon the filing of the nomination papers.

    B.   Except as provided in subsection C of this section, nomination papers for councilmanic elections shall not be accepted unless accompanied by the filing fee set and established by this section.

    C.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a candidate for member of the city council may submit, in lieu of all or part of the required filing fee, a petition containing four qualified signatures for each dollar of the filing fee not paid, the number of required signatures not to exceed one hundred. A qualified signature is the signature of a person who, at the time of providing such signature, was a registered voter within the city.

    D.  Any petition submitted pursuant to this section in lieu of all or part of the required filing fee shall be submitted to the city clerk with the nomination papers related hereto, together with the amount of the filing fee, if any, remaining to be paid.

    E.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to extend or otherwise modify the period of time of filing nomination papers for councilmanic elections.

    F.   The filing fee set and established by subsection A of this section shall be operative for councilmanic nominations for the general municipal election to be held on April 12, 1994 and for each special and general municipal election held thereafter for election to membership on the city council. (Ord. 846 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 2.20 CITY TREASURER
2.20.010 Office created—Powers and duties.
    The office of city treasurer is created. The city treasurer shall have those duties as prescribed by the Government Code of the state and in addition, where not inconsistent with the foregoing, the city treasurer shall:

    A.  Receive and safely keep all moneys coming into his or her hands;

    B.   Comply with all laws governing the securing of public funds and the handling of trust funds in his or her possession;

    C.   Pay out money only on warrants signed by legally designated persons;

    D.  Regularly, at least once each month, submit to the city clerk a written report and accounting of all receipts, disbursements and fund balances, and file a copy thereof with the city council;

    E.   Perform such other duties relative to the collection of city taxes and license fees as are prescribed by ordinance; and

    F.   Pay out salaries, benefits or other financial obligations of the city relating to labor or personnel matters only when such obligations have been approved by the city council in an open and public meeting and memorialized in an agreement signed by the mayor. (Ord. 1133 § 2, 2019; prior code § 2101)

 

2.20.020 Appointment—Term.
    The city treasurer shall be appointed by the city council and serve at the will of the city council, unless the city council invests such power in the city manager by ordinance pursuant to Section 34586 of the Government Code of the state. (Prior code § 2102.2)

 

2.20.030 Deputy city treasurer.
    The city treasurer may appoint a deputy city treasurer, who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city treasurer and city manager, and shall receive compensation as provided by the city council. The deputy city treasurer shall perform those duties as specified and directed by the city treasurer. (Ord. 1004 § 2, 2003; prior code § 2102.1)

Chapter 2.24 CITY ATTORNEY
2.24.010 Office created—Powers and duties.
    The office of city attorney is created. The city attorney shall have those duties specified by law, and as such shall:

    A.  Advise all city officers and officials in all legal matters pertaining to the city;

    B.   Defend and appear for the city in his or her official capacity;

    C.   Frame all ordinances and resolutions and other legal documents required by the legislative body and as requested by the city council; and

    D.  Perform other legal services as required from time to time by the city council. (Prior code § 2104)

 

2.24.020 Appointment—Term.
    The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the will of the city council. (Prior code § 2104.1)

Chapter 2.28 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
2.28.010 Office established—Powers and duties.
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 37209 and Section 36501 of the Government Code of the state, the office of director of finance of the city is created and established. The city council finds that the tasks and duties bestowed upon the city clerk and the city manager are so numerous that it is necessary to have this position created, to appoint someone to fill the position, and to transfer certain duties of the city clerk to the director of finance, as allowed by law. (Prior code § 2150)

 

2.28.020 Transfer of certain duties.
    The duties imposed upon the city clerk by Title 4, Division 3, Part 2, Chapter 4, Article I of the Government Code of the state are transferred to the director of finance, in accordance with Section 37209 of the Government Code. In addition, the finance and accounting duties imposed upon the city clerk by Sections 40802 through 40805 of the Government Code are hereby transferred to the director of finance. (Prior code § 2150.1)

 

2.28.030 Specific financial duties.
    A.  The director of finance shall have those duties imposed upon the city clerk by Title 4, Division 3, Part 2, Chapter 4, Article I of the Government Code of the state, and as imposed upon the director of finance by ordinance or resolution of the city council in connection with such duties or related duties, as set forth in said Article I of the Government Code. As director of finance, he or she shall have charge of the administration of all financial affairs of the city, subject to the control and under the direction of the city manager. In addition, the director of finance shall be accounting officer of the city, and shall maintain a general accounting system and records reflecting the financial condition of the city, prepare and present to the council or to other agencies all financial reports required by law, ordinance, or direction of the city council or city manager. As director of finance, he or she shall be responsible for the preparation of all vouchers for payment, preparation of the register of demands, and all preparations of monthly financial statements to the city manager and city council.

    B.   In addition to the foregoing, the director of finance shall perform such other duties as hereinafter imposed upon him or her by state law or by ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council. He or she shall assist the city manager in all financial and budgetary matters, as well as any other administrative matter, when ordered to do so by the city manager. In addition to the foregoing, the director of finance, under the jurisdiction of the city manager, shall:

    1.   Have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city;

    2.   Compile the budget expenses and income estimates for the city manager;

    3.   Maintain and supervise a general accounting system for the city government and each of its officers, departments and agencies;

    4.   Supervise and be responsible for the disbursements of all moneys, and have control of all expenditures, and audit and approval of all claims, bills, invoices, demands, charges and purchase orders, with the advice of the city attorney, when necessary, for submission to the city council;

    5.   Prepare and submit to the city manager and city council monthly financial statements of receipts and disbursements of the city, as well as an annual statement and report of the financial condition of the city;

    6.   Assist the city manager in keeping current inventories of all property of the city, its departments, officers and agencies; and

    7.   Disburse funds to pay salaries, benefits or other financial obligations of the city relating to labor or personnel matters only when such obligations have been approved by the city council in an open and public meeting and memorialized in an agreement signed by the mayor. (Ord. 1133 § 3, 2019; prior code § 2150.2)

 

2.28.040 Compensation.
    The director of finance shall receive that compensation set forth in the resolution appointing him or her. (Prior code § 2150.3)

Chapter 2.32 TAX ASSESSOR AND COLLECTOR
2.32.010 Transfer of duties to county.
    Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state, the duties of city tax assessment and collection performed by the city tax assessor and tax collector are hereby transferred to the tax assessor and collector of the county of Los Angeles. (Prior code § 2100)

 

2.32.020 City clerk’s duties.
    The offices of the city tax assessor and collector are hereby abolished. All other duties of city tax collection, other than those transferred pursuant to Section 51507 of the Government Code, as set forth in Section 2.32.010, shall be performed by the city clerk under the direction of the city manager, if there be one, and if not, under the direction of the city council. (Prior code § 2100.1)

Chapter 2.36 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS
2.36.010 Office created—Powers and duties.
    A.  Pursuant to the provisions of this title, the city council finds that the tasks and duties bestowed upon the city manager by this title and the law of the state are so numerous that is necessary to have the position of the director of public works created, and appoint someone to fill that position. The office of director of public works is hereby created.

    B.   The director of public works shall have all of the powers and duties of the city manager, under the jurisdiction and control of the city manager, heretofore specified or hereafter specified by law or ordinance of the city council, in respect to public works, construction and maintenance programs of the city. (Prior code § 2192)

Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC ENGINEER
2.40.010 Director of public works authority.
    Unless the city council should by resolution otherwise designate, the director of public works shall serve as the traffic engineer of the city. (Prior code § 2193)

Chapter 2.44 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.44.010 Planning commission established.
    Pursuant to Section 65100 of the Government Code, the city council hereby establishes a planning agency for the city, which shall consist of a planning commission. It shall be the function of the planning commission:

    A.  To develop and maintain a general plan;

    B.   To develop such specific plans as may be necessary or desirable;

    C.   To periodically review the improvement program of the city; and

    D.  To perform such other functions as authorized by the city council and provided by law. (Prior code § 2200)

 

2.44.020 Membership and vacancies.
    The planning commission shall consist of five members who shall be appointed in the manner set forth by resolution of the city council and shall serve at the will of the city council. All members of the planning commission shall be residents of the city. Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from reappointing a commissioner following the completion of his or her term. (Ord. 1014 § 1, 2004; Ord. 935 § 1, 1999; prior code § 2201)

 

2.44.030 Organization and officers.
    The planning commission shall establish by resolution for the election of a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a period of one year. The election shall occur within thirty days of the reorganization of the city council. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. (Ord. 1046 § 1, 2008; prior code § 2203)

 

2.44.040 Meetings—Time and place.
    The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the rules and regulations of the planning commission. (Prior code § 2204)

 

2.44.050 Meetings—Attendance and absences.
    A.  If a member of the planning commission is absent from three successive regular meetings, which absences are not excused by the majority vote of the commission, or is absent for any reason, excused or unexcused, from more than six regular meetings in a twelve-month period, beginning on May 1st of each year, the city manager shall immediately notify the city council. Upon such notification, the city council shall review the status of such member as to continuation of appointment.

    B.   Commissioners may only be excused from attendance at regular meetings by a majority vote of the commission itself, based on the following criteria: Personal illness, death or serious illness in the family, occasional employment-related requirements, council-authorized city business, vacations, or any other reason deemed by the commission to be of equal justification.

    C.   In addition to the above, the city council shall review attendance records of all commissioners annually at the second regular city council meeting in April. (Prior code § 2202)

 

2.44.060 Removal from office.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any member of the planning commission may be removed from office at any time by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council. (Prior code § 2205)

 

2.44.070 Powers and duties.
    The planning commission shall perform the duties and shall have all the rights, powers and privileges specified and provided in this code and by law. (Prior code § 2206)

 

2.44.080 Additional functions.
    A.  As provided in Section 65101 of the Government Code, the planning commission shall perform the following additional functions as an advisory agency to the city council, to the extent that such functions may be related to local planning:

    1.   Building and Safety.

    a.   Study and review building and safety laws and current legislation as same may be related to city ordinances,

    b.   Recommend to the city council methods of implementation of building and safety requirements;

    2.   Traffic and Circulation.

    a.   Study and review ways and means to improve general traffic and circulation conditions, and periodically report to the council,

    b.   Review and report to the city council all Southern California Rapid Transit District, Cal-Trans and SCAG reports and proposals regarding transportation, as they may relate to the city;

    3.   Environment.

    a.   Review and report to the city council on new legislation relating to the California Environmental Quality Act and the implementation thereof,

    b.   Study and review land use as related to ecological control;

    4.   City Beautification. Make recommendations to the city council on community beautification, including capital im-

provement projects in the civic center area, main entrances to the city, and parks.

    B.   In the event of a conflict or incompatibility arising out of the functions set forth hereinabove, this section shall be deemed inapplicable to such extent, and in such event the city council shall solely assume such functions. (Prior code § 2207)

 

2.44.090 Expense reimbursement.
    In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of Title 7 of the Government Code pertaining to local planning, city planning commissioners, if authorized by the city council, may attend planning conferences, meetings of planning executives, or hearings on planning legislation or matters affecting all or part of the general plan, and shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary reasonable expenses incurred in respect to such attendance. “Expenses,” as used in this section, means those incurred by reason of traveling, living, registration and other necessary fees and charges imposed. In addition, members of the city planning commission shall receive compensation for their attendance at meetings of the commission in the amount specified and determined by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 2301)

Chapter 2.52 EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
2.52.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, and to provide for the coordination of the public agencies and affected private persons, corporations and organizations. (Prior code § 3600)

 

2.52.020 Emergency defined.
    As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Prior code § 3601)

 

2.52.030 Disaster council—Created—Membership.
    The Pico Rivera disaster council is created, and shall consist of the following:

    A.  The mayor, who shall be chairman;

    B.   The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman;

    C.   The assistant director, appointed by the city manager with the advice and consent of the city council who, under the supervision of the director, shall develop emergency services plans and organize the emergency services program of the city, and shall have such other duties as may be assigned by the director;

    D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter;

    E.   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Prior code § 3602)

 

2.52.040 Disaster council—Powers and duties.
    A.  It shall be the duty of the disaster council, and it is hereby empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.

    B.   The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman. (Prior code § 3603)

 

2.52.050 Director and assistant director—Created.
    A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

    B.   There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be the director of public works. (Prior code § 3604)

 

2.52.060 Director and assistant director—Powers and duties.
    A.  The director is empowered:

    1.   To request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency,” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session;

    2.   To request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

    3.   To control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

    4.   To direct coordination and cooperation of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

    5.   To represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining to emergencies, as defined in this chapter;

    6.   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency” as herein provided, or the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, the director is empowered:

    a.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

    b.   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of the life and property of the people, and bind the city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

    c.   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she thinks necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency service volunteers,

    d.   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency,

    e.   To execute all of his or her ordinary powers as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant hereto, all powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, agreement approved by the city council, or by any other lawful authority, and, in conformity with Section 38791 of the Government Code, to exercise complete authority over the city and to exercise all police power vested in the city by the Constitution and general laws.

    B.   The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

    C.   The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of the emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city, and shall have such powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Prior code § 3605)

 

2.52.070 Emergency organization.
    All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of subsection A6a of Section 2.52.060 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such disaster, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Prior code § 3606)

 

2.52.080 Emergency plan.
    The disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city’s emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 3607)

 

2.52.090 Expenditures.
    Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of Pico Rivera. (Prior code § 3608)

 

2.52.100 Unlawful acts during emergencies—Penalty.
    It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

    A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

    B.   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

    C.   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state, the county, county district, or any city in the county;

    D.  Violate any curfew or other emergency order or regulation established by any lawful rule, regulation, order or directive issued pursuant to this chapter. It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of a curfew order that a person was traveling to or from work or school, was homeless, or was seeking medical treatment. (Ord. 837 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 2.53 PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.53.010 Establishment.
    The city council hereby establishes a parks and recreation commission, which shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council to study and review those matters of public interest referred to it by the city council. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

 

2.53.020 Membership—Term.
    The parks and recreation commission shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed in the manner set forth by resolution of the city council to serve at the will of the city council. All members of the parks and recreation commission shall be residents of the city. One ex-officio member shall be appointed by the mayor and shall be representative of the youth of the community. The attendance of the ex-officio member shall not impact the establishment of an official quorum of the full commission for any scheduled meeting. Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from reappointing a commissioner following the completion of his or her term. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

2.53.030 Organization and officers.
    A.  The parks and recreation commission shall establish by resolution for the election of a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a period of one year. The election shall occur within thirty days of the reorganization of the city council. The parks and recreation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations.

    B.   The city manager shall designate a staff person to serve as secretary to the regular meetings of the commission. Interim officers shall be elected at the first meeting of the commission to serve until the election of the regular officers. (Ord. 1046 § 3, 2008; Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

 

2.53.040 Meetings—Time and place.
    The parks and recreation commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the rules and regulations of the commission. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

 

2.53.050 Meetings—Absences.
    A.  If a member of the parks and recreation commission is absent from two successive regular meetings, which absences are not excused by the majority vote of the commission, or is absent for any reason, excused or unexcused, for more than three regular meetings in a twelve-month period, the city manager shall immediately notify the city council. Upon such notification, the city council shall review the status of such member as to continuation of appointment.

    B.   Commissioners may only be excused from regular meetings by a majority vote of the commission itself, based on the following criteria:

    1.   Personal illness;

    2.   Death or serious illness in the family;

    3.   Occasional employment-related requirements;

    4.   Council-authorized city business;

    5.   Vacations; or

    6.   Any other reason deemed by the commission to be of equal justification.

    C.   In addition to the above, the city council shall review attendance records of all commissioners annually. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

 

2.53.060 Removal from office.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any member of the parks and recreation commission may be removed from office at any time by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

 

2.53.070 Powers and duties.
    The commission’s powers and duties shall be advisory and not administrative, operational, or policy making legislative powers and duties and shall have the following duties:

    A.  To promote the values and benefits of participating in parks and recreation programs and to strengthen the community’s sense of place and community image;

    B.   To conduct public meetings where the community has the opportunity to provide input regarding issues under the prevue of the commission;

    C.   To encourage community participation in parks and recreation activities including activities for older adults, youth, cultural arts, special events, aquatics and sports;

    D.  To evaluate the effectiveness of current recreational programming, standards and practices, and make recommendations as appropriate;

    E.   To interpret the policies and function of the parks and recreation department to the public and interpret the needs of the community to the city council;

    F.   To make recommendations, as directed by city council, for capital improvement projects as they relate to parks and recreation and open space needs;

    G.  To make recommendations whether to accept park land dedication or in-lieu fees of park land dedication consistent with applicable city ordinances and the general plan. If a land dedication is recommended, the commission shall also make recommendations concerning proposed park site(s);

    H.  To promote cooperative use and make recommendations on the utilization of school district facilities for the purposes of recreation programming and for general use by the community;

    I.    To recommend to the city council specific matters for the commission’s study and recommendation, but shall not commence a study, review or investigation of any matter without the authorization of the city council;

    J.    Such other advisory duties as may be assigned to it by the city council. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

 

2.53.080 Expense reimbursement.
    Members of the parks and recreation commission shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary reasonable expenses incurred incidental to attendance at meetings outside of the city, and where authorized and directed by the city council to so attend. “Expenses,” as used in this section, means those incurred by reason of traveling, living, registration and other necessary fees and charges imposed. In addition, members of the commission shall receive compensation for their attendance at the meetings of the commission in the amount specified and determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1036 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 2.54 SISTER CITY COMMISSION
2.54.010 Establishment.
    The city council hereby establishes a sister city commission, which shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council to study and review those matters of public interest referred to it by the city council. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.020 Membership—Term.
    The sister city commission shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed in the manner set forth by resolution of the city council to serve at the will of the city council. All members of the sister city commission shall be residents of the city. Nothing herein shall preclude the city council from reappointing a commissioner following the completion of his or her term. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.030 Organization and officers.
    A.  The sister city commission shall establish by resolution for the election of a chairperson and vice-chairperson for a period of one year. The election shall occur within thirty days of the reorganization of the city council. The sister city commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business, and shall keep a record of all its minutes, resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations.

    B.   The city manager shall designate an ex officio staff person as liaison, and a secretary to the regular meetings of the commission. Interim officers shall be elected at the first meeting of the commission to serve until the election of the regular officers.

    C.   The liaison will be responsible for ensuring the proper and necessary recording of the minutes of regular and special meetings, administer to the correspondence, and provide notification of meetings. (Ord. 1046 § 4, 2008; Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.040 Meetings—Time and place.
    The sister city commission shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at such time and place as designated in the rules and regulations of the commission. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.050 Meetings—Absences.
    A.  If a member of the sister city commission is absent from two successive regular meetings, which absences are not excused by the majority vote of the commission, or is absent for any reason, excused or unexcused, for more than three regular meetings in a twelve-month period, the city manager shall immediately notify the city council. Upon such notification, the city council shall review the status of such member as to continuation of appointment.

    B.   Commissioners may only be excused from regular meetings by a majority vote of the commission itself, based on the following criteria:

    1.   Personal illness;

    2.   Death or serious illness in the family;

    3.   Occasional employment-related requirements;

    4.   Council-authorized city business;

    5.   Vacations; or

    6.   Any other reason deemed by the commission to be of equal justification.

    C.   In addition to the above, the city council shall review attendance records of all commissioners annually. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.060 Removal from office.
    Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, any member of the sister city commission may be removed from office at any time by the affirmative vote of at least three members of the city council. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.070 Powers and duties.
    The commission’s powers and duties shall be advisory and not administrative, operational, or policy making legislative powers and duties and shall have the following duties:

    A.  To promote a greater global understanding of other cultures and an international perspective for the citizens of Pico Rivera;

    B.   To promote the goals of international understanding and friendship by the establishment and maintenance of programs of cultural exchange;

    C.   To establish exchange programs through local residents, businesses, schools, churches, and similar entities and institutions to develop a program consisting of projects, exhibits, contacts and exchanges of all types to foster and promote the goals of the commission;

    D.  To conduct public meetings where the community has the opportunity to provide input regarding issues under the prevue of the commission;

    E.   To keep the community informed concerning the sister city program;

    F.   To advise the city council on matters pertaining to the sister city commission;

    G.  To interpret the policies and function of sister city objectives to the public and interpret the needs of the community to the city council;

    H.  To recommend to the city council specific matters for the commission’s study and recommendation, but shall not commence a study, review or investigation of any matter without the authorization of the city council;

    I.    Such other advisory duties as may be assigned to it by the city council. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

 

2.54.080 Expense reimbursement.
    Members of the sister city commission shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary reasonable expenses incurred incidental to attendance at meetings outside of the city, and where authorized and directed by the city council to so attend. “Expenses,” as used in this section, means those incurred by reason of traveling, living, registration and other necessary fees and charges imposed. In addition, members of the commission shall receive compensation for their attendance at the meetings of the commission in the amount specified and determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1037 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 2.56 LOBBYING FOR CABLE TELEVISION
2.56.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined, and shall be construed as set out in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

    A.  “Compensation” means salary, fee, gift, payment, benefit, subscription, loan, advance, stock, stock option, partnership, interest, reimbursement, or deposit of money or anything of value; or a contract, promise or agreement to make compensation.

    B.   “Influencing” means promoting, supporting, influencing, modifying, opposing or delaying by any means, including but not limited to the provision or use of information, statistics, studies or analyses.

    C.   “Legislative or administrative action” means the proposal, drafting, development, analysis, introduction, consideration, amendment, enactment or defeat of any resolution, rate, ordinance, motion, contract, agreement, franchise, license, permit, rule or regulation of the city.

    D.  “Lobbying” means:

    1.   Communicating in the presence of a city official or employee, with the intent to influence any legislative or administrative action of that official or employee, which action is directly or indirectly related to cable television; or

    2.   Engaging in activities having the express purpose of soliciting others to communicate with a city official or employee, with the intent to influence legislative or administrative action directly or indirectly related to cable television.

    E.   “Lobbyist” means any person who is employed or receives compensation for lobbying legislative or administrative action directly or indirectly related to cable television. Any person who engages in lobbying and within twelve months prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or at any time thereafter, receives or is promised stock or any ownership interest in any business entity undertaking activities designed or intended to effect ownership or operation of a cable television system in the city at the time of the receipt or the promise shall be considered a lobbyist.

    F.   “Lobbyist employer” means any person who employs or contracts for the services of one or more lobbyists, whether independently or jointly with others.

    G.  “Official or employee” means any person elected to, appointed to or employed by the city, or any city agency, board, commission or committee, whether or not paid in whole or in part with city funds.

    H.  “Person” means any individual, proprietorship, corporation, firm, partnership, trust, association, joint venture, syndicate, company, committee, or any other organization or group of persons acting in concert. (Prior code § 10816.1)

 

2.56.020 Registration—Required—Contents.
    A.  Any lobbyist shall file with the city clerk a registration statement disclosing the following:

    1.   The person’s name, occupation, business address, telephone number;

    2.   The name and business address of each person, if any, employing and/or compensating the registrant to lobby legislative or administrative action relating to cable television and, where the employing or compensating person is a corporation, a list of all stockholders or owners holding five percent or more of the stock or other ownership interest thereof, and all subsidiary corporations or companies, and where the employing or compensating person is a partnership or joint venture, a list of all general partners, joint ventures or partners holding five percent or more of ownership interest therein;

    3.   A brief description of the legislative or administrative action such person is seeking to influence.

    B.   Within thirty days after a change in any information contained in said statement, an amendment to the statement shall be made to reflect the change, including termination of lobbyist status.

    C.   Each statement shall be valid until December 31st of each odd-numbered year.

    D.  No registration fee shall be charged. (Prior code § 10816.2)

 

2.56.030 Registration—Exceptions.
    The following acts do not require a person to register as a lobbyist:

    A.  Professional services in drafting bills or in advising and rendering opinions to clients as to the construction and effect of proposed or pending actions, where these services do not otherwise constitute lobbying activities;

    B.   Appearance before the council or any city committee, board or commission, upon its specific invitation or request, but only if the person engages in no further or other activities which would constitute lobbying;

    C.   Appearance as part of the official duties of a duly elected or appointed official or employee of the state or a governmental entity of the state, or of the United States, and not in behalf of any other entity;

    D.  Actions of a publisher or working member of the press, radio or television, in the ordinary course of the business of disseminating news or making editorial comment to the general public, who does not, however, engage in further or other lobbying that would directly and specifically benefit the economic, business or professional interests of himself or his or her employer;

    E.   The representation of a bona fide religious organization solely for the purpose of protecting the right of its own members to practice the doctrine of the organization. (Prior code § 10816.3)

 

2.56.040 Quarterly report requirements.
    A.  Every lobbyist required to register under Section 2.56.020 shall file quarterly reports containing:

    1.   The amount of each expenditure made by the person filing a statement to influence legislative or administrative action directly or indirectly related to cable television, and the specific purpose of that expenditure, along with the total amount of all such expenditures;

    2.   In the case of expenditures which benefit in whole or in part any councilmember, city officer or employee, local organized business group, fraternal group, local club, business entity, civic group, service organization or other local group or person, the date and amount of the expenditure, together with the full name and address of the payee, and the full name and official position, if any, of each beneficiary, if the beneficiary is other than the payee or lobbyist, and the exact legislative or administrative action sought to be influenced;

    3.   The monetary value of all payments, including but not limited to salaries, fees, and reimbursement of expenses received or earned, even though the payment date is not yet due, received in consideration for, or directly or indirectly in support of or in connection with influencing legislative or administrative action relating to cable television, and the full name and address of each person from whom accounts or things of value have been received, and the total monetary value received from each person;

    4.   A listing of all communications or contracts relating to cable television, not made at a public hearing or meeting of the city, with individual council members, or city officers or employees who have duties and responsibilities with respect to cable television, together with the names of the participants in the discussion, and any written material provided.

    B.   Reports required by this section shall be filed with the city clerk on or before the fifteenth day of the month following each calendar quarter, and shall cover only the preceding calendar quarter, except that the first such report hereunder shall be filed within thirty days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Prior code § 10816.4)

 

2.56.050 Campaign contribution limitations.
    A.  No lobbyist or lobbyist employer shall make a campaign contribution to a candidate for city council or other controlled committee within the period commencing thirty days prior to a municipal election for a seat on the city council.

    B.   All lobbyists or lobbyist employers shall file a report with the city clerk listing campaign contributions made to city council candidates or their controlled committees, and the amounts and recipients, on the fifteenth day prior to any municipal election for a seat on the city council. (Prior code § 10816.5)

 

2.56.060 Violation—Misdemeanor.
    Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Prior code § 10816.6)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 GENERAL FUND
Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.10 AIR QUALITY
Chapter 3.12 EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.16 CLAIMS AND WARRANTS
Chapter 3.20 PURCHASING
Chapter 3.24 TAX ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE
Chapter 3.28 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.32 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.36 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.40 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.44 BUILDING TAX FOR PARKS AND RECREATION
Chapter 3.48 INFORMAL BIDDING FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS
Chapter 3.50 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX
Chapter 3.52 UTILITY USERS TAX
Chapter 3.56 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY

Chapter 3.04 GENERAL FUND
3.04.010 Created—Source of funds—Expenditures.
    A fund is created, known as the “General Fund,” into which shall be deposited all general funds of the city, and from which there shall be disbursed all general expenditures of the city other than the expenditures from special funds as set forth in Title 3 of this code. (Prior code § 2500)

Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.08.010 Created—Name.
    There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Prior code § 2501)

 

3.08.020 Source of moneys.
    All moneys received by the city from the state of California under provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into said fund. (Prior code § 2501.1)

 

3.08.030 Expenditures.
    All moneys in the special gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Prior code § 2501.2)

Chapter 3.10 AIR QUALITY
3.10.010 Definitions.
    Definitions as applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:

    A.  “City” means the City of Pico Rivera.

    B.   “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5. of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code.

    C.   “Fee administrator” means the finance director of the city or his or her designee. (Ord. 794 § 2, 1991)

 

3.10.020 Administration of fees and trust fund.
    A.  Receipt of fee: The additional vehicle registration fee disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, for purposes of reduction of air pollution pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 44243, shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

    B.   Establishment of air quality improvement trust fund: The fee administrator shall establish a separate quality improvement trust fund into which all fee revenues distributed to the city shall be deposited, and out of which expenditures shall be made to reduce air pollution in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 44243.

    C.   Transfer of funds: Upon receipt of the funds described in subsection A above, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate fund established pursuant to subsection B above. All interest earned by the trust fund shall be credited only to that fund.

    D.  Expenditure of air quality trust fund revenues: All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source air pollution reduction programs. Such revenues, and any interest earned on the revenues, shall be expended within one year of the completion of the program. (Ord. 794 § 2, 1991)

Chapter 3.12 EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT FUND
3.12.010 Created—Name.
    A special fund is created in the city treasury, to be known as the “Equipment Replacement Fund.” (Prior code § 2505)

 

3.12.020 Source of moneys—Basis of rental rates.
    A.  Each department of the city shall pay into the equipment replacement fund a sum of money, as determined by the director of finance, as rental for each piece of equipment placed under such replacement program. The rental shall be based on the anticipated life of the particular unit of equipment, or the anticipated replacement cost and the maintenance and replacement cost, whichever is deemed applicable to the particular piece of equipment.

    B.   The rental rates shall be reviewed annually by the director of finance, and a statement shall be forwarded to each department, setting forth any changes in rental rates from previous statements, to be effective for the next fiscal year. In the event a single piece of equipment is used by more than one department, the rental therefor shall be prorated among the departments using such unit of equipment. (Prior code § 2505.1)

 

3.12.030 Expenditure restrictions.
    A.  All rental and other moneys deposited in the equipment replacement fund shall be withdrawn from the fund only upon warrant drawn and approved in the normal manner. Expenditures from this fund shall be expended only for the purpose of purchasing equipment to replace equipment on which a rental has been paid into the fund, or from the repair of same, when the cost of such repairs has been included in the basis of the rental rate.

    B.   No expenditures or transfers shall be made from said fund except those expenditures or transfers expressly authorized by the city council, and any moneys deposited in the fund shall not be withdrawn except for the express purposes provided herein. (Prior code § 2505.2)

Chapter 3.16 CLAIMS AND WARRANTS
3.16.010 Definitions.
    Wherever the words “warrant” or “check” are used in this code, “warrant” or “check” means voucher checks. (Prior code § 2530)

 

3.16.020 City council—Statutory powers.
    The city council may, by resolution, pursuant to Government Code Sections 935.2 and 935.4, establish a claims board or commission, and delegate to such board or commission, or to an employee of the city, its powers to perform functions and make determinations relating to claims as contained in this chapter, and in Government Code Section 900 et seq. (Prior code § 2531)

 

3.16.030 Presentation of claims.
    All claims for money or damages against the city shall be filed, presented and acted upon as provided in the Government Code of the state, and as provided in this chapter. Such claims shall be presented to the city council in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Government Code, and if not so presented or acted upon by the city council within the time specified by law, shall be deemed rejected as provided by law. Any person may appear before the city council in respect to the allowance or denial in whole or in part of any claim or demand made against the city. (Prior code § 2520)

 

3.16.040 Sufficient money for payment.
    Except as otherwise provided by law, no warrant or check shall be drawn or evidence of indebtedness issued unless there is at the time sufficient money in the treasury legally applicable to the payment of the same. (Prior code § 2520.2)

 

3.16.050 Auditing of other claims.
    All claims for money or damages, where not required by law, and invoices and obligations due and owing by the city as established by contract, agreement or purchase order, or otherwise by law, shall be audited by the director of finance and approved by the city manager, both as to accuracy thereof, and the availability of funds for payment. (Prior code § 2521)

 

3.16.060 Forms for claims.
    All claims for money or damages, where a claim is required to be filed by law, shall be in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Government Code of the state. For this purpose, the city clerk shall prepare and have available printed forms in duplicate for use of all claimants. Each claim shall be stamped received by the city clerk, and given a claim number. (Prior code § 2522)

 

3.16.070 Approval procedure.
    Each claim for money or damages, where a claim is required by law, shall be submitted to the city manager within five days of the receipt thereof for audit and approval by him. The city manager may, in his or her discretion, refer such claim or demand to the city attorney for a report to the city manager when the city manager deems the same necessary. The city manager shall audit such claims and report on such claims, whether approved or not, to the city council within thirty days of the date such claim was first received; the report shall contain the findings and recommendations of the city manager. All claims and demands shall be submitted to the city council for final approval or rejection, and the city council shall audit such claims and demands as required by law. However, if any such claim is not presented to the city council within the time authorized by law for action thereon by the city council, all such claims shall be deemed denied, regardless of the foregoing, where so provided by law, unless the city council should take action thereon to the contrary. (Prior code § 2523)

 

3.16.080 Auditing by director of finance.
    Notwithstanding the foregoing, all payroll warrants, checks, drafts, itemized statements of expenditures, invoices and authorized or approved claims or demands against the city for money or damages shall be first audited and approved by the director of finance prior to payment thereof. (Prior code § 2524)

 

3.16.090 City council action.
    A.  If the city council finds that any claim or demand is not a proper charge against the city, it shall be rejected by minute motion, and the fact of rejection shall be plainly endorsed upon the claim by the city clerk. The city clerk shall also, within five days of the action of the city council, notify the claimant or his or her authorized representative in writing of the action of the city council, and the fact of rejection of the claim.

    B.   If any claim or demand is determined by the city council to be a proper charge against the city, the same shall be allowed by resolution or minute order setting forth as to each claim the name of the claimant, a brief statement of the claim, the amount allowed, and a designation of the fund out of which it is to be paid. In such event, the city clerk shall notify the claimant or his or her authorized representative in writing within five days of the action of the city council on the foregoing facts.

    C.   Any claim may be allowed in part and rejected in part by the city council. (Prior code § 2526)

 

3.16.100 Approval, endorsement and payment.
    If any claim or demand is allowed and approved by the city council, the city clerk shall endorse upon such claim the words, “Allowed by the City Council of the City of Pico Rivera,” together with the date of such allowance, and for what amount and from what fund, and the city clerk shall attest the same with his or her signature. The city clerk shall thereupon deliver a check therefor to the claimant with a copy of the resolution or minute order allowing the same. (Prior code § 2527)

 

3.16.110 Warrants and voucher checks.
    The city council hereby adopts this procedure as an alternate procedure to that specified to drawing warrants in Section 37203 of the Government Code of the state, and pursuant to said Section 37203, all warrants or voucher checks shall be signed by the mayor or the city treasurer or deputy treasurer, and countersigned by the city clerk or a deputy city clerk. In the absence of the mayor, the vice-mayor may sign in his or her place instead. In any event, at least one of the foregoing municipal officers must have executed an official bond to the city covering the faithful performance by such officer of the duties of his or her office. (Prior code § 2528)

Chapter 3.20 PURCHASING
3.20.010 System adopted—Purpose—Statutory authority.
    In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, to secure for the city supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted, in accordance with Section 54202 of the Government Code. (Prior code § 2700)

 

3.20.020 Administration—Purchasing authority.
    In accordance with the provisions of Sections 54201 through 54204 of the Government Code, the policies and procedures contained in this chapter, as well as the policies and procedures adopted by subsequent rules and resolutions, have been adopted. The authority for the purchase of supplies and equipment is vested in a purchasing officer, and the procedures and policies contained in this chapter, as well as in supplemental rules and resolutions, shall hereafter be followed in respect to the purchase of supplies and equipment, unless the provisions of Section 3.20.030 of this chapter should apply. (Prior code § 2701)

 

3.20.030 Exemptions from chapter application.
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in respect to the purchase of supplies and equipment in the following circumstances:

    A.  Where the city council, by contract or resolution, or both, transfers the authority to make the purchase of supplies and equip-

ment, whether blanket authority or single purchases, to another governmental agency, or officer thereof, pursuant to lawful authority, and where such other governmental agency or officer, in the purchase of supplies and equipment, follows to the satisfaction of the purchasing officer policies and procedures in compliance with the provisions of Sections 54201 through 54204 of the Government Code. In the event of the transfer of blanket authority in respect to such purchase of supplies or equipment pursuant to this section, the purchasing officer, as defined in this chapter, shall remain the purchasing officer of the city, and the other office or agency performing the services shall be designated the purchasing agent. In such an event, the purchasing officer of the city may authorize purchases through said purchasing agent in accordance with the authority vested in him or her by the city council;

    B.   The purchase of equipment and supplies through the Department of General Services pursuant to Section 10324 of the Public Contracts Code;

    C.   The purchase is made by, through, or in concert with another public agency provided the other public agency makes such purchase in accordance with the state laws or local rules and regulations governing such purchase for the other public agency. (Ord. 938 § 1, 1999; prior code § 2702)

 

3.20.040 Purchasing officer powers and duties.
    The city manager, or designated deputy, shall serve as the purchasing officer. He or she shall have authority to:

    A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council;

    B.   Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment;

    C.   Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at least expense to the city;

    D.  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

    E.   Prepare and recommend to the city council rules governing the purchasing of supplies, services and equipment for the city;

    F.   Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

    G.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

    H.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter, and other rules and regulations;

    I.    Supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased, to insure conformance with specifications;

    J.    Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments, as needed, and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency, or which have become unsuitable for city use;

    K.  Maintain a bidders’ list, vendors catalogue file, and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. (Prior code § 2703)

 

3.20.050 Estimates of requirements.
    All using agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing officer shall prescribe. (Prior code § 2704)

 

3.20.060 Requisition forms.
    Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies, services and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. (Prior code § 2704.1)

 

3.20.070 Purchase orders.
    Purchase of supplies, services and equipment shall be made only by purchase order, except as provided by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 937 § 1, 1999; prior code § 2706)

 

3.20.080 Bid procedures required when.
    A.  Purchases of supplies, equipment and the sale of personal property shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 3.20.120 through 3.20.180 of this chapter.

    B.   Bidding shall be dispensed with only when an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply, when the amount involved is less than one thousand dollars, or when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor. Purchases shall not be divided or split in order to circumvent formal bidding requirements. (Ord. 784 § 1, 1990; prior code § 2705)

 

3.20.090 Encumbrance of funds.
    Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services and equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which such purchase is to be charged. (Prior code § 2707)

 

3.20.100 Open market procedure.
    A.  Authorized When. Purchase of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars or less may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market without observing the procedure prescribed by Sections 3.20.110 through 3.20.190. Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value between the amounts of ten thousand dollars and twenty-five thousand dollars shall also require the approval of the director of finance.

    B.   Minimum Number of Bids. Open-market purchase shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.

    C.   Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone, by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall, or by other suitable means.

    D.  Written Bids. Sealed written bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer, who shall keep a record of all open-market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 1076 § 7, 2013; Ord. 1035 § 2, 2007; Ord. 784 § 2, 1990; prior code § 2708)

 

3.20.105 Personal and professional services excluded.
    A.  Except for the provisions of Section 3.20.210, the city may award purchase orders and contracts in any amount for personal or professional services without complying with the provisions of this chapter; provided that the award shall be on the basis of demonstrated competence and on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the service required and shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 4526, when applicable.

    B.   For purposes of this section, personal services shall include:

    1.   Any communication, gas, water, electric light and power service or similar utility service;

    2.   Insurance, postage, freight and courier service;

    3.   Travel/hotel accommodations, education and training expense;

    4.   Subscriptions and memberships;

    5.   Maintenance service for equipment, machinery or other city-owned personal property;

    6.   Maintenance service for city-owned or occupied real property and buildings;

    7.   Rental of real property or equipment and other personal property; and

    8.   Such other services as the city council may, by resolution, specifically direct.

    C.   For purposes of this section, professional services shall include:

    1.   Services of engineers, architects, accountants, attorneys, doctors, appraisers and similar professionals when the city is contracting for the skill, integrity, judgment and/or special technical ability of the professional.

    2.   Such other services as the city council may, by resolution, specifically direct. (Ord. 784 § 5, 1990)

 

3.20.110 Formal contract procedure.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of estimated value greater than twenty-five thousand dollars shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder, pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Sections 3.20.120 through 3.20.190 of this chapter. (Ord. 1076 § 8, 2013; Ord. 1035 § 3, 2007; Ord. 784 § 3, 1990; prior code § 2709)

 

3.20.120 Notices inviting bids.
    A.  Contents of Notices. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids.

    B.   Published Notices. Notices inviting bids shall be given at least ten days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices.

    C.   Bidders’ List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders’ list, or who have requested their names be added thereto.

    D.  Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer shall also advertise pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall. (Prior code § 2709(a))

 

3.20.130 Bidder’s security.
    When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. (Prior code § 2709(b))

 

3.20.140 Bid opening procedure.
    Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. (Prior code § 2709(c))

 

3.20.150 Rejection of bids.
    In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented and readvertise for bids. (Prior code § 2709(d))

 

3.20.160 Award of contracts.
    Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 2709(e))

 

3.20.170 Tie bids.
    If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses, or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of bid opening. (Prior code § 2709(f))

 

3.20.180 Performance bonds.
    The city council shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract, in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Prior code § 2709(g))

 

3.20.190 Inspection and testing of materials.
    The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered, and contractual services performed, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order of the contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids, and samples of deliveries, which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Prior code § 2710)

 

3.20.200 Sale of surplus supplies and equipment.
    All using department heads shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such forms as he or she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are no longer used, or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to sell all personal property desired to be sold by the city, supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department, or which have become unsuitable for city use, or to exchange the same for or trade in the same on new supplies and equipment. Sales not exceeding five thousand dollars shall be made pursuant to Section 3.20.100 and sales of more than five thousand dollars shall require approval of the city council and be made pursuant to Section 3.20.110, except sales shall be made to the highest responsible bidder. (Ord. 1076 § 9, 2013; Ord. 784 § 4, 1990; prior code § 2711)

 

3.20.210 City manager authority.
    The city manager is authorized to approve and execute, on behalf of the city, any contract in an amount not exceeding thirty thousand dollars for the services described in Section 3.20.105(B) and (C). Contracts for services described in Section 3.20.105(B) shall be based upon competitive quotations from not less than three vendors. Contracts described in Section 3.20.105(C) shall be subject to the provisions of Section 3.20.105(A). (Ord. 1035 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1025 § 1, 2006; Ord. 784 § 6, 1990)

Chapter 3.24 TAX ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE
3.24.010 Date when property assessed.
    Taxable property in the city shall be assessed to the persons owning, claiming, possessing or controlling it at twelve noon (meridian) on the first Monday of March of each year. All tax liens shall attach annually as of twelve noon (meridian) on the first Monday of March of each year preceding a fiscal year for which taxes are levied. (Prior code § 2400)

 

3.24.020 Assessment performed by the county.
    From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the duties of assessing property and of collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and the tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector of Los Angeles County, California, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 through 51519 of the Government Code of the state. (Prior code § 2401)

Chapter 3.28 SALES AND USE TAX
3.28.010 Short title.
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.020 Purpose.
    The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California;

    B.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 1 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code;

    C.   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a one percent tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

    D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.030 Sales tax—Levied.
    A.  For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city.

    B.   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State Sales and Use Tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization.

    C.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1990, applicable to sales taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section.

    D.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “State” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the State of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this section; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code; nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted.

    E.   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section.

    F.   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

    1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer;

    2.   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.040 Sales tax—Alternative exclusions and exceptions.
    There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

    A.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of California upon a retailer or consumer;

    B.   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes;

    C.   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.050 Sales tax—Operability.
    A.  Section 3.28.030F shall be operative January 1, 1984.

    B.   Section 3.28.040A of this chapter shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State of California which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.060 Use tax—Levied.
    A.  An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

    B.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Code, as amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1990, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth in this section.

    C.   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state of California; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this section; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that code; and in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

    D.  There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

    1.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

    2.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

    3.   In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.070 Use tax—Alternative exclusive exemptions.
    There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

    A.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

    B.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

    C.   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes;

    D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.080 Use tax—Operability.
    A.  Section 3.28.060 shall be operative January 1, 1984.

    B.   Section 3.28.070(A) of this chapter shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.090 Amendments.
    All amendments of the said Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter* which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

     *Editor’s note: The effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is July 2, 1990.

 

3.28.100 City sales and use tax—Credit for taxes due to redevelopment agency.
    Any person subject to a sales and use tax under the city’s ordinance shall be entitled to credit against the payment of taxes due under that ordinance the amount of sales and use taxes due to the Pico Rivera redevelopment agency pursuant to Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

    The maximum rate of sales and use taxes payable pursuant to Pico Rivera redevelopment agency (“agency”) Ordinance No. 1-90, as amended by agency Ordinance No. 4-12 adopted on January 24, 2012 (collectively, the “agency ordinances”), and the maximum amount of the credit any person is entitled to receive hereunder shall be as specified in the agency ordinances, as the same are implemented from fiscal year to fiscal year for as long as the agency ordinances remain in effect, as specified in Sections 2-4 thereof. The city manager or designee shall cooperate with the agency (or, in the event the agency is dissolved, with the successor agency to the agency) and take all actions required to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the agency ordinances, including without limitation notifying the California State Board of Equalization of the applicable rate to use for the city and agency (or successor agency) for the next succeeding fiscal year and entering into whatever new or amended agreement with the State Board of Equalization as may be necessary to enable the State Board of Equalization to perform its duties with respect to the transfer of sales and use taxes from the city to the agency.

    To the extent that, notwithstanding the adoption and implementation of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the California State Board of Equalization in any fiscal year pays or remits sales and use taxes to the agency (or, in the event the agency is dissolved, to the successor agency to the agency) in excess of the lesser of: (1) the sum of one million sixty-five thousand dollars; or (2) the amount needed by the agency (or such successor agency) to timely pay and discharge the then-current debt service requirements under the agency existing obligations for payment/use of sales and use taxes referred to in the agency ordinances, the agency (or such successor agency) shall be deemed to hold such excess sums in trust for the city and the city manager or successor shall promptly take such actions as are necessary to cause the agency (or such successor agency) to remit such excess sums to the city.

    This section shall terminate and shall be of no further force or effect upon the payment in full of all of the agency existing obligations for payment/use of sales and use taxes. (Ord. 1071 § 2, 2012; Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.110 Contract for administration.
    The city shall contract prior to the effective date of the city sales and use tax ordinance with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration or operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the city which shall continue in effect so long as the county within which the city is located has an operative sales and use tax ordinance enacted pursuant to this part. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.120 Enjoining collection forbidden.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

 

3.28.130 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the city jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 779 § 3, 1990)

Chapter 3.32 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
3.32.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known as the “City of Pico Rivera Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance.” The city of Pico Rivera hereinafter shall be called “city.” This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1048 § 1, 2008)

 

3.32.020 Operative date.
    “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than ten days after the city council declares the results of the special election on November 4, 2008. (Ord. 1048 § 2, 2008)

 

3.32.030 Purpose.
    This chapter is adopted to achieve the following purposes, among others, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

    A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2, which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose;

    B.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

    C.   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes.

    D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1048 § 3, 2008)

 

3.32.040 Contract with state.
    Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance provided that if the city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1048 § 4, 2008)

 

3.42.050 Transactions tax rate.
    For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1048 § 5, 2008)

 

3.32.060 Place of sale.
    For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 1048 § 6, 2008)

 

3.32.070 Use tax rate.
    An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1048 § 7, 2008)

 

3.32.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1048 § 8, 2008)

 

3.32.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
    In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

    A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

    1.   The word “state” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

    2.   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter;

    3.   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

    a.   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or,

    b.   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code;

    4.   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

    5.   The word “city” shall be substituted for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 1048 § 9, 2008)

 

3.32.100 Permit not required.
    If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1048 § 10, 2008)

 

3.32.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
    A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax.

    B.   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

    1.   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government;

    2.   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:

    a.   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence, and

    b.   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address;

    3.   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

    4.   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

    5.   For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

    C.   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:

    1.   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance;

    2.   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California;

    3.   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

    4.   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

    5.   For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised;

    6.   Except as provided in subsection (C)(7) of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer;

    7.   “A retailer engaged in business in the city” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.

    D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 1048 § 11, 2008)

 

3.32.120 New revenue use restriction.
    Any new revenues generated by the passage and collection of this transaction and use tax are restricted for general fund purposes, except that such new revenues shall not be spent for improvements to the site known as the “Pico Rivera Sports Arena Complex” unless and until the improvements as defined in the Pico Rivera Parks master plan are first constructed and completed. (Ord. 1048 § 12, 2008)

 

3.32.130 Amendments to state law.
    All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 1048 § 13, 2008)

 

3.32.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1048 § 14, 2008)

 

3.32.150 Severability.
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1048 § 15, 2008)

 

3.32.160 Effective date and submission to voters.
    This chapter relates to the levying and collecting of city transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately. However, no tax imposed by this chapter shall be effective unless that tax has been approved by the voters of the city, at an election held on November 4, 2008, as required by Section 2(b) of Article XIIIC of the California Constitution and applicable law. (Ord. 1048 § 16, 2008)

 

3.32.170 Amendment and termination.
    The authority to levy the taxes imposed by this chapter shall continue indefinitely until this chapter is repealed. The city council may amend this chapter to reduce the rate of the taxes, either permanently or for a set period of time, without a further vote of the people. However, as required by Article XIIIC of the California Constitution, no amendment to this chapter may increase the rates of the taxes above what is authorized by this chapter unless such amendment is submitted to and approved by the voters. (Ord. 1048 § 17, 2008)

 

3.32.180 Declaration.
    The proceeds of the taxes imposed by this chapter may be used for any lawful purpose of the city, as authorized by ordinance, resolution or action of the city council or by ordinance adopted by the electorate of the city. These taxes do not meet the criteria established by Section 1(d) of Article XIIIC of the California Constitution for special taxes, and are general taxes imposed for general government purposes. (Ord. 1048 § 18, 2008)

 

3.32.190 Accountability.
    The city’s expenditure of the proceeds of the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be reviewed annually in conjunction with, and as part of the city’s usual annual financial audit, and the results of such review shall be made available for inspection by the public. (Ord. 1048 § 19, 2008)

Chapter 3.36 UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.36.010 Title for citation.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the City of Pico Rivera.” (Prior code § 6901)

 

3.36.020 Definitions.
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

    A.  “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

    B.   “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

    C.   “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

    D.  “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

    E.   “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

    F.   “Tax administrator” means the director of finance.

    G.  “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance amending this section may be considered. (Prior code § 6902)

 

3.36.030 Imposed—Rate.
    For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 787 § 1, 1990; prior code § 6903)

 

3.36.040 Exemptions.
    A.  No tax shall be imposed upon:

    1.   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

    2.   Any federal or state officer or employee, when on official business;

    3.   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

    B.   No exemption shall be granted, except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury, upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Prior code § 6904)

 

3.36.050 Operator—Registration requirements.
    Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance adopting the provisions set out in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him or her a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

    A.  The name of the operator;

    B.   The address of the hotel;

    C.   The date upon which the certificate was issued;

    D.  “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including the zoning laws and including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Prior code § 6906)

 

3.36.060 Operator—Collection duties.
    Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 6905)

 

3.36.070 Reporting and remitting.
    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received, and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he or she deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax, and he or she may require further information on the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Prior code § 6907)

 

3.36.080 Recordkeeping requirements.
    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 6911)

 

3.36.090 Refunds.
    A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

    B.   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

    C.   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

    D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 6912)

 

3.36.100 Failure to collect and report.
    A.  If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax, and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he or she is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same, and to make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter.

    B.   In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount to be assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last known place of address. Such operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice, make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days’ written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted, and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days, unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.36.130. (Prior code § 6909)

 

3.36.110 Late payment or fraud—Penalties.
    A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

    B.   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten-percent penalty first imposed.

    C.   Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

    D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

    E.   Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Prior code § 6908)

 

3.36.120 Actions to collect.
    Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Prior code § 6913)

 

3.36.130 Appeal procedure.
    Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his or her last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 6910)

 

3.36.140 Violation—Misdemeanor—Penalty.
    A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable as provided in this code.

    B.   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid.

    C.   Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. (Prior code § 6914)

Chapter 3.40 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.40.010 Title for citation—Statutory authority.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Pico Rivera.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 6920)

 

3.40.020 Imposed—Amount.
    There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to or vested in the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Prior code § 6921)

 

3.40.030 Administration of tax.
    The county recorder shall administer the tax in this chapter, in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Prior code § 6928)

 

3.40.040 Who must pay tax.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Prior code § 6922)

 

3.40.050 Exemptions—Certain conveyances and orders.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

    A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

    B.   Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

    C.   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Prior code § 6926)

 

3.40.060 Exemptions—Instruments to secure debts.
    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Prior code § 6923)

 

3.40.070 Exemptions—Partnership interests.
    A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

    1.   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

    2.   Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

    B.   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

    C.   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Prior code § 6927)

 

3.40.080 Exemptions—Plans of reorganization.
    A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

    1.   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

    2.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

    3.   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

    4.   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

    B.   Subsections A1 through A4, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivering or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Prior code § 6925)

 

3.40.090 Exemptions—Public entities.
    The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia, shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Prior code § 6924)

 

3.40.100 Refunds.
    Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Prior code § 6929)

Chapter 3.44 BUILDING TAX FOR PARKS AND RECREATION
3.44.010 Title for citation—Statutory authority.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Building Tax for Parks and Recreation Purposes.” It is adopted pursuant to the taxing power granted the city by the Government Code of the state, and is solely for the purpose of producing revenue. (Prior code § 6940(part))

 

3.44.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Dwelling unit” means and includes each single-family dwelling and each habitation unit of an apartment, duplex or multiple-dwelling structure designated as a separate place for habitation. “Dwelling unit” also includes each “guestroom” designed as a separate habitation for one or more persons.

    B.   “Person” means and includes every person, firm or corporation engaging in construction activities, itself or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor.

    C.   “Trailer space” means each space, area or building in a trailer park or mobile home park, or other place designed or intended as a place to accommodate any mobile home, trailer or van, bus or other vehicle or mobile structure, when the same is being used as a living or sleeping quarters for human beings. (Ord. 694 § 25, 1985; prior code § 6940(a))

 

3.44.030 Amount—Who must pay.
    Every person constructing any new dwelling unit or trailer space in the city shall pay to the city the sum of one hundred dollars for each dwelling unit, including relocated dwelling units and each trailer space. (Prior code § 6940(b))

 

3.44.040 Time for payment.
    Such fees shall be due and payable upon application to the city for a permit for the construction of any such dwelling unit or addition or trailer space; provided, however, that there shall be a refund of such fees in the event the building permit is not approved, or is not used, for such construction. (Prior code § 6940(c))

 

3.44.050 Use of funds—Restrictions.
    All of the sums collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the capital improvement fund for park and recreation purposes, and shall be used solely for capital outlay expenditures such as, but not limited to, the following:

    A.  Purchase of land and interest in land;

    B.   Development of parks and buildings for use thereon;

    C.   Acquisition and development of other varieties of open space;

    D.  Acquisition and development of parkways and median islands;

    E.   Acquisition and development of bicycle trails, riding trails, and other types of trails for recreational use;

    F.   Acquisition and development of recreation facilities and equipment. (Prior code § 6940(d))

Chapter 3.48 INFORMAL BIDDING FOR PUBLIC PROJECTS
3.48.010 Findings and purpose.
    A.  It is in the public interest for the city to elect to become subject to the uniform public construction cost accounting procedures adopted by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission pursuant to Public Contract Code Sections 22000 et seq., Part 3, Chapter 2.

    B.   Such election will enable the city to perform public works projects with its own forces and/or by contracts awarded through informal bidding procedures when it is in the best interest of the city to do so.

    C.   It is the intent of the city that this section govern the selection of public contractors by the city through informal bidding procedures, in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22034.

    D.  It is the intent of the city that any future amendments, duly adopted by the State Legislature, to Public Contracts Code Sections 22000 et seq., shall automatically become the law of the city, even if in conflict with this chapter. (Ord. 958 § 1, 2000; Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.1)

 

3.48.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Facility” means any plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, subject to the limitation found in subsection 3 of the definition for “public project,” real property, streets and highways or other public work improvement.

    “Public project” means any of the following:

    1.   Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or operated facility;

    2.   Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated facility;

    3.   In the case of publicly owned utility system, “public property” includes only the construction, erection, improvement or repair of dams, reservoirs, powerplants and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher.

    “Public project” does not include maintenance work. For purposes of this chapter, “maintenance work” includes all of the following:

    1.   Routine, recurring and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes;

    2.   Minor repainting;

    3.   Resurfacing of less than one inch in thickness of streets and highways;

    4.   Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems;

    5.   Work performed to keep, operate and maintain publicly owned water, power or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of two hundred thirty thousand volts and higher. (Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.2)

 

3.48.030 Responsibilities of purchasing officer.
    The city council delegates the authority to the purchasing officer to award informal contracts, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 3.48.040, 3.48.070 and 3.48.080, after receiving the recommendation of the director of public works. (Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.3)

 

3.48.040 Informal bidding.
    Public works projects of an estimated value under one hundred thousand dollars may be made by the city council with the following limitations:

    A.  Public projects of twenty-five thousand dollars or less may be performed by city employees by force account, by negotiated contract or by informal bid and purchase order, as recommended by the director of public works, depending on the nature, urgency, complexity and cost of the project. The city manager will advise the city council of projects in this cost range prior to commencement of work, negotiations or informal bidding procedures.

    B.   Public projects over twenty-five thousand dollars and less than one hundred thousand dollars shall be contracted by informal bidding procedures as set forth in Section 3.48.080. The city manager will seek prior council approval to proceed with projects not contained in current budget. Following council approval, the department of public works will cause plans and specifications to be prepared, either by city forces or consultants.

    C.   Minimum Number of Bids. The award of bid shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.

    D.  Notices Inviting Bids. After the city council has approved plans and specifications and authorized requests for bids, the purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written request to contractors licensed and experienced for the type of public work to be performed. (Ord. 958 § 2, 2000; Ord. 772 § 1, 1990)

 

3.48.050 Development, maintenance and use of list of qualified contractors.
    A.  The director of public works shall develop a list of qualified contractors eligible to submit bids on informal contracts awarded by the city. In developing the list, the director of public works shall obtain from the Contractor’s State License Board, and from construction trade associations within the County of Los Angeles, names and addresses of qualified contractors located in Los Angeles County.

    B.   The list shall be organized in accordance with the license classifications of the Contractor’s State License Board.

    C.   The director of public works shall publish annually, in all construction trade journals required by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 22036, notice that the city has elected to become subject to the uniform public construction cost accounting procedures, that it maintains a list of contractors qualified to submit bids on informal contracts and of the city office to contact for all information necessary for a qualified contractor to be included on the list.

    D.  Any licensed California contractor qualified according to classification may upon request be added to the list as set forth in subsection B of this section, at any time.

    E.   The director of public works shall develop and provide to contractors who apply for inclusion on the list a simplified form requesting the applicant’s name, address and California contractors license number and classification. (Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.5)

 

3.48.060 Plans, specifications and working details.
    The city council delegates to the director of public works authority to prepare and adopt plans, specifications and working details for all informal contracts and directs the director of public works to develop plans, specifications and working details necessary to enable a qualified contractor to perform the work required for each informal contract awarded. (Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.6)

 

3.48.070 Informal contract projects—Identifying and inviting bids.
    A.  With the concurrence of the manager, the director of public works will establish the need, urgency and funding source of new city public projects ranging in cost from zero to one hundred thousand dollars. Public projects shall be contracted in accordance with requirements of Section 3.48.040.

    B.   Projects shall not be split to avoid any of the bidding requirements contained in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Public Contract Code 22000 et seq.

    C.   The director of public works shall mail notice inviting informal bids to all contractors on the list of qualified contractors for the category of work being bid, and/or to all construction trade journals as specified in subsection C of Section 3.48.050.

    D.  The director of public works shall complete the mailing of notices inviting informal bids, as required by this section, not less than ten calendar days before bids are due.

    E.   The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the projects in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project and state the time and place for the submission of bids. (Ord. 958 § 3, 2000; Ord. 772 § 1, 1990)

 

3.48.080 Opening of bids and award of contract.
    A.  At the time provided in the notice inviting informal bids, the city clerk shall open all bids timely received and the purchasing officer shall award the contract to the lowest responsible bidder based upon the recommendation of the director of public works. If two or more bids are the same and lowest, the purchasing officer shall award the contract by drawing lots. If no bids are received, the director of public works may solicit informal bids again, perform the work by city forces, by force account or by contract, as he/she determines to be in the best interests of the city.

    B.   If all bids received are in excess of the one hundred thousand dollars informal bid limit, the city council may by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at one hundred ten thousand dollars, or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the cost estimate of the city was reasonable, pursuant to California Public Contract Code § 22034(f). (Ord. 958 § 4, 2000; Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.8)

 

3.48.090 Rejection of informal bids.
    The city reserves the right to reject any and all bids presented. If, after the first invitation for informal bids are rejected, the purchasing officer shall have the option, after reevaluating the project cost estimates to do one of the following:

    A.  Abandon the project or readvertise for bids in the manner described in this chapter.

    B.   By adoption of resolution by four-fifths majority of the city council, declare that the project can be performed more economically by city employees and the city may then have the project constructed by force account. (Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.9)

 

3.48.100 Formal bidding.
    Formal bidding of public projects with an estimated value in an amount over one hundred thousand dollars shall be performed in accordance with California Public Contract Code Sections 21207 to 21215. (Ord. 958 § 5, 2000; Ord. 772 § 1, 1990)

 

3.48.110 Procedure for emergencies.
    The city council delegates to the director of public works the power to declare a public emergency, as defined in Public Contract Code Section 22035, and to accomplish repairs and/or replacements as are necessary to permit the continued operation or services of the city or to avoid danger to life or property. The work shall be performed at once without the benefit of informal or formal bidding. The work may be done by city forces, by contract or by both. The director of public works shall provide a full report on the emergency and work performed at the next meeting of the city council, at which time the city council must confirm such action by a four-fifths vote, and further determine appropriate action such as, but not limited to, whether work should continue without the benefit of informal or formal bidding. (Ord. 757 § 1, 1989; prior code § 2712.11)

 

3.48.120 Economic Opportunities Program.
    There is created within the city an Economic Opportunities Program to encourage the employment of unemployed Pico Rivera citizens on public works projects performed by or on behalf of the city.

    A.  Application. The provisions of this Economic Opportunities Program shall only apply to those public works projects which have been recommended for inclusion in the program by the city engineer and city manager to the city council and approved by the city council for inclusion in the program. Inclusion or deletion of public works projects from the Economic Opportunities Program shall be within the sole discretion of the city council.

    B.   Definitions.

    1.   “EOP” means the Economic Opportunities Program.

    2.   “EOP project” means a public works project which has been approved by the city council for participation in the Economic Opportunities Program.

    3.   “EOP participant” means a bona fide citizen of the city who is on file with the California Employment Development Department as being unemployed and who is skilled and qualified to perform the type of work in a job classification designated for an EOP project by the city engineer.

    4.   “EOP goal” means the goal set by the city council for the percentage of the EOP participants to be employed for each EOP project. The city council shall set the EOP goal at the same time it designates the EOP project.

    5.   “EOP contractor” means a person or entity contracting directly with the city for the performance of an EOP project.

    6.   “EOP subcontractor” means any subcontractor employed by an EOP contractor to perform work on an EOP project.

    C.   EOP Requirements. Every contractor contracting directly with the city on an EOP project shall comply with the requirements of the EOP program contained in this section.

    1.   Every EOP contractor shall include in his or her bid or contract proposal a program to meet the EOP goal. The program of the EOP contractor shall include, but not be limited to, the following means of employing EOP participants:

    a.   Obtaining EOP participants by placing a job order with the Whittier office of the State Employment Development Department;

    b.   Advertising employment positions by posting notices which identify the positions to be filled, the qualifications required, and when to obtain additional information about the application process in conspicuous public places such as the City Hall, post offices, libraries, senior citizens centers and parks;

    c.   Scheduling and advertising a job informational meeting to be conducted by the city or contractor representatives at a city facility;

    d.   Arranging for contractor representatives to be available to provide assistance to city residents in completing job application forms;

    e.   Arranging for the holding of a workshop on applying and interviewing for jobs;

    f.    Arranging for a location where job applications may be delivered to and collected;

    g.   Conducting job interviews at locations easily accessible to Pico Rivera residents;

    h.   Advertising the jobs to be filled through the local media, such as community television network, newspapers of general circulation, trade papers and minority focus newspapers;

    i.    Telephone solicitation of known potential EOP participants;

    j.    Any other means of obtaining EOP participants which are reasonably calculated to comply with the EOP goal.

    2.   Upon the determination of the lowest responsible bidder for an EOP project, and prior to the award of the bid, the lowest responsible bidder must demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the city engineer that the bidder will meet the EOP goal, or that the bidder has used his or her best good faith efforts to comply with the EOP goal. The determination of the city engineer may be appealed in writing to the city manager within three days of the determination by the city engineer. The determination of the city manager shall be final. If it is determined that the lowest bidder does not meet the EOP goal, or has not made his or her best good faith efforts to comply with the EOP goal, then that bid will be considered nonresponsive. The same process will then be used to determine if the second lowest bidder complies with the requirements of the EOP program. This process will be completed until the lowest remaining bidder is determined to comply with the EOP program.

    3.   Every contract or agreement between the city and an EOP contractor shall contain provisions requiring the contractor to carry out the provisions of the EOP program.

    4.   Every EOP contractor or EOP subcontractor shall incorporate or cause to be incorporated in all contracts or subcontracts for work to be performed in connection with the EOP project the requirements of the EOP program.

    5.   In order to ensure that the city engineer is kept informed on the progress being made by the EOP contractor and subcontractor in meeting their obligations under the EOP program, each EOP contractor and subcontractor is required to:

    a.   Maintain such records and accounts and furnish such information and reports as are required by the city engineer and permit the city engineer access to books, records and premises for purposes of investigation in connection with ascertainment of compliance with the EOP program. The EOP contractor shall maintain records of all individuals hired under the EOP project. Such records shall show the name and address of each EOP participant and the gross dollar amount actually paid in wages to each EOP participant.

    6.   The city engineer is authorized to provide such forms and procedures as may be necessary to administer the provisions of the EOP program. The city engineer is further authorized to establish the job classifications appropriate for each EOP project.

    7.   An EOP participant shall not be dismissed from employment without good cause and without the written consent of the city. If an EOP participant is unable to perform successfully, and is to be replaced, the contractor will be required to make good faith efforts to replace the original EOP participant with another EOP participant. If any EOP participant is dismissed from employment without the written consent of the city, the original EOP participant must be rehired, or replaced with another EOP participant at the discretion of the city.

    D.  Invitations for bids and requests for proposals for EOP projects shall contain specific notification that this is an EOP project under which the contractor will be required to employ unemployed Pico Rivera citizens as required by the EOP program adopted by the city.

    E.   Failure of any EOP contractor or EOP subcontractor to comply with the provisions of the EOP program shall be cause for termination of the contract for the EOP project. The EOP contractor shall be liable to the city for all damages resulting from such termination as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 848 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 3.50 COMMUNICATION USERS’ TAX
3.50.010 Short title.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Communication Users’ Tax Law” of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.020 Definitions.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

    A.  “Ancillary telecommunication services” mean services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including, but not limited to, the following services:

    1.   “Conference bridging service” means an ancillary service that links two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number. Conference bridging service does not include the telecommunications services used to reach the conference bridge.

    2.   “Detailed telecommunications billing service” means an ancillary service of separately stating information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

    3.   “Directory assistance” means an ancillary service of providing telephone number information and/or address information.

    4.   “Vertical service” means an ancillary service that is offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services, which offers advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections, including conference bridging services.

    5.   “Voice mail service” means an ancillary service that enables the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages. Voice mail service does not include any vertical services that the customer may be required to have in order to utilize the voice mail service.

 

 

    B.   “Ancillary video services” mean services that are associated with or incidental to the provision or delivery of video services, including, but not limited to, electronic program guide services, recording services, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of video services.

    C.   “Billing address” means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

    D.  “City” means the city of Pico Rivera.

    E.   “Communication services” mean “telecommunications services,” “ancillary telecommunication services,” “video services” and “ancillary video services.”

    F.   “Mobile telecommunications service” has the meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

    G.  “Month” means a calendar month.

    H.  “Paging service” means a “telecommunications service” that provides transmission of coded radio signals for the purpose of activating specific pagers; such transmissions may include messages and/or sounds.

    I.    “Person” means, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), municipal district or municipal corporation (other than the city) cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.

    J.    “Place of primary use” means the street address representative of where the customer’s use of the communications service primarily occurs, which must be the residential street address or the primary business street address of the customer.

    K.  “Post-paid telecommunication service” means the telecommunication service obtained by making a payment on a communication-by-communication basis either through the use of a credit card or payment mechanism such as a bank card, travel card, credit card, or debit card, or by charge made to a service number which is not associated with the origination or termination of the telecommunication service.

    L.   “Prepaid telecommunication service” means the right to access telecommunication services, which must be paid for in advance and which enables the origination of communications using an access number or authorization code, whether manually or electronically dialed, and that is sold in predetermined units or dollars of which the number declines with use in a known amount.

    M.  “Private telecommunication service” means a telecommunication service that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel or group of channels between or among termination points, regardless of the manner in which such channel or channels are connected, and includes switching capacity, extension lines, stations, and any other associated services that are provided in connection with the use of such channel or channels. A communications channel is a physical or virtual path of communications over which signals are transmitted between or among customer channel termination points (i.e., the location where the customer either inputs or receives the communications).

    N.  “Service address” means either:

    1.   The location of the service user’s communication equipment from which the communication originates or terminates, regardless of where the communication is billed or paid; or

    2.   If the location in subsection (1) of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications service or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use;

    3.   For prepaid telecommunication service, “service address” means the location associated with the service number or, if not known, the point of sale of the services.

    O.  “Service supplier” means any entity or person, including the city, that provides communication service to a user of such service within the city.

    P.   “Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter.

    Q.  “State” means the state of California.

    R.   “Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement” means the multistate agreement commonly known and referred to as the Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement, as it is amended from time to time.

    S.   “Tax administrator” means the finance director, or designee.

    T.   “Telecommunications service” means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that is functionally integrated with “telecommunication services.” “Telecommunications services” include, but are not limited to, the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: ancillary telecommunication services; intrastate, interstate, and international telecommunication services; mobile telecommunications service; prepaid telecommunication service; post-paid telecommunication service; private telecommunication service; paging service; 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission); 900 service (or any other similar numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission for services whereby subscribers who call in to pre-recorded or live service).

    U.  “Video programming” means those programming services commonly provided to subscribers by a “video service supplier” including, but not limited to, basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, origination programming, or any other similar services, regardless of the content of such video programming, or the technology used to deliver such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed.

    V.  “Video services” mean “video programming” and any and all services related to the providing, recording, delivering, use or enjoyment of “video programming” (including origination programming and programming using Internet Protocol, e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video) using one or more channels by a “video service supplier,” regardless of the technology used to deliver, store or provide such services, and regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed, and includes ancillary video services, data services, “telecommunication services,” or interactive communication services that are functionally integrated with “video services.”

    W.  “Video service supplier” means any person, company, or service which provides or sells one or more channels of video programming, or provides or sells the capability to receive one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the provision, use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from a business or residential address in the city, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to, multichannel video programming distributors (as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)); open video systems (OVS) suppliers; and suppliers of cable television; master antenna television; satellite master antenna television; multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS); video services using internet protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on demand), direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video services (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.

    X.  “VoIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol)” means the digital process of making and receiving real-time voice transmissions over any Internet Protocol network.

    Y.  “800 service” means a “telecommunications service” that allows a caller to dial a toll-free number without incurring a charge for the call. The service is typically marketed under the name “800,” “855,” “866,” “877,” and “888” toll-free calling, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission.

    Z.   “900 service” means an inbound toll “telecommunications service” purchased by a subscriber that allows the subscriber’s customers to call in to the subscriber’s prerecorded announcement or live service. “900 service” does not include the charge for collection services provided by the seller of the “telecommunications services” to the subscriber, or service or product sold by the subscriber to the subscriber’s customer. The service is typically marketed under the name “900” service, and any subsequent numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.030 Constitutional, statutory, and other exemptions.
    A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person or service when the imposition of such tax upon such person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state.

    B.   Any service user that is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all communication service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in communication service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new communication service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of a communication users’ tax collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance.

    The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.50.150 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city manager pursuant to Section 3.50.150 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    C.   The city council may, by resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax for a specified period of time. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.040 Communication users’ tax.
    A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person in the city using communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four and one-half percent of the charges made for such services and shall be collected from the service user by the communication services supplier or its billing agent. There is a rebuttable presumption that communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. There is also a rebuttable presumption that prepaid telecommunication services sold within the city are used, in whole or in part, within the city and are therefore subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address of the service user shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the communication services.

    B.   “Mobile telecommunications service” shall be sourced in accordance with the sourcing rules set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124). The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, sourcing rules for the taxation of other communication services, including, but not limited to, post-paid communication services, prepaid communication services, VoIP and private communication services, provided that such rules are based upon custom and common practice that further administrative efficiency and minimize multijurisdictional taxation (e.g., Streamlined Sales and Use Tax Agreement).

    C.   The tax administrator may issue and disseminate to communication service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this chapter, an administrative ruling identifying those communication services, or charges therefor, that are subject to or not subject to the tax of subsection (A) of this section.

    D.  As used in this section, the term “telecommunication services” shall include, but is not limited to, charges for: connection, reconnection, termination, movement, or change of telecommunication services; late payment fees; detailed billing; central office and custom calling features (including, but not limited to, call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling); voice mail and other messaging services; directory assistance; access and line charges; universal service charges; regulatory fees and surcharges, and other state and federal cost recovery fees and surcharges; local number portability charges; and text and instant messaging. “Telecommunication services” shall not include digital downloads that are not “ancillary telecommunication services,” such as music, ringtones, games, and similar digital products.

    E.   Charges for communication services (video) shall include, but are not limited to, charges for the following:

    1.   Regulatory fees and surcharges, franchise fees and access fees (PEG);

    2.   Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;

    3.   Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;

    4.   Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

    5.   Video programming and video services;

    6.   Ancillary video services (e.g., electronic program guide services, recording functions, search functions, or other interactive services or communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of video services);

    7.   Equipment leases (e.g., remote, recording or search devices, converters, remote devices); and,

    8.   Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services.

    F.   To prevent actual multijurisdictional taxation of communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such communication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

    G.  The tax on communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.050 Bundling taxable items with nontaxable items.
    If any nontaxable charges are combined with and not separately stated from taxable service charges on the customer bill or invoice of a service supplier, the combined charge is subject to tax unless the service supplier identifies, by reasonable and verifiable standards, the portions of the combined charge that are nontaxable and taxable through the service supplier’s books and records kept in the regular course of business, and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation and apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. If the service supplier offers a combination of taxable and nontaxable services, and the charges are separately stated, then for taxation purposes, the values assigned the taxable and nontaxable services shall be based on its books and records kept in the regular course of business and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and not created and maintained for tax purposes. The service supplier has the burden of proving the proper valuation of the taxable and nontaxable services. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.060 Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
    For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the communication users’ tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any communication service (including VoIP) used by a person with a service address in the city, which service is capable of terminating a call to another person on the general telephone network, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. A service supplier shall be deemed to have sufficient activity in the city for tax collection and remittance purposes if its activities include, but are not limited to, any of the following: maintains or has within the city, directly or through an agent or subsidiary, a place of business of any nature; solicits business in the city by employees, independent contractors, resellers, agents or other representatives; solicits business in the city on a continuous, regular, seasonal or systematic basis by means of advertising that is broadcast or relayed from a transmitter with the city or distributed from a location with the city; or advertises in newspapers or other periodicals printed and published within the city or through materials distributed in the city by means other than the United States mail; or if there are activities performed in the city on behalf of the service supplier that are significantly associated with the service supplier’s ability to establish and maintain a market in the city for the provision of communication services that are subject to a tax under this chapter. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.070 Duty to collect—Procedures.
    A.  Collection by Service Suppliers. The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

    1.   The tax shall be collected by service suppliers insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. In those cases where a service user has notified the service supplier of refusal to pay the tax imposed on said charges, Section 3.50.110 shall apply.

    2.   The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a service user receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period.

    B.   Filing Return and Payment. Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator, on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he or she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and his or her agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information that is exempt from the disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.080 Collection penalties—Service suppliers.
    A.  Taxes collected from a service user are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging moneys between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on the following business day.

    B.   If the person required to collect and/or remit the communication users’ tax fails to collect the tax (by failing to properly assess the tax on one or more services or charges on the customer’s billing) or fails to remit the tax collected on or before the due date, the tax administrator shall attach a penalty for such delinquencies or deficiencies at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax that is delinquent or deficient in the remittance, and interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

    C.   The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

    D.  For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.

    E.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax administrator may, in his or her discretion, modify the due dates of this chapter to be consistent with any uniform standards or procedures that are mutually agreed upon by other public agencies imposing a utility users tax, or otherwise legally established, to create a central payment location or mechanism. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.090 Actions to collect.
    Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees. Any tax required to be collected by a service supplier or owed by a service user is an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). Service suppliers who seek to collect charges for service in bankruptcy proceedings shall also include in any such claim the amount of taxes due the city for those services, unless the tax administrator determines that such duty is in conflict with any federal or state law, rule, or regulation or that such action would be administratively impractical. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.100 Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors.
    A.  The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to pay or collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to pay, collect, and/or remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

    B.   The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within fourteen calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter.

    C.   If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city. If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be scheduled within thirty days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

    D.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.50.150 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city manager pursuant to Section 3.50.150 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    E.   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen percent on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this chapter shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection.

    F.   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.110 Administrative remedy—Nonpaying service users.
    A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. To the extent the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter. Nothing herein shall require that the tax administrator institute proceedings under this section if, in the opinion of the tax administrator, the cost of collection or enforcement likely outweighs the tax benefit.

    B.   In addition to the tax owed, the service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of 75/100ths percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

    C.   The tax administrator shall notify the non-paying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

    D.  If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within thirty days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.120 Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.
    A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations consistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. The administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax; revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax, except as allowed by California Government Code Section 53750(h)(2). A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office. To the extent that the tax administrator determines that the tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time from any particular service supplier or service user, that determination shall be considered an exercise of the tax administrator’s discretion to settle disputes and shall not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 or otherwise. The tax administrator is not authorized to amend the city’s methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750 and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the communication users’ tax in full as a result of promulgating administrative rulings or entering into agreements.

    C.   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (1) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter; or (2) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and are voidable by the tax administrator or the city at any time.

    D.  The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.50.100 of this chapter for all taxes (and applicable penalties and interest) owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

    E.   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period of not to exceed forty-five days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of 75/100ths percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

    F.   The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

    G.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, or require prospective application of the tax, if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.130 Records.
    A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

    B.   The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection.

    C.   The tax administrator is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7.

    D.  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (2) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.

    E.   If any person subject to recordkeeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars on such person for each day following: (1) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (2) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.140 Refunds.
    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, it may be refunded as provided in this section as follows:

    A.  Written Claim for Refund. The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter from a person or service supplier, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless each member of the class has submitted a written claim under penalty of perjury as provided by this subsection.

    B.   Compliance with Claims Act. The filing of a written claim pursuant to Government Code Section 935 is a prerequisite to any suit thereon. Any action brought against the city pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of Government Code Sections 945.6 and 946. The tax administrator, or the city council where the claim is in excess of five thousand dollars, shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the tax administrator/city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. The tax administrator shall give notice of the action in a form which substantially complies with that set forth in Government Code Section 913.

    C.   Refunds to Service Suppliers. Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection (A) of this section, the tax administrator may, at his or her discretion, give written permission to a service supplier, who has collected and remitted any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, to claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due the city upon a subsequent monthly return(s) to the tax administrator, provided that: (1) such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous collection of said tax; (2) the tax administrator is satisfied that the underlying basis and amount of such credit has been reasonably established; and (3) in the case of an overpayment by a service user to the service supplier that has been remitted to the city, the tax administrator has received proof, to his or her satisfaction, that the overpayment has been refunded by the service supplier to the service user in an amount equal to the requested credit. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.150 Appeals.
    A.  The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.50.140 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.50.140 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Government Code Section 935(b).) Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

    B.   If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.50.140 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator; he or she may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

    C.   The matter shall be scheduled for hearing before an independent hearing officer selected by the city manager, no more than thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

    D.  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.

    E.   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.160 No injunction/writ of mandate.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.170 Notice of changes to ordinance.
    If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.180 Effect of state and federal reference/authorization.
    Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended from time to time, provided that such reference to a statute herein shall not include any subsequent amendment thereto, or to any subsequent change of interpretation thereto by a state or federal agency or court of law with the duty to interpret such law, to the extent that such amendment or change of interpretation would require voter approval under California law, or to the extent that such change would result in a tax decrease (as a result of excluding all or a part of a communication service, or charge therefor, from taxation). Only to the extent voter approval would otherwise be required or a tax decrease would result, the prior version of the statute (or interpretation) shall remain applicable; for any application or situation that would not require voter approval or result in a decrease of a tax, provisions of the amended statute (or new interpretation) shall be applicable to the maximum possible extent.

    To the extent that the city’s authorization to collect or impose any tax imposed under this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.190 Independent audit of tax collection, exemption, remittance and expenditure.
    The city shall annually verify that the taxes owed under this chapter have been properly applied, exempted, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter, and properly expended according to applicable municipal law. The annual verification shall be performed by a qualified independent third party and the review shall employ reasonable, cost-effective steps to assure compliance, including the use of sampling audits. The verification shall not be required of tax remitters where the cost of the verification may exceed the tax revenues to be reviewed. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

 

3.50.200 Interaction with prior tax.
    A.  Satisfaction of Tax Obligation by Service Users. Any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.50.040 of this chapter with respect to any charge for a communication service shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Sections 3.52.020 and 3.52.060 of this code with respect to that charge. Likewise, prior to May 1, 2010, any person who pays the tax levied pursuant to Sections 3.52.020 and 3.52.060 of this code with respect to any charge for a service subject to taxation pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to have satisfied his or her obligation to pay the tax levied pursuant to Section 3.50.040 of this chapter with respect to that charge. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the imposition of multiple taxes upon a single utility charge during the transition period from the prior telephone users tax and cable television users tax to the new communication users’ tax (which transition period ends May 1, 2010) and to permit communications service providers, during that transition period, to satisfy their collection obligations by collecting either tax.

    B.   Collection of Tax by Service Providers. Service providers shall begin to collect the tax imposed by this chapter as soon as feasible after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but in no event later than permitted by Section 799 of the California Public Utilities Code.

    C.   Judicial Determinations. In the event that a final court order should determine that the election enacting the ordinance codified in this chapter is invalid for whatever reason, or that any tax imposed under this chapter is invalid in whole or in part, then the taxes imposed under Sections 3.52.020 and 3.52.060 (unless repealed) shall automatically continue to apply with respect to any service for which the tax levied pursuant to this chapter has been determined to be invalid. Such automatic continuation shall be effective beginning as of the first date of service (or billing date) for which the tax imposed by this chapter is invalid. However, in the event of an invalidation, any tax (other than a tax that is ordered refunded by the court or is otherwise refunded by the city) paid by a person with respect to a service and calculated pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to satisfy the tax imposed under Sections 3.52.020 and 3.52.060 on that service, so long as the tax is paid with respect to a service provided no later than six months subsequent to the date on which the final court order is published. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 3.52 UTILITY USERS TAX
Note
*   Prior ordinance history: Ords. 820, 844, 845 and 984.

 

3.52.010 Definitions.
    Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

    A.  “Billing address” shall mean the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

    B.   “Charges for mobile telecommunications services” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Sections 116 and 124) and the regulations thereunder.

    C.   “City” shall mean the city of Pico Rivera.

    D.  “City manager” means the city manager of the city, or his or her authorized representative.

    E.   “Cogenerator” shall mean any corporation or person employing cogeneration (as defined in Section 218.5 of the California Public Utilities Code) for producing power for the generation of electricity for self-use or sale to others from a qualified cogeneration facility (as defined in the Federal Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 and regulations thereunder).

    F.   “Electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” “water corporation,” “telephone corporation” and “video provider” shall have the same meanings as defined in California Public Utilities Code Sections 218, 222, 241, and 234 respectively, and Business and Professions Code Section 22770(b), except “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation” and “water corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality, public agency, broker/marketer or person engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas or water to a service user.

    G.  “Exempt wholesale generator” shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Federal Power Act (15 U.S.C.S. 79z-5a) and regulations thereunder.

    H.  “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor.

    I.    “Mobile telecommunications service” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 124) and the regulations thereunder.

    J.    “Month” shall mean a calendar month.

    K.  “Nonutility supplier” shall mean:

    1.   A service supplier, other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which generates electricity for sale to others, and shall include, but is not limited to, any publicly owned electric utility, investor-owned utility, cogenerator, municipal utility district, federal power marketing authority, exempt wholesale generator, electric rural cooperative, or other supplier or seller of electricity;

    2.   An electric service provider (ESP), electricity broker, marketer, aggregator, pool operator, or other electricity supplier other than a supplier of electric distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies electricity or supplemental services to electricity users within the city; and

    3.   A gas service supplier, aggregator, marketer, or broker, other than a supplier of gas distribution services to all or a significant portion of the city, which sells or supplies gas to users within the city.

    L.   “Person” shall mean, without limitation, any natural individual, firm, trust, common law trust, estate, partnership of any kind, association, syndicate, club, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, corporation (including foreign, domestic, and nonprofit), receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.

    M.  “Place of primary use” has the same meaning and usage as set forth in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act (4 U.S.C. Section 116 et seq.) and the regulations thereunder.

    N.  “Service address” means the residential street address or the business street address of the service user. For a telephone communication service user, “service address” means either:

    1.   The location of the telecommunications equipment to which a service user’s call is charged and from which the call originates or terminates, regardless of where the call is billed or paid; or

    2.   If the location in subsection 1 of this definition is unknown (e.g., mobile telecommunications or VoIP service), the service address means the location of the service user’s place of primary use.

    O.  “Service supplier” shall mean any entity or person, including the city, that provides telephone communication, electric, or gas service to a user of such services within the city, and includes an entity or person required to collect, or self-collect under Section 3.52.030 of this chapter, and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter, including its billing agent in the case of electric, gas, and video services.

    P.   “Service user” shall mean a person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter.

    Q.  “State” shall mean the state of California.

    R.   “Tax administrator” shall mean the financial director of the city.

    S.   “Telephone communication services” shall include any service that is capable of transmitting telephonic quality communications with the general telephone public [including the use of internet protocol (IP) or other protocol], whether provided by analog, digital, electronic, radio or similar means through “interconnected service” with the “public switched network” [as these terms are commonly used in the Federal Communications Act and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission - see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)] or over digital networks by which communications with the general telephone public is available (e.g., voice using internet protocol or VoIP), and whether such transmission occurs by wire, typewriter, cable, cable modem or digital subscriber line (DSL), internet, fiber-optic, WiFi, light wave, laser, microwave, switching facilities, satellite, radio wave [including, but not limited to, mobile telecommunications service, cellular service, commercial mobile service and commercial mobile radio service (see 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)(1) and Part 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations), personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), and other similar services regardless of radio spectrum used], or any other similar facilities and whether charges for such services are based on time, distance, or on any other basis. “Telecommunication services” shall also include, but is not limited to, “communication services” as defined in Sections 4251 and 4252 of the Internal Revenue Code, and the regulations thereunder.

    T.   “Video service supplier” shall mean any person, company, or service which provides one or more channels of video programming, including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming, to or from an address in the city, including to or from a business, home, condominium, or apartment, where some fee is paid, whether directly or included in dues or rental charges for that service, whether or not public rights-of-way are utilized in the delivery of the video programming or communications. A “video service supplier” includes, but is not limited to: a multichannel video programming distributor [as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 522(13)]; a supplier of: open video systems (OVS), cable television, master antenna television, satellite master antenna television, multichannel multipoint distribution services (MMDS), video services using internet protocol (e.g., IP-TV and IP-Video, which provide, among other things, broadcasting and video on demand), or direct broadcast satellite to the extent federal law permits taxation of its video services, now or in the future; and other suppliers of video programming or communications (including two-way communications), whatever their technology.

    U.  “Video services” shall mean any and all services related to the providing of video programming (including origination programming), including any communications that are ancillary, necessary or common to the use or enjoyment of the video programming, regardless of the content of such video programming or communications, or the technology used to deliver such services, and shall include the leasing of channel access. “Video services” shall not include services for which a tax is paid under Section 3.52.020. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.020 Telephone users tax.
    A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than a telephone corporation, who uses telephone communication services in the city, including intrastate, interstate, and international telephone communication services. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of all charges made for such telephone communication services. There is a rebuttable presumption that telephone communication services, which are billed to a billing or service address in the city, are used, in whole or in part, within the city’s boundaries, and such services are subject to taxation under this chapter. If the billing address of the service user is different from the service address, the service address shall be used for purposes of imposing the tax. Charges for mobile telecommunications services are subject to taxation under this chapter if the customer’s place of primary use is in the city, regardless of where the mobile telecommunications service may originate, terminate, or pass through. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the tax shall not apply to any individual who qualifies, and has been accepted, for “lifeline telephone service” as such criteria is established by the California Public Utilities Commission pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 873 et seq. In the event that said “lifeline telephone service” is repealed or otherwise ceases to exist in a substantially similar form, the exemption granted under this subsection shall automatically terminate.

    B.   As used in this section, the term “telephone communication services” shall not include “private mobile radio service,” as defined in Part 20 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or “private mobile service,” as defined in 47 U.S.C.A. Section 332(d)(3), which is not interconnected with the public switched network or is not provided over digital networks by which communications with a substantial portion of the public is available (e.g., voice using internet protocol or VoIP). The tax imposed under subsection A of this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using telecommunication services to the extent that, pursuant to Sections 4252(d) and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code, the amounts paid for such communication services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code. In the event that the federal excise tax on “communication services” as provided in Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code is subsequently repealed, any reference in this section and in Section 3.52.010(S) to such law, including any related federal regulations, private letter rulings, case law, and other opinions interpreting these sections, shall refer to that body of law that existed immediately prior to the date of repeal, as well as to any final published decision by the U.S. Supreme Court or by a federal court in the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals interpreting such federal excise tax law.

    C.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telephone communication services. The term “charges” shall also include charges to a service user by a hotel or motel for telephone communication services used in the city when such charges are incidental to the right of occupancy in such hotel or motel. The collection of the tax from the service user shall be the responsibility of the hotel or motel owner. “Charges” shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting coins in coin-operated telephones except that where such coin-operated telephone service is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under such guarantee plus any fixed monthly or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for computing the amount of the tax due.

    D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may issue and disseminate to telecommunication service suppliers which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this section, an administrative ruling which identifies those telecommunication services that are subject to the tax of subsection A of this section and identifies the sourcing of such services for tax administration purposes. This administrative ruling shall not impose a new tax, revise an existing tax methodology as stated in this section, or increase an existing tax. An administrative ruling shall not constitute a new tax or an increase in an existing tax if such administrative ruling is:

    1.   Consistent with the existing ordinance language; and

    2.   Merely reflects a change in, clarification to, or new rendition of:

    a.   The definition, interpretation, or application of substantial nexus by a court of competent jurisdiction or by preemptive state or federal law, for purposes of taxation,

    b.   The sourcing of taxable transactions based upon industry custom and practice, which furthers administrative efficiency and minimizes multi-jurisdictional taxation, or

    c.   The definition, interpretation, or application of the federal excise tax rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to “communications services” (Sections 4251, 4252 and 4253 of the Internal Revenue Code) by the Internal Revenue Service, or by a state or local agency that assumes an interpretative role of those rules, regulations, and laws in the event that the federal excise tax on telecommunications is repealed.

    E.   To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telephone communication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telephone communication service, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city, provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

    F.   The tax on telephone communication services imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.030 Electricity users tax.
    A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than an electric corporation, using electricity in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at a rate of four and one-half percent of the charges made for such electricity, and for any supplemental services or other associated activities directly related and/or necessary for the provision of electricity to the end-user, which are provided by a service supplier or nonutility supplier to a service user. The tax shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or nonutility service supplier, or its billing agent.

    B.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

    1.   Energy charges;

    2.   Distribution and transmission charges;

    3.   Metering charges;

    4.   Standby, reserves, firming, ramping, voltage support, regulation, emergency, or other similar minimum charges for supplemental services to an electric service user that produces electricity for self-use and is subject to Section 3.52.050 of this chapter;

    5.   Customer charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, demand charges, fuel or other cost adjustments, power exchange charges, independent system operator (ISO) charges, stranded investment or competitive transition charges (CTC), public purpose program charges, nuclear decommissioning charges, trust transfer amounts (bond financing charges), franchise fee, franchise surcharge, annual and monthly charges, and other charges, fees and surcharges which are necessary to or common for the receipt, use and enjoyment of electric service; and

    6.   Charges, fees, or surcharges for electricity services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission, or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

    C.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the electricity or services related to the provision of such electricity.

    D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the electric service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of electric retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such electric service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such electric service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of electric service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for electric service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

    E.   As used in this section, the term “using electricity” shall not include electricity used and consumed by an electric service supplier in the conduct of its business as an electric public utility; nor shall the term include the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility at a point within the city for resale.

    F.   The tax on electricity provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier or an electric utility not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.52.050. All other taxes on charges for electricity imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the electric service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of the tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 1060 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.040 Gas users tax.
    A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than a gas corporation, using gas in the city, which is transported through a pipeline distribution system. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of four and one-half percent of the charges made for such gas, including all services related to the storage, transportation, and delivery of such gas.

    B.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items for gas service that are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

    1.   The commodity charges for purchased gas, or the cost of gas owned by the service user (including the actual costs attributed to drilling, production, lifting, storage, gathering, trunkline, pipeline, and other operating costs associated with the production and delivery of such gas), which is delivered through a gas pipeline distribution system;

    2.   Gas transportation charges (including interstate charges to the extent not included in commodity charges);

    3.   Storage charges; provided, however, that the service supplier shall not be required to apply the tax to any charges for gas storage services when the service supplier cannot, as a practical matter, determine the jurisdiction where such stored gas is ultimately used; but it shall be the obligation of the service user to self-collect the amount of tax not applied to any charge for gas storage by the service supplier and to remit the tax to the appropriate jurisdiction;

    4.   Capacity or demand charges, service establishment or reestablishment charges, transition charges, customer charges, administrative charges, marketing fees, broker’s fees, minimum charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charges which are necessary or common to the receipt, use and enjoyment of gas service; and

    5.   Charges, fees, or surcharges for gas services or programs, which are mandated by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, whether or not such charges, fees, or surcharges appear on a bundled or line item basis on the customer billing.

    C.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the gas or services related to the delivery of such gas.

    D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the gas service suppliers to identify the various unbundled billing components of gas retail service that they commonly provide to residential and commercial/industrial customers in the city, and the charges therefor, including those items that are mandated by state or federal regulatory agencies as a condition of providing such gas service. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such gas service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components and items which are: (1) necessary or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of gas service; or (2) currently, or historically have been, included in a single or bundled rate for gas service by a local distribution company to a class of retail customers. Charges for such components and items shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

    E.   The following shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed:

    1.   Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through a pipeline distribution system;

    2.   Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, utilizing natural gas.

    F.   The tax on gas provided by self-production or by a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be collected and remitted in the manner set forth in Section 3.52.050 of this chapter. All other taxes on charges for gas imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the gas service supplier or its billing agent. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month; or, at the option of the person required to collect or remit the tax, such person shall remit an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month or upon the payment pattern of the service user, which must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due. (Ord. 1060 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.050 Collection of tax from service users receiving direct purchase of gas or electricity.
    A.  Any service user subject to the tax imposed by Section 3.52.030 or 3.52.040, hereof, which produces gas or electricity for self-use, or which receives gas or electricity directly from a nonutility supplier not under the jurisdiction of this chapter, or which otherwise is not having the full tax due on the use of gas or electricity in the city that is directly billed and collected by the service supplier or its billing agent, shall report said fact to the tax administrator and shall remit the tax due directly to the tax administrator within thirty days of such use. In lieu of paying said actual tax, the service user may, at its option, remit to the tax administrator within thirty days of such use an estimated amount of tax measured by the tax billed in the previous month, or upon the pattern payment of similar customers of the service supplier using similar amounts of gas or electricity, provided that the service user shall submit an adjusted payment or request for credit, as appropriate, within sixty days following each calendar quarter. The credit, if approved by the tax administrator, may be applied against any subsequent tax bill that becomes due.

    B.   The tax administrator may require said service user to identify its nonutility supplier and provide, subject to audit, invoices, books of account, or other satisfactory evidence documenting the quantity of gas or electricity used and the cost or price thereof. If the service user is unable to provide such satisfactory evidence, or, if the administrative cost of calculating the tax, in the opinion of the city, is excessive, the city may determine the tax by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charges the service user would have incurred if the gas or electricity used had been provided by the service supplier, which is the primary supplier of gas or electricity within the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.060 Video users tax.
    A.  There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person, other than a video provider, using video services in the city from a video service supplier. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent of the charges made for such video services, and shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, or its billing agent.

    B.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall apply to all services, components and items that are: (i) necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of video service; or (ii) currently are or historically have been included in a single or bundled rate for video service by a local video service supplier to a class of retail customers. The term “charges” shall include, but is not limited to, the following charges:

    1.   Franchise fees and access fees (PEG), whether designated on the customer’s bill or not;

    2.   Initial installation of equipment necessary for provision and receipt of video services;

    3.   Late fees, collection fees, bad debt recoveries, and return check fees;

    4.   Activation fees, reactivation fees, and reconnection fees;

    5.   All programming services (e.g., basic services, premium services, audio services, video games, pay-per-view services, video on demand, and electronic program guide services);

    6.   Equipment leases (e.g., converters, remote devices);

    7.   Service calls, service protection plans, name changes, changes of services, and special services (e.g., no promotional mail); and

    8.   The leasing of channel access.

    C.   As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the video services.

    D.  The tax administrator, from time to time, may survey the video service suppliers in the city to identify the various components of video service that are being offered to customers within the city, and the charges therefor. The tax administrator, thereafter, may issue and disseminate to such video service suppliers an administrative ruling identifying those components: (i) that are necessary for or common to the receipt, use or enjoyment of video service; or (ii) which currently are or historically have been included in a bundled rate for video service by a local distribution company. Charges for such components shall be subject to the tax of subsection A of this section.

    E.   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the service user by the video service supplier, its billing agent, or a reseller of such services. In the case of video service, the service user shall be deemed to be the purchaser of the bulk video service (e.g., an apartment owner), unless such service is resold to individual users, in which case the service user shall be the ultimate purchaser of the video service. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth day of the following month. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.070 Effect of bundling nontaxable with taxable items.
    Except as otherwise provided by federal or state law, if one or more nontaxable items are bundled or billed together with one or more taxable items (as provided for by this chapter) under a single charge on a customer’s bill, the entire single charge shall be deemed taxable. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.080 Substantial nexus/minimum contacts.
    For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this section, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the utility users tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.090 Constitutional and statutory exemptions.
    A.  The taxes imposed by this chapter shall not apply to:

    1.   Any person or service if imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of a federal or state statute or the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California; or

    2.   Any person or entity that has applied, qualified for, and continues to qualify for any one of the utility discount programs pursuant to the regulations of their telephone, electricity service, or natural gas supplier, shall be exempt from all utility taxes imposed by this chapter;

    3.   Any school district, governmental agency or water corporation shall be exempt from all utility taxes imposed by this chapter.

    B.   Any person who is exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to a service user that is a state or federal agency or subdivision with a commonly recognized name, or is a service user of telephone communication services that has received a federal excise tax exemption certificate for such service. Said application shall be made upon a form approved by the tax administrator and shall state those facts, declared under penalty of perjury, which qualify the applicant for an exemption, and shall include the names of all utility service suppliers serving that service user. If deemed exempt by the tax administrator, such service user shall give the tax administrator timely written notice of any change in utility service suppliers so that the tax administrator can properly notify the new utility service supplier of the service user’s tax exempt status. A service user that fails to comply with this section shall not be entitled to a refund of utility users taxes collected and remitted to the tax administrator from such service user as a result of such noncompliance. Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier or nonutility supplier, or their billing agents, shall provide a list of names and addresses of those customers which, according to their billing records, are deemed exempt from the utility users tax. With respect to a service user of telephone communication services, a service supplier of such telephone communication services doing business in the city shall, upon request of the tax administrator, provide a copy of the federal exemption certificate for each exempt customer within the city that is served by such service supplier.

    C.   The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.52.200 of this chapter. Filing an application with the tax administrator and appeal to the city manager pursuant to Section 3.52.200 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.100 Duty to collect—Procedures.
    The duty of service suppliers to collect and remit the taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed as follows:

    A.  The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as, and along with, the collection of the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practice of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the charge and tax which was accrued for the billing period, a proportionate share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid. The tax administrator shall have the power to make an assessment for delinquent taxes as provided for in Section 3.52.150 of this chapter thereby relieving the service supplier from the obligation to collect these delinquent taxes.

    B.   The duty of a service supplier to collect the tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing period. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.120 Filing return and payment.
    Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return to the tax administrator, on forms approved by the tax administrator on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax collected shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such additional information as he/she deems necessary to determine if the tax is being levied, collected, and remitted in accordance with this chapter. Returns are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to Revenue and Tax Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and its agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information exempt from disclosure provisions of the Public Records Act. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.130 Collection penalties—Service suppliers or self-collectors.
    A.  Taxes collected from a service user, or self-collected by a service user subject to Section 3.52.050 of this chapter, are delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the due date. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return must be received by the tax administrator on or before the first regular working day following the weekend or legal holiday. A direct deposit, including electronic fund transfers and other similar methods of electronically exchanging monies between financial accounts, made by a service supplier in satisfaction of its obligations under this subsection shall be considered timely if the transfer is initiated on or before the due date, and the transfer settles into the city’s account on or before the following business day.

    B.   If a service supplier, or a service user subject to Section 3.52.050 of this chapter, fails to remit any tax collected, on or before the due date, said person shall pay a penalty for such delinquencies at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax that is delinquent in the remittance, and shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid.

    C.   The tax administrator shall have the power to impose additional penalties upon persons required to collect and/or remit taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for fraud or gross negligence in reporting or remitting at the rate of fifteen percent of the amount of the tax collected and/or required to be remitted, or as recomputed by the tax administrator.

    D.  For collection purposes only, every penalty imposed and such interest that is accrued under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.140 Deficiency determination and assessment—Tax application errors.
    A.  The tax administrator shall make a deficiency determination if he or she determines that any person required to collect or self-collect taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has failed to collect and remit the proper amount of tax by improperly or failing to apply the tax to one or more taxable services or charges.

    B.   The tax administrator shall mail a notice of such deficiency determination to the person required to pay or remit the tax, which notice shall refer briefly to the amount of the taxes owed, plus interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax from the date on which the tax should have been received by the city. Within fourteen calendar days after the date of service of such notice, the person may request in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the matter. If the person fails to request a hearing within the prescribed time period, the amount of the deficiency determination shall become a final assessment, and shall immediately be due and owing to the city.

    C.   If the person requests a hearing, the tax administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing, which shall be held within thirty days after receipt of the written request for hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be mailed by the tax administrator to such person at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing, and, if the tax administrator desires said person to produce specific records at such hearing, such notice may designate the records requested to be produced.

    D.  At the time fixed for the hearing, the tax administrator shall hear all relevant testimony and evidence, including that of any other interested parties. At the discretion of the tax administrator, the hearing may be continued from time to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence. Within a reasonable time following the conclusion of the hearing, the tax administrator shall issue a final assessment (or nonassessment), thereafter, by confirming, modifying or rejecting the original deficiency determination, and shall mail a copy of such final assessment to person owing the tax. The decision of the tax administrator may be appealed pursuant to Section 3.52.200 of this chapter. Filing a request for a hearing with the tax administrator and appeal to the city manager pursuant to Section 3.52.200 of this chapter is a prerequisite to a suit thereon.

    E.   Payment of the final assessment shall become delinquent if not received by the tax administrator on or before the thirtieth day following the date of receipt of the notice of final assessment. The penalty for delinquency shall be fifteen percent on the total amount of the assessment, along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date of delinquency, until paid. The applicable statute of limitations regarding a claim by the city seeking payment of a tax assessed under this section shall commence from the date of delinquency as provided in this subsection.

    F.   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.150 Administrative remedy—Nonpaying service users.
    A.  Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has withheld the full amount of the tax owed by the service user from the amounts remitted to a person required to collect the tax, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interests of the city, he or she may relieve such person of the obligation to collect the taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specific billing periods. Whenever the service user has failed to pay the amount of tax owed for a period of two or more billing periods, the service supplier shall be relieved of the obligation to collect taxes due. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed under the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   In addition to the tax owed, the nonpaying service user shall pay a delinquency penalty at the rate of fifteen percent of the total tax that is owed, and shall pay interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the due date, until paid.

    C.   The tax administrator shall notify the nonpaying service user that the tax administrator has assumed the responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes, including penalties and interest. The notice shall be served on the service user by personal delivery or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax; or, should the service user have a change of address, to his or her last known address.

    D.  If the service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within thirty days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her or her, the tax administrator may impose an additional penalty of fifteen percent of the amount of the total tax that is owed. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.160 Actions to collect.
    Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including penalties and interest as provided for in this chapter, along with any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney’s fees.

    In the event that a service user or service supplier owing a tax under this chapter files bankruptcy, then such debt to the city shall be deemed an unsecured priority excise tax obligation under 11 U.S.C.A. Section 507(a)(8)(C). (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.170 Additional powers and duties of the tax administrator.
    A.  The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is hereby directed, to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   The tax administrator may adopt administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of interpreting, clarifying, carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such administrative rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

    C.   Upon a proper showing of good cause, the tax administrator may make administrative agreements, with appropriate conditions, to vary from the strict requirements of this chapter and thereby: (i) conform to the billing procedures of a particular service supplier (or service user subject to Section 3.52.050 of this chapter) so long as said agreements result in the collection of the tax in conformance with the intent of this chapter; or (ii) to avoid a hardship where the administrative costs of collection and remittance greatly outweigh the tax benefit. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office, and are subject to cancellation by the tax administrator or the city at any time.

    D.  The tax administrator may conduct an audit, to ensure proper compliance with the requirements of this chapter, of any person required to collect and/or remit a tax pursuant to this chapter. The tax administrator shall notify said person of the initiation of an audit in writing. In the absence of fraud or other intentional misconduct, the audit period of review shall not exceed a period of three years next preceding the date of receipt of the written notice by said person from the tax administrator. Upon completion of the audit, the tax administrator may make a deficiency determination pursuant to Section 3.52.140 of this chapter for all taxes, penalties and interest owed and not paid, as evidenced by information provided by such person to the tax administrator. If said person is unable or unwilling to provide sufficient records to enable the tax administrator to verify compliance with this chapter, the tax administrator is authorized to make a reasonable estimate of the deficiency. Said reasonable estimate shall be entitled to a rebuttable presumption of correctness.

    E.   Upon receipt of a written request of a taxpayer, and for good cause, the tax administrator may extend the time for filing any statement required pursuant to this chapter for a period not to exceed forty-five days, provided that the time for filing the required statement has not already passed when the request is received. No penalty for delinquent payment shall accrue by reason of such extension. Interest shall accrue during said extension at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, prorated for any portion thereof.

    F.   The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from, or a refund of, the tax imposed by this chapter.

    G.  The tax administrator, with the written approval of the city attorney, may compromise a claim pursuant to this chapter where the portion of the claim proposed to be released is less than the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city, and, with the approval of the city attorney and the city council, may compromise such a claim where the portion proposed to be released is equal to or greater than the amount set by separate resolution of the city council relating to the settlement of general liability claims against the city.

    H.  Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, the tax administrator may waive any penalty or interest imposed upon a person required to collect and/or remit for failure to collect the tax imposed by this chapter if the noncollection occurred in good faith. In determining whether the noncollection was in good faith, the tax administrator shall take into consideration industry practice or other precedence. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.180 Records.
    A.  It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he/she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at a reasonable time.

    B.   The city may issue an administrative subpoena to compel a person to deliver, to the tax administrator, copies of all records deemed necessary by the tax administrator to establish compliance with this chapter, including the delivery of records in a common electronic format on readily available media if such records are kept electronically by the person in the usual and ordinary course of business. As an alternative to delivering the subpoenaed records to the tax administrator on or before the due date provided in the administrative subpoena, such person may provide access to such records outside the city on or before the due date, provided that such person shall reimburse the city for all reasonable travel expenses incurred by the city to inspect those records, including travel, lodging, meals, and other similar expenses, but excluding the normal salary or hourly wages of those persons designated by the city to conduct the inspection.

    C.   The tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, is authorized to execute a nondisclosure agreement approved by the city attorney to protect the confidentiality of customer information pursuant to California Revenue and Tax Code Sections 7284.6 and 7284.7. The tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, may request from a person providing transportation services of gas or electricity to service users within the city a list of the names and addresses, and other pertinent information, of its transportation customers within the city pursuant to California Public Utilities Code Section 6354(e).

    D.  If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (i) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (ii) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.

    E.   If any person subject to recordkeeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, or fails to produce the information requested in an administrative subpoena within the time specified, then the tax administrator may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars on such person for each day following: (i) the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access; or (ii) the due date for production of records as set forth in the administrative subpoena. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.190 Refunds.
    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section:

    A.  The tax administrator may refund any tax that has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant or his or her guardian, conservator, executor, or administrator has submitted a written claim to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

    B.   The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the city council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. (See Section 935 of the California Government Code.) The city council shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. It is the intent of the city council that the one year written claim requirement of this subsection be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the commencement of the one-year claim period of this subsection, and which are not otherwise barred by a then applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the tax administrator as provided in this subsection within ninety days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    C.   Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection A of this section, a service supplier that has collected any amount of tax in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter and actually due from a service user (whether due to overpayment or to erroneous or illegal collection of said tax), may refund such amount to the service user, or credit to charges subsequently payable by the service user to the service supplier, and claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the tax administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. The tax administrator shall determine the validity of the service user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.

    D.  Notwithstanding the notice provisions of subsection A of this section, in the event that a service supplier, or a service user subject to Section 3.52.050 of this chapter, remits a tax to city in excess of the amount of tax imposed by this chapter, said service supplier, or service user subject to Section 3.52.050 of this chapter, may claim credit for such overpayment against the amount of tax which is due upon any other monthly returns to the tax administrator, provided such credit is claimed in a return dated no later than one year from the date of overpayment of said tax. The tax administrator shall determine the validity of the service user’s claim of credit, and the underlying basis for such claim.

    E.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly returns. In the event this chapter is repealed, the amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne by the city. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.200 Appeals.
    A.  The provisions of this section apply to any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.52.190 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator. Any person aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.52.190 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator, shall be required to comply with the appeals procedure of this section. Compliance with this section shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. [See Government Code Section 935(6).] Nothing herein shall permit the filing of a claim or action on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers.

    B.   If any person is aggrieved by any decision (other than a decision relating to a refund pursuant to Section 3.52.190 of this chapter), deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator; he or she may appeal to the city manager by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the date of the decision, deficiency determination, assessment, or administrative ruling of the tax administrator which aggrieved the service user or service supplier.

    C.   The matter shall be set for hearing no more than thirty days from the receipt of the appeal. The appellant shall be served with notice of the time and place of the hearing, as well as any relevant materials, at least five calendar days prior to the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon mutual consent. At the time of the hearing, the appealing party, the tax administrator, the city manager, and any other interested person may present such relevant evidence as he or she may have relating to the determination from which the appeal is taken.

    D.  Based upon the submission of such evidence and the review of the city’s files, the city manager shall issue a written notice and order upholding, modifying or reversing the determination from which the appeal is taken. The notice shall be given within fourteen days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall state the reasons for the decision. The notice shall specify that the decision is final and that any petition for judicial review shall be filed within ninety days from the date of the decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. If the city manager fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the fourteen-day period, the claim shall be deemed to have been rejected by the city manager on the fourteenth day.

    E.   All notices under this section may be sent by regular mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed received on the third calendar day following the date of mailing, as established by a proof of mailing. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.210 No injunction/writ of mandate.
    No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.220 Remedies cumulative.
    All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision of law or equity, including but not limited to the California False Claims Act (Government Code Section 12650 et seq.) and the California Unfair Practices Act (Business and Professions Code Section 17070 et seq.), are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.230 Notice of changes to ordinance.
    If a tax under this chapter is added, repealed, increased, reduced, or the tax base is changed, the tax administrator shall follow the notice requirements of California Public Utilities Code Section 799. Prior to the effective date of the ordinance change, the service supplier shall provide the tax administrator with a copy of any written procedures describing the information that the service supplier needs to implement the ordinance change. If the service supplier fails to provide such written instructions, the tax administrator, or his or her agent, shall send, by first class mail, a copy of the ordinance change to all administrators and remitters of the city’s utility users taxes according to the latest payment records of the tax administrator. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.240 Severability.
    If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be invalid, unlawful or unconstitutional, such decision, and the decision not to enforce such, shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid, unlawful or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

 

3.52.250 Penalties.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, or an infraction at the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.260 Future amendment or recodification of cited statute or regulation.
    Unless specifically provided otherwise, any reference to a state or federal statute or regulation in this chapter shall mean such statute as it may be amended or recodified from time to time. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

 

3.52.270 Annual review.
    The city council shall review the tax imposed by this chapter on each anniversary date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or at such earlier time as the council may desire, to determine if the revenues produced by this chapter are necessary for the current and necessary operations of the city. (Ord. 1016 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 3.56 CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
3.56.010 Authority.
    The provisions of this chapter implement the general claim procedures applicable to the city and all local public agencies governed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of Government Code Section 900 et seq. (Ord. 1100 § 1, 2016; Ord. 967 § 1, 2001)

 

3.56.020 Claims required.
    All claims against the city for money or damages governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et. seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1100 § 1, 2016; Ord. 967 § 1, 2001)

 

3.56.025 Special claims procedure.
    Notwithstanding the exemptions set forth in California Government Code Section 905, all claims, except claims by public employees for fees, salaries, wages, mileage, or other expenses and allowances, against the city for damages or money, when a procedure for processing such claims is not otherwise provided by state or local laws, including claims for tax refunds, shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by California Government Code Sections 910 through 915.2, but in no event shall exceed one year. Such claims shall further be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 945.4 relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence of the presentation of claims and action thereon. (Ord. 1100 § 1, 2016)

 

3.56.030 Form of claim.
    All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. (Ord. 967 § 1, 2001)

 

3.56.040 Claim prerequisite to suit.
    In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of Section 2 of this chapter. (Ord. 967 § 1, 2001)

 

3.56.050 Suit.
    Any action brought against the city of Pico Rivera upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city of Pico Rivera shall confirm with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 967 § 1, 2001)

Title 4 FRANCHISES
Division I. General Provisions
Division II. Pipeline Franchises
Division III. Cable System Regulations

Division I. General Provisions
Chapter 4.04 GENERAL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
4.04.010 Franchises—Council and statutory authority.
    A.  The city council shall, pursuant to the provisions of Article XI, Section 19, of the Constitution of the state, Section 32932 of the Government Code, and the provisions of Division 3, Chapters 1 and 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state, and any other provision of the laws of the state pertaining thereto, grant by ordinance a franchise to any person, firm or corporation to furnish the city and its inhabitants with light, water, power, heat, transportation, telephone service, or any other public utility service as provided by law, including closed-circuit television transmission, to use the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist, for the construction and operation of plants, works or equipment necessary or convenient for traversing any portion of the city for the transmitting or conveying of any service elsewhere. The city council, within the limits of the Constitution of the state, shall provide the terms and conditions upon which all of such franchises shall be granted, subject to the provisions of Title 4 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    B.   Whenever any section of this title is in conflict with any provision of the Constitution or the laws of the state in respect to the granting of franchises, those provisions as set forth in the Constitution and the laws and the statutes of the state shall govern to the exclusion of these sections. It is the intention of this title to provide procedural steps, rules and regulations as a supplementary addition to those procedural steps, rules and regulations provided by the State Constitution and law, and it is also the intention of this title to provide procedural steps, rules and regulations in respect to the granting of franchises in those cases where the Constitution of the state and the statutes of the state have given cities power to grant franchises but have not covered by statute the procedural steps for the granting of such franchises. (Prior code § 10000)

 

4.04.020 Grant—Resolution of intention.
    Before any franchise is hereafter granted by the city, and the franchise is not within the provisions of Division 3 of the Public Utilities Code of the state, or the proposed franchise or the public utility service to be franchised thereby is not governed by any other law of the state governing procedure for a franchise, the following procedure shall be followed:

    A.  The city council shall pass a resolution declaring its intention to grant the same, stating the name of the proposed grantee, the character of the franchise, and the terms and conditions upon which it is proposed to be granted. Such resolution shall fix and state further the day, hour and place when and where any persons having any interest therein or any objections to the granting thereof may appear before the city council and be heard thereon. It shall further direct the city clerk to publish or post such resolution at least once within fifteen days of the passage thereof, as required by law for the publication or posting of ordinances of the city.

    B.   The time fixed for such hearing shall not be less than twenty nor more than sixty days after the passage of the resolution.

    C.   At the time set for the hearing, the city council shall proceed to hear and pass upon all protests, and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 10001)

 

4.04.030 Term of franchises.
    A.  Every franchise shall state the term for which it is granted, or shall state that it is for an indeterminate term.

    B.   A franchise grant may be indeterminate, that is to say, that it may provide that it shall endure in full force and effect until the same, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the state, shall be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by its possessor, or until the state or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement, or shall condemn and take, under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of such franchise, and situated within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until the franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance of the terms by the possessor thereof. (Prior code § 10002)

 

4.04.040 Grant—Conditions and acceptance.
    A.  Any franchise granted by the city with respect to any given utility service or other service or facility using public streets, ways, alleys and places within the city, shall be in lieu of all other franchises, rights or privileges owned by the grantee or by any successor of the grantee to any rights under such franchise, for the rendering of such utility service within the limits of the city, as they now or hereafter may exist. The acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate as an abandonment of all franchises, rights and privileges within the limits of the city, as such limits shall at any time exist, in lieu of which such franchise shall be granted.

    B.   Any franchise granted hereunder shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee thereof with the city clerk within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, and when so filed such acceptance shall constitute a written acceptance of the terms and conditions set out in this chapter and the ordinances granting such franchise. (Prior code § 10003)

 

4.04.050 Eminent domain.
    A.  No franchise grant shall in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the city to acquire the property of the grantee thereof, either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or to breach, either for a term or any perpetuity, the city’s right of eminent domain with respect to any public utility.

    B.   Every franchise grant shall reserve to the city the right to purchase the property of such utility. No allowance shall be made for franchise value (other than the actual amount paid to the city at the time of the franchise acquisition), good will, going concern, earning power, increased cost of production, severance damage, or increased value of right-of-way, in fixing the price to be paid by the city for any utility. (Prior code § 10004)

 

4.04.060 Grantee’s duties.
    By its acceptance of any franchise under this chapter, the grantee shall covenant and agree to perform and be bound by each and all of the terms and conditions imposed in the grant or by the procedural ordinance codified in this title, and shall further agree to:

    A.  Comply with all lawful ordinances, rules and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted by the city council governing the construction, maintenance and operation of its plants, works or equipment;

    B.   Pay to the city on demand the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any of the operations of the grantee under such franchise;

    C.   Indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, in such manner as set forth in the grant, from any and all liability for damages approximately resulting from any operations under such franchise;

    D.  Remove and relocate, without expense to the city, any facilities installed, used and maintained under the franchise, if and when made necessary by lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct;

    E.   Pay to the city during the life of the franchise a compensation to be specified in the grant for the privileges and rights granted under the franchise. (Prior code § 10005)

 

4.04.070 Using public ways without franchise prohibited.
    No person, firm or corporation shall use the public streets, ways, alleys and places within the city, as the same now or may hereafter exist, for the construction and operation of plants, works or equipment necessary or convenient for furnishing the city and its inhabitants with light, water, power, heat, transportation, telephone service or other means of communication, or for any public utility service, nor shall any person, firm or corporation use the public streets, ways, alleys and places within the city, as the same now or may hereafter exist, for the construction and operation of plants, works, equipment, poles, lines, pipes or vehicles necessary or convenient for transmitting or conveying any public utility service, including light, water, power, heat, transportation, telephone service or other means of communication, or the laying of gas and water pipes in public streets, without having in existence a valid franchise to do the same, issued pursuant to this title or pursuant to other valid and lawful authority of the state or the county of Los Angeles, pursuant to the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city and the ordinances of the county of Los Angeles. (Prior code § 10006)

Division II. Pipeline Franchises
Chapter 4.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Article I General Requirements
4.08.010 Title for citation.
    Division II of this title shall be known as and may be cited as “The Pipeline Franchise Ordinance.” (Prior code § 10100)

 

4.08.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of Division II of this title, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

    A.  “City” means the city of Pico Rivera, state of California.

    B.   “Council” means the city council of the city of Pico Rivera.

    C.   “Director” means the director of public works of the city.

    D.  “Facilities” or “appurtenances” means all property of the franchisee, including, but not limited to, pipelines, pump stations and service connections with the franchisee’s facilities, whether installed by the franchisee or not, erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained in, upon, over, under, along or across any highway, pursuant to any right or privilege granted by the franchise.

    E.   “Franchisee” or “grantee” means the person to whom the franchise is granted, and any person to whom it lawfully may be assigned.

    F.   “Franchise report period,” in all cases, means the first year after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, or, at the option of the franchisee, any shorter period of time immediately following the date of such ordinance, and each year thereafter, during the life of the franchise.

    G.  “Highway” means any public highway, freeway (except a state freeway), street, road, alley, lane or court, or other public easement, and above and below the same, which now exists or which may hereafter exist in any unincorporated territory of the city and in which the city has the authority to grant a franchise.

    H.  “Main” means any pipeline or conduit laid in, along or approximately parallel with any highway for the collection, transmission or distribution of any substance or commodity.

    I.    “Person” means any individual, person, firm, partnership or corporation.

    J.    “Section” means a section of the ordinance codified in this title, unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned.

    K.  “Service connection” means the wire, pipes or conduits connecting the building or place where the service or commodity supplied by the franchisee is used or delivered, or is made available for use or delivery, with the supply line or supply main in the highway, or with such line or supply main on private property. (Prior code § 10102)

 

4.08.030 Grant conditions and compliance.
    Every franchise hereafter granted by the city to lay or construct from time to time and for the period covered by the franchise to maintain, operate, renew, repair, change the size of, remove or abandon in place pipes and pipelines for the collection, transportation or distribution of oil, petroleum, gas, gasoline, or other hydrocarbon substances, wet gas, chemicals, mud, steam, water, wastewater, or other liquid substances, for any purpose, together with all manholes, valves, appurtenances and service connections necessary or convenient for the operation of such pipes or pipelines, including poles, conduits, wires, cables and other appurtenances and equipment for telegraph or telephone lines, or both, necessary or convenient for the franchisee’s business, in, under, along or across any and all highways, except as otherwise provided in the ordinance granting the franchise, shall be granted upon and be subject to the rules, regulations, restrictions and terms and conditions of Chapter 4.04 of this title and, in addition, to those rules, regulations, restrictions, terms and conditions set forth in the ordinance granting the franchise. In the event the terms and conditions hereof conflict with the terms and conditions of Chapter 4.04, the terms and conditions hereof shall control. (Prior code § 10101)

 

4.08.040 Term of franchise.
    Unless the ordinance granting the franchise provides otherwise, the term of the franchise shall be twenty-five years. (Prior code § 10103)

 

4.08.050 Acceptance of franchise.
    The franchisee shall, within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance granting the franchise, file with the city clerk a written acceptance of the terms and conditions of such ordinance; provided, however, that as to franchises granted to the United States of America, use will constitute acceptance. (Prior code § 10104)

 

4.08.060 Nonexclusive grant.
    The granting of the franchise shall not be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical or similar franchise to any person other than the franchisee. Nothing herein contained shall ever be construed so as to exempt the franchisee from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect, or which may be hereafter adopted, which are not inconsistent with the terms of the franchise. (Prior code § 10105)

 

4.08.070 Insurance requirements.
    A.  On or before commencement of any franchise operations, the franchisee shall obtain or provide satisfactory evidence of having policies of liability and workers’ compensation insurance from companies authorized to transact business in the state, by the State Insurance Commissioner.

    B.   The policy of liability insurance shall:

    1.   Be issued to the franchisee, and name the city, its officers, agents and employees as additional insured;

    2.   Indemnify for all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted pursuant to this franchise by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to:

    a.   Negligent acts or omissions of the franchisee and the agents, servants and employees thereof, committed in the conduct of franchise operations,

    b.   Provide combined single limit liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars, subject to self-insured retention as is normal and prudent in the franchisee’s similar operations,

    c.   Be noncancellable without forty-five days’ written notice thereof directed to the city clerk.

    C.   The policy of workers’ compensation insurance shall:

    1.   Have been previously approved as to substance and form by the State Insurance Commissioner;

    2.   Cover all employees of the franchisee who, in the course of their employment, are to conduct or do work pursuant to the franchise operations;

    3.   Provide for every benefit and payment presently or hereinafter conferred by Division 4 of the Labor Code of the state upon an injured employee, including the vocational rehabilitation and death benefits;

    4.   Provide for every benefit and payment under any obligation of the Federal U.S. Long Shoreman and Harbor Worker Compensation Act, paying particular attention to Public Law 92.572;

    5.   Be noncancellable without thirty days’ written notice thereof directed to the city clerk.

    D.  In lieu of the policy of workers’ compensation insurance required above, the franchisee may substitute and provide a certificate of consent to self-insure, issued by the Director of Industrial Relations of the state.

    E.   The franchisee shall file with the director prior to commencement of any franchise operations, either certified copies of such policies, or a certificate of insurance for each of the required policies executed by the company issuing the policy, certifying that the policy is in force.

    F.   Any franchise operations shall not commence until the franchisee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section, and any such operations shall be suspended during any period that the franchisee fails to maintain such policies in full force and effect. (Prior code § 10106)

 

4.08.080 Performance bond.
    A.  Within five days after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the franchisee shall file and thereafter at all times during the life of the franchise keep on file with the city clerk a corporate surety bond running to the city, in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars, or such other sum as may be specifically provided for in the ordinance granting the franchise, with surety to be approved by the city clerk, conditioned that the franchisee shall well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each condition of the franchise and that in case of any breach of condition of the bond the whole amount of the penal sum shall be deemed to be liquidated damages, and shall be recoverable from the principal and sureties of the bond.

    B.   If the bond is not filed within five days after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, the award of the franchise may be set aside and the ordinance granting the franchise repealed at any time prior to the filing of the bond, and any money paid in consideration for the award of franchise shall be deemed forfeited in the event that the bond, after it has been so filed, shall at any time during the life of the franchise, in the opinion of the city clerk, become insufficient. The franchisee agrees to renew the bond, with sureties to be approved by the city clerk, within ten days after written notice to do so from the city clerk. (Prior code § 10107)

 

4.08.090 Alternates to bond.
    As an alternate to the filing of a bond, the franchisee may deposit with the city clerk and assign to the city savings and loan certificates or shares, or both, in the same amount as required on such bond. (Prior code § 10108)

 

4.08.100 Indemnification of city.
    A.  The franchisee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless from and against any and all loss, damages, liability, claims, suits, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, regardless of the merit or outcome of any such claim or suit, claimed or arising from any negligent or intentional act or omission of the franchisee, its officers, employees, agents or subcontractors, arising from activities or work conducted pursuant to the franchise.

    B.   The franchisee shall indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from and against any and all claims and losses whatsoever, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, accruing or resulting to any and all persons, firms or corporations furnishing or supplying work, services, materials, equipment or supplies in connection with activities or work conducted or performed pursuant to the franchise and arising out of such activities or work, and from any and all claims and losses whatsoever, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, accruing or resulting to any person, firm or corporation for damage, injury or death arising out of the franchisee’s franchise operations. (Ord. 699 § 1, 1985; prior code § 10112)

 

4.08.110 Assignment of franchise.
    A.  The franchisee shall not sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise, or any part thereof, except with the consent of the city clerk. Such sale, transfer, assignment or lease shall be made only by filing with the city clerk a certified copy of the duly executed instrument of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, and a written request for the consent of the city clerk to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease. If such duly executed instrument and such written request is not filed with the city clerk before the expiration of thirty days after the effective date of such sale, transfer, assignment or lease then, upon the expiration of such thirty days, the franchise shall be subject to forfeiture, and the city council may, without notice, by ordinance, repeal the franchise. As a condition to the granting of consent to such sale, transfer, assignment or lease, the city council may impose such additional terms upon the franchise and upon the grantee or assignee which the city council may deem to be in the public interest. Such additional terms and conditions shall be expressed by ordinance.

    B.   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant to the franchisee the right to sell, transfer, assign or lease the franchise, or any part thereof, except in the manner aforesaid. This section applies to any assignment, whether by operation of law, by voluntary act of the franchisee, or otherwise.

    C.   No such consent shall be required to any transfer of the franchise in trust or by way of mortgage or hypothecation with all or a part of the franchisee’s other property for the purpose of securing any indebtedness of the franchisee. (Prior code § 10110)

 

4.08.120 Value of franchise.
    The franchisee agrees that the franchise shall never be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of the cost to the franchisee of the necessary publication and any other sum or sums paid by it to the city for the franchise. (Prior code § 10113)

 

4.08.130 Grant and forfeiture conditions.
    A.  The franchise is granted and shall be held and enjoyed upon each and every condition contained in the ordinance granting the franchise, including such conditions contained herein as are incorporated by reference in the franchise ordinance, and shall ever be strictly construed against the franchisee. Nothing shall pass thereby unless it is granted in plain and unambiguous terms. Any neglect, failure or refusal by the franchisee to comply with any of the conditions of the franchise shall constitute grounds for the suspension or forfeiture thereof. The city council, prior to any suspension or forfeiture of the franchise shall give to the franchisee not less than ten days’ notice in writing of any default thereunder.

    B.   If the franchisee does not, within the noticed period, begin the work of compliance, or after such beginning does not prosecute the work with due diligence to completion, the city council may hold a hearing, at which the franchisee shall have the right to appear and be heard, and thereupon the city council may determine whether such conditions are material and essential to the franchise and whether the franchisee is in default with respect thereto, and may declare the franchise suspended or forfeited. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the franchisee by certified mail not less than five days before the hearing. (Prior code § 10109)

 

4.08.140 Work permit requirements.
    Notwithstanding the granting of a franchise, the franchisee shall not be authorized to do any work under the franchise for which the issuance of a permit is required unless such a permit is issued for such work. The franchisee shall not have an absolute right to the issuance of such a permit. (Prior code § 10111)

 

4.08.150 Severability.
    If any provision of the franchise or the application of the franchise to any person or circumstances is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction or is not in compliance with any requirement of the Public Utilities Commission or any other federal or state agency, the remainder of the franchise, or the application of the franchise to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid or not in compliance shall not be affected thereby. (Prior code § 10114)

 

Article II Provisions for Other Than Oil Pipelines
4.08.160 Report requirements.
    The franchisee shall:

    A.  File with the city finance director, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of the franchise and within three months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, two copies of a report verified by the oath of the franchisee, or by the oath of a duly authorized representative of the franchisee, showing the total gross receipts of the franchisee for the immediately preceding franchise payment period, received or accrued in connection with the furnishing of the commodity or service arising from the use or operation of the franchise, together with such additional data as are necessary, in the opinion of the city finance director, to calculate or verify the calculation of the annual payment required by Section 4.12.040 of this title (or the pro rata amount thereof for the first period if the first period is less than one year). On this report, the franchisee shall also show any change in franchise footage since the last franchise report period, segregating such footage as to new mains laid, old mains abandoned in place, and the footage of mains in territory annexed or incorporated since the last franchise;

    B.   File with the city clerk, within the same franchise report period as provided in subsection A of this section, a report in duplicate, showing the permit number of each permit obtained for the installation of new mains during the immediately preceding franchise report period, together with the length and size of such mains. (Prior code § 10600)

 

4.08.170 Annual payments.
    A.  The franchisee, during the life of the franchise, shall make annual payments to the city, as provided in Sections 4.12.030 and 4.12.040 of this title, within fifteen days after the filing of the report required by Section 4.08.160.

    B.   In the event the amount paid is incorrect in the judgment of the city council, it may order the payment of such additional sum or sums as it may find thereunder, and if not paid, or if paid under protest, the share may be determined by suit. (Prior code § 10601)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.12 FEES AND PAYMENTS
4.12.010 Payments to city required.
    As a consideration for the franchise granted, the franchisee shall pay to the city in lawful money of the United States the fees set out in Sections 4.12.020 through 4.12.050 of this chapter. (Prior code § 10200(part))

 

4.12.020 Granting and renewal fees.
    A.  In the case of an initial grant of franchise, or on franchises which extend, renew or continue in existence previously granted franchises, the franchisee shall pay to the city a granting fee of three thousand dollars within thirty days after the city council adopts the ordinance granting the franchise.

    B.   Provided, however, that if the pipe or pipeline to be laid or constructed pursuant to the franchise is one-fourth mile or less in length, and extends, renews or continues a previously granted franchise to lay or construct a pipe or pipeline one-fourth mile or less in length, the franchisee shall pay to the city a granting fee of one thousand four hundred dollars within thirty days after the city council adopts the ordinance granting the franchise. (Ord. 948 § 1, 2000; prior code § 10200(A))

 

4.12.030 Initial charges—Underground conduit fees.
    In addition to the foregoing annual payments, the franchisee shall:

    A.  Pay the city, within sixty days after the end of each calendar year, an initial construction charge calculated at a rate of one hundred dollars per mile or fraction thereof for all new mains laid during the preceding year, during the life of the franchise;

    B.   Pay the city, during the life of the franchise, an annual fee of twenty-five dollars per pole-mile or portion thereof, and twenty-five dollars per mile or portion thereof of underground conduit for telephone or telegraph lines maintained under the franchise. Such fee shall be due within sixty days after the end of each calendar year. (Prior code § 10200(D))

 

4.12.040 Annual payment— Generally.
    Except as provided in Section 4.12.050 of this chapter, the franchisee, as further consideration for the franchise hereby granted, shall pay to the city in lawful money of the United States, two percent of the gross annual receipts of the franchisee arising from the use, operation or possession of the franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of the franchisee derived from the sale within the franchise area of the commodity or service for which the franchise is awarded. Such percentage shall be paid annually during the life of the franchise, including the year of granting the franchise. (Prior code § 10200(B)

 

4.12.050 Annual payment—Oil pipelines.
    A.  The franchisee of any franchise awarded to a nonpublic utility for oil or products thereof, as further consideration for the franchise hereby granted, shall pay to the city in lawful money of the United States a “base annual fee” computed as follows:

    1.   Pipe of eight inches or less in nominal internal diameter: The annual fee shall be thirty-three cents per linear foot;

    2.   Pipe greater than eight inches in nominal internal diameter: The annual fee shall be thirty-three cents per linear foot for the first eight inches of nominal internal diameter, plus six cents per nominal internal diameter inch for each inch or fraction thereof over eight inches.

    B.   The amount of each annual payment of the base annual fee shall be revised every year from the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, at the time of payment, in accordance with the following formula:

    1.   The Wholesale Producer Price Index (1967—100) All Commodities, for the Los Angeles Area, established by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, as it stands on the date the franchise is granted, shall be taken as the “base index” upon which the franchise fee is computed.

    2.   If said index for the last calendar month ending prior to the month in which payment to the city is due shall stand at other than such “base index,” then the rate of payment to the city shall vary from such “base annual fee” in direct proportion as such index has increased from the “base index,” as hereinabove defined; provided, however, that in no event shall the amount of the annual payment be less than the “base annual fee” as set forth in this section.

    3.   If the Bureau of Labor Statistics shall revise the said index, the parties thereto shall accept the method of revision or conversion recommended by the Bureau.

    4.   If the Bureau of Labor Statistics shall discontinue the preparation of the said index, using prices prevailing in the year 1967 as a base of 100, and if no transposition table prepared by the Bureau is available, applicable to the year of 1967, then the amount of each annual payment shall be computed by reference to such other price index as may be chosen by the city and the city shall be the sole judge of comparability of successive indices.

    C.   The “base annual fee” described in subsection B of this section shall be paid annually during the life of the franchise, including the year of granting the franchise. (Ord. 948 § 2, 2000; prior code § 10200(C))

 

4.12.060 Prorating of payments.
    In the event of abandonment of facilities with the approval of the city, or in the event of removal of facilities with approval of the city, payments otherwise due the city for occupancy of the roads or highways by such facilities shall be prorated for the calendar year in which such removal or abandonment occurs as of the end of the calendar month in which removed or abandoned. (Prior code § 10201)

 

4.12.070 Late payment fee.
    In the event the franchisee fails to make the payments for the franchise, or the payments due under Section 4.12.030 of this chapter, on or before the dates due, as hereinabove provided, the franchisee shall pay as an additional consideration the following amount: A sum of money equal to ten percent of the amount due. (Prior code § 10202)

 

4.12.080 Recordkeeping requirements.
    A.  The franchisee shall keep and preserve, for a period of five years, subsequent to the date of the most recent franchise fee determination as ascertained by an audit made by the city or on its behalf, all records necessary to determine the amount of such franchise fees or other payments due under Section 4.12.030 of this chapter. The franchisee, upon demand by the city, shall make such records available for inspection by the city or its authorized representative.

    B.   At all reasonable times, the franchisee shall permit the city, or its duly authorized representatives, to examine all property of the franchisee erected, constructed, laid, operated or maintained pursuant to the franchise, together with any appurtenant property of the franchisee, and to examine and transcribe any and all books, accounts, papers, maps and other records kept or maintained by the franchisee, or under its control, which relate to the operations, affairs, transactions, property or financial condition of the franchisee with respect to the franchise. (Prior code § 10203)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.16 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
4.16.010 Standards for construction and maintenance.
    Pipelines and appurtenances shall be constructed and maintained in a good workmanlike manner, in conformity with any ordinance, rule or regulation, now or as hereafter amended, adopted or prescribed by the city, as may be applicable to the construction and maintenance of pipelines and appurtenances. All pipes laid under the franchise shall be of first-class material. (Prior code § 10300)

 

4.16.020 New or replacement installations.
    New installations or replacements of pipelines and appurtenances and all other facilities necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance and safety of pipelines and conduits shall be laid and maintained only pursuant to permits issued by the city. All such installations or replacements shall be reviewed by the director as to the most desirable location in the roads or highways of the city, and his or her decision shall be final and binding on the franchisee. (Prior code § 10301)

 

4.16.030 Work involving highways.
    The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing, abandoning or removing all pipelines and appurtenances authorized under the provisions of this title in, over, under, along and across any highway, shall be done to the satisfaction of the director, at the expense of the franchisee, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of Division II of this title. (Prior code § 10302)

 

4.16.040 Annual completion statement.
    The franchisee shall submit an annual summary to the city identifying the permit or permits issued by the city during the preceding calendar year, identifying the total length of the pipeline, the construction of which was authorized under such permit or permits, the nominal internal diameter of the pipeline, and the total length of the pipeline or appurtenances actually laid. (Prior code § 10303)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.20 RELOCATION
4.20.010 City rights and franchisee duties.
    A.  The city reserves the right to change the grade, to change the width or to alter or change the location of any highway over which the franchise is granted, if any of the pipelines, facilities or appurtenances heretofore or hereafter constructed, installed or maintained by the franchisee pursuant to the franchise on, along, under, over, in, upon or across any highway are located in a manner which prevents or interferes with the change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance, improvement, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, alteration or relocation of the highway, or any work or improvement upon the highway, the franchisee shall relocate permanently or temporarily any such facility at no expense to the city upon receipt of a written request from the city to do so, and shall commence such work on or before the date specified in such written request, which date shall be not less than thirty days from receipt of such written request. The franchisee shall thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion; provided, however, if such highway is subsequently constituted as state highway, thereafter and so long as such highway remains a state highway, no such change of location shall be required for a temporary purpose.

    B.   The city reserves the right for itself to lay, construct, repair, alter, relocate and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of any type or description, in a governmental but not proprietary capacity, within the highways over which the franchise is granted. If the city finds that the location or relocation of such facilities or improvements conflicts with the facilities laid, constructed or maintained under the franchise, whether such facilities were laid before or after the facilities of the city, the franchisee of such franchise shall, at no expense to the city, on or before the date specified in a written request from the city, which date shall be not less than thirty days after the receipt of such notice and request to do so, commence work to change the location either permanently or temporarily of all facilities so conflicting with such improvements to a permanent or temporary location in such highways, to be approved by the city, and thereafter diligently prosecute such work to completion. If such highway is subsequently constituted a state highway, while it remains a state highway, the rights of the state shall be as provided in Section 680 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Prior code § 10304)

 

4.20.020 Emergency equipment.
    At all times during the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall maintain or arrange for, on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis, adequate emergency equipment and a properly trained emergency crew within a reasonable distance from any facilities installed or maintained pursuant thereto for the purpose of shutting off the pressure and the flow of contents of such facilities in the event of an emergency resulting from an earthquake, act of war, civil disturbance, fire, flood, or any other cause or nature whatsoever. (Prior code § 10305)

 

 

Chapter 4.24 ABANDONMENT OF FACILITIES
4.24.010 Required procedures.
    A.  At the expiration, revocation or termination of the franchise, or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee shall, within thirty days thereafter, make written application to the city for authority either (1) to abandon all or a portion of such facilities in place, or (2) to remove all or a portion of such facilities. Such application shall describe the facilities desired to be abandoned, their location with reference to city highways, and shall describe with reasonable accuracy the physical condition of such facilities. The city shall determine whether any abandonment or removal which is thereby proposed may be effected without detriment to the public interest and under what conditions such proposed abandonment or removal may be effected. He or she shall then notify the franchisee of his or her determination.

    B.   Within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the franchisee shall apply for a permit from the city to abandon or remove the facility.

    C.   The franchisee shall, within sixty days after obtaining such permit, commence and diligently prosecute to completion the work authorized by the permit. (Prior code § 10306)

 

4.24.020 Failure to comply—City remedies.
    A.  If any facilities to be abandoned in place, subject to prescribed conditions, shall not be abandoned in accordance with all such conditions, the city may make additional appropriate orders, including an order that the franchisee shall remove any or all such facilities. The franchisee shall comply with such additional orders.

    B.   In the event that the franchisee shall fail to comply with the terms and conditions of abandonment or removal, as may be required by this title and within such time as may be prescribed by the city, then the city may remove or cause to be removed such facilities at the franchisee’s expense. The franchisee shall pay to the city the cost of such work, plus the current rate of overhead being charged by the city for reimbursable work.

    C.   If, at the expiration, revocation or termination of this franchise, or of the permanent discontinuance of the use of all or a portion of its facilities, the franchisee shall, within thirty days thereafter, fail or refuse to make written application for the above-mentioned authority, the city shall make the determination as to whether the facilities shall be abandoned in place or removed. The city shall then notify the franchisee of its determinations. The franchisee shall thereafter comply with the provisions of subsections B and C of Section 4.24.010. (Prior code § 10307)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.28 OIL PIPELINES
4.28.010 Rights granted.
    The franchisee granted an oil pipeline franchise shall have the right during the life thereof to transport oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, chemicals, hydrocarbon substances, water, wastewater, mud and other liquid substances through the pipelines maintained under the franchise. (Prior code § 10400)

 

4.28.020 Materials for pipelines.
    All pipelines used or to be used for the transportation of oil, gas, gasoline, petroleum, wet gas, chemicals, hydrocarbon substances, or other flammable liquid, shall be first-class and standard material, as set forth in the American National Standard Institute (ANSI) code. (Prior code § 10401)

 

4.28.030 Flush-valve connections.
    On all pipelines laid pursuant to the franchise, the city fire chief shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodity transmitted in the line, and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the city fire chief. (Prior code § 10402)

 

4.28.040 Facilities—Reports required.
    The franchisee shall:

    A.  File with the city finance director, within three months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of the franchise and within three months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, two copies of a report duly verified by the oath of the franchisee or by the oath of a duly authorized representative of the franchisee, showing for the immediately preceding franchise period:

    1.   The length of lines in highways,

    2.   The nominal internal diameter of such lines,

    3.   The rate per foot per year, and

    4.   The total amount due the city;

    B.   File with the director a report in duplicate, as provided by Section 4.08.140. (Prior code § 10700)

 

4.28.050 Payments to city.
    A.  Except for pipelines lawfully maintained other than by the authority granted by the franchise, the annual payments shall accrue from the respective dates of installation, whether before or after the effective date of the ordinance granting the franchise, and such payments, together with the initial construction charge and other fees, if any, shall be due and payable annually beginning with the expiration of the first franchise payment period selected by the franchisee in accordance with Sections 4.12.030 and 4.12.050.

    B.   In the event the amount paid is incorrect, in the judgment of the city, it may order the payment of such additional sum or sums as it may find thereunder; and if not paid, or paid under protest, the same may be determined by suit. (Prior code § 10403)

 

4.28.060 Annual payments.
    A.  The franchisee, during the life of the franchise, shall make annual payments to the city as provided in Sections 4.12.030 and 4.12.050 of this title, within fifteen days after the filing of the report required by subsection A of Section 4.28.040.

    B.   In the event the amount paid is incorrect, in the judgment of the city council, it may order the payment of such additional sum or sums as it may find thereunder; and if not paid, or if paid under protest, the same may be determined by suit. (Prior code § 10701)

 

4.28.070 Exempt services and commodities.
    This title does not apply to public utilities or to mutual water companies, where the franchise is for a purpose involving the furnishing of any service or commodity to the public, or any portion thereof. (Prior code § 10404)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.32 GAS PIPELINES
4.32.010 Rights granted.
    The franchisee shall have the right, during the period covered by the franchise and subject to the terms and conditions thereof, to make service connections with all property adjoining highways, and to furnish and distribute gas through pipes and pipelines to all the unincorporated territory adjacent to such pipelines for any purpose. (Prior code § 10500)

 

4.32.020 Flush-valve connection requirements.
    On all pipelines carrying gas heavier than air laid pursuant to the franchise, the city fire chief shall approve where flush-valve connections shall be placed in the line. The availability of adequate water supplies, the commodities transmitted in the lines, and the location of control valves shall be considered when making such determination. Such flush-valve connections shall be installed in the manner prescribed by the city fire chief. (Prior code § 10501)

Division III. Cable System Regulations
Chapter 4.36 GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.36.010 Authority.
    The city, pursuant to applicable Federal and State law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems within the city limits. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.36.020 Findings.
    The city council finds that the development of cable systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the residents of the city. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable systems, the city council further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the city or such persons as the city may designate. It is the intent of this division and subsequent amendments to provide for and specify the means to attain the best possible cable service to the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this division shall be deemed to include this as an integral finding thereof. It is the further intent of this division to establish regulatory provisions that permit the city to regulate cable system franchises to the extent permitted by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended or hereafter amended, applicable Federal Communications Commission regulations and applicable California law. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.36.030 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.

    1.   “Basic cable service” means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.

    2.   “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons who:

    a.   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or

    b.   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such cable system.

    3.   “Cable service” means:

    a.   The one-way transmission to subscribers of:

    i.    Video programming; or

    ii.   Other programming service; and

    b.   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service.

    4.   “Cable system” or “system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:

    a.   A facility that serves only to retransmit television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;

    b.   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way;

    c.   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for the purposes of 47 U.S.C. 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;

    d.   An open video system that complies with Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 573) as amended; or

    e.   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system.

    5.   “Channel” or “cable channel” means a portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

    6.   “Council” means the city council of the city of Pico Rivera.

    7.   “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the council, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not supersede the requirement to obtain any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting business within the city as required by the other ordinances and laws of the city.

    8.   “Franchise agreement” means a franchise grant ordinance or a contractual agreement, containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.

    9.   “Franchise fee” means any fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the city on a grantee as compensation for the grantee’s use of the public rights-of-way. The term “franchise fee” does not include:

    a.   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);

    b.   Capital costs which are required by the franchise to be incurred by grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;

    c.   Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or

    d.   Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code,

    10. “Grantee” means any “person” receiving a franchise pursuant to this division and under the granting franchise ordinance or agreement, and its lawful successor, transferee or assignee.

    11. “Grantor” or “city” means the city of Pico Rivera as represented by the council or any delegate, acting within the scope of its jurisdiction.

    12. “Gross annual cable service revenues” means the annual gross revenues received directly or indirectly by a grantee from the provision of cable service within the city utilizing the public rights-of-way for which a franchise is required. “Gross annual cable service revenues” shall include, but not be limited to, subscriber revenue, equipment charges, late fees, advertising revenue, home shopping revenue and franchise fee revenue. “Gross annual cable service revenues” shall not include refundable deposits, rebates or credits, or any sales, excise or other taxes or charges imposed externally to the franchise, and collected for direct pass-through to local, state or federal government.

    13. “Installation” means the connection of the system to subscribers terminals, and the provision of service.

    14. “Normal operating conditions” means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of the grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the cable operator include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.

    15. “Person” means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.

    16. “Public, educational or government access facilities” or “peg access facilities” means the total of the following:

    a.   Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public, educational, or government use; and

    b.   Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

    17. “Section” means any section, subsection or provision of this division.

    18. “Service area” or “franchise area” means the entire geographic area within the municipal boundaries of the city as it is now constituted or may in the future be constituted, unless otherwise specified in the franchise.

    19. “Service tier” means a category of cable service or other services provided by a cable operator and for which a separate rate is charged.

    20. “State” means the state of California.

    21. “Street” or “public way” or “public rights-of-way” means each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by others and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property.

    22. “Subscriber” or “customer” or “consumer” means any person who or which elects to subscribe to, for any purpose, cable service provided by the grantee by means of or in connection with the cable system, and who pays the charges therefor. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.40 FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS
4.40.010 Franchise purposes.
    A franchise granted by the city under the provisions of this division shall encompass the following purposes:

    A.  To permit the grantee to engage in the business of providing cable service, and such other services as may be permitted by law which grantee provides to subscribers within the designated service area.

    B.   To permit the grantee to erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment, supporting structures, appurtenances, and other property in connection with the operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across streets or other public places within the designated service area.

    C.   To permit the grantee to maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination, reception, transmission, amplification, and distribution of television and radio signals and for the delivery of cable services, and such other services as may be permitted by law.

    D.  To set forth the obligations of the grantee under the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.020 Franchise required.
    After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable system in the city within any public way without a properly granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this division. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.030 Term of the franchise.
    A.  A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the franchise agreement, commencing on the grantor’s adoption of an ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise.

    B.   A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by the grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.040 Franchise territory.
    Any franchise shall be valid within all the municipal limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.050 Federal or state jurisdiction.
    This division shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division to the extent permitted by applicable law. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.060 Franchise nontransferable.
    A.  Grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign or dispose of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, contract, consolidation or otherwise (collectively “transfer”), the franchise or any of the rights or privileges therein granted, without the prior consent of the council, which consent shall not be unreasonably denied, withheld or delayed; provided, however, that the prior written consent of the council shall not be required for an intracorporate or intracompany transfer from one subsidiary of grantee’s ultimate parent to another subsidiary in which grantee’s ultimate parent retains at least a seventy-five percent interest. The granting of a security interest in any grantee assets, or any mortgage or other hypothecation or by assignment of any right, title or interest in the cable system, or use of the cable system as collateral in order to secure indebtedness, shall not be considered a transfer for the purposes of this section.

    B.   The requirements of subsection A of this section shall apply to any change in control of grantee. The word “control” as used herein includes majority ownership, and actual working control in whatever manner exercised. In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior consent of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than twenty-five percent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control the voting stock of the grantee as of the effective date of the franchise, singularly or collectively.

    C.   Grantee shall notify grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall be considered by grantor as notice that a change in control or ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under this section governing the consent of grantor to such change in control or ownership shall apply.

    D.  For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer, or acquisition of control, grantor may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, in accordance with the guidelines set forth herein, and grantee shall assist grantor in such inquiry. In seeking grantor’s consent to any change of ownership or control, grantee shall have the responsibility of insuring that the grantee and/or the proposed transferee complete an application in accordance with Federal Communications Commission form 394 or equivalent. An application shall be submitted to grantor not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the remainder of the term of the franchise. If the franchisee is then in compliance with the requirements of the franchise, and the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the applicant are satisfactory, the grantor shall consent to the transfer of the franchise in accordance with federal regulations. If the grantor has not taken action on the grantee’s request for transfer within one hundred twenty days after receiving such request, grantor’s consent to such transfer shall be deemed given. The consent of the grantor to such transfer shall not be unreasonably denied or delayed.

    E.   Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the franchise shall have the right to notify the grantor that it or its designee satisfactory to the grantor shall take control of and operate the cable system, in the event of a grantee default of its financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also agree in writing to continue cable service and comply with all franchise requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control over the system.

    F.   Upon transfer, grantee shall reimburse grantor for grantor’s reasonable processing and review expenses in connection with the transfer of the franchise including without limitation, costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication costs and document preparation expenses, as specified in any franchise agreement. Any such reimbursement shall not be charged against any franchise fee due to grantor during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.070 Geographical coverage.
    A.  Grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable system to have the capability to pass every residential dwelling unit in the service area, subject to any service area line extension requirements of the franchise agreement.

    B.   After service has been established by activating trunk and/or distribution cables for any service area, grantee shall provide service to any requesting subscriber within that service area within thirty days from the date of request, provided that the grantee is able to secure all rights-of-way, permits and landlord agreements necessary to extend service to such subscriber within such thirty-day period on reasonable terms and conditions. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.080 Nonexclusive franchise.
    Any franchise granted pursuant to this division shall be nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a cable system, as it deems appropriate, subject to applicable state and federal law. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.090 Multiple franchises.
    A.  Grantor may grant any number of franchises subject to applicable state or federal law. Grantor may limit the number of franchises granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:

    1.   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and sewerage.

    2.   The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable system competition, such as lower rates and improved service.

    3.   The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition, such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents’ property, and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of the public rights-of-way.

    B.   Where electric and telephone utilities are to be placed underground in any new residential housing developments, grantor and the developer of such new residential housing shall give each grantee serving the franchise area within which the new residential housing development is located at least seventy-two hours’ prior written notice of the date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee’s installation of conduit, pedestals and vaults. On request of the grantor or developer, the grantee shall provide specifications needed for trenching. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two new entrant cable systems and dedicate the use of such conduit to the city.

    C.   Grantor may require that any new entrant, nonincumbent grantee be responsible for its own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in grantor’s opinion, the public rights-of-way in any particular area cannot feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.40.100 Franchise modification.
    The grantee may be required to pay any reasonable costs incurred by the grantor in processing a grantee request for franchise modification. Such costs may include the reasonable costs incurred for hiring consultants to assist in evaluating the request. Upon written request from the grantee, the grantor shall provide grantee with an estimate of the total processing costs prior to entering into the review of the request. Such costs shall be paid by the grantee prior to final consideration of the request by the grantor. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.44 FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS AND RENEWAL
4.44.010 Filing of applications.
    Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system shall file an application with the city. A reasonable non refundable initial application fee established by the city shall accompany the initial franchise application to cover all validly documented reasonable costs associated with processing and reviewing the application, including without limitation costs of administrative review, financial, legal and technical evaluation of the applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs incurred by such experts), notice and publication requirements with respect to the consideration of the application and document preparation expenses. In the event such validly documented reasonable costs exceed the application fee, the selected applicant(s) shall pay the difference to the city within thirty days following receipt of an itemized statement of such costs. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.44.020 Applications—Contents.
    An application for an initial franchise for a cable system shall contain, where applicable:

    A.  A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area;

    B.   A resume of prior history of the applicant, including the expertise of applicant in the cable system field;

    C.   A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each stockholder having a five percent or greater interest, if a corporation;

    D.  A list of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;

    E.   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant or any other business entity owning or controlling the applicant in whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant;

    F.   A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a certified public accountant audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the reasonable satisfaction of the city;

    G.  A proposed construction and service schedule;

    H.  Any reasonable relevant additional information that the city deems applicable. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.44.030 Consideration of initial applications.
    A.  Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the city manager or a delegate shall prepare a report and make recommendations respecting such application to the council.

    B.   A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a time and date approved by the council. Within sixty days after the close of the hearing, the council shall make a decision based upon the evidence received at the hearing as to whether or not the initial franchise(s) should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.44.040 Franchise renewal.
    Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law and regulation. Grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.48 MINIMUM CONSUMER PROTECTION AND SERVICE STANDARDS
4.48.010 Operational standards.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee shall meet or exceed the following consumer protection and service standards under normal operating conditions:

    1.   Sufficient toll-free telephone line capacity during normal business hours to assure that telephone answer time by a customer service representative, including wait time, shall not exceed thirty seconds; and callers needing to be transferred shall not be required to wait more than thirty seconds before being connected to a service representative. Under normal operating conditions, a caller shall receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time.

    2.   Emergency toll free telephone line capacity on a twenty-four-hour basis, including weekends and holidays. After normal business hours, the telephone calls may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an answering machine and calls received after normal business hours by such service or automated response system must be responded to by a trained company representative by the next business day. During periods when an answering device, including, but not limited to voicemail, is used, grantee shall provide personnel who shall contact the answering device or machine, at a minimum, every six hours to check on requests for service or complaints.

    3.   A conveniently located local business and service and/or payment office open during normal business hours where grantee provides adequate staffing to accept subscriber payments and the return or exchange of subscriber equipment. Normal business hours shall include some evening hours, at least one night per week, and/or some weekend hours. The grantee may petition the grantor to reduce its business hours if the extended hours are not justified by subscriber demand, and grantor may not unreasonably deny the petition.

    4.   An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of responding to and repairing major system malfunction on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis.

    5.   An installation staff, capable of installing service to any subscriber requiring a standard installation within seven days after receipt of a request, in all areas where trunk and feeder cable have been activated. “Standard installations” shall be those that are located up to one hundred twenty-five feet from the existing distribution system, unless otherwise defined in any franchise agreement.

    6.   Grantee shall schedule, within a specified four-hour time period during normal business hours, all appointments with subscribers for installation of service, service calls and other activities at the subscriber location. Grantee may schedule installation and service calls outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. Grantee shall not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. If a grantee representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer shall be contacted and the appointment rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is mutually agreeable to the grantee and the customer.

    B.   Under normal operating conditions, the standards of subsections (A)(1) — (A)(2) of this section shall be met not less than ninety percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. The standards of subsections (A)(4) — (A)(6) of this section shall be met not less than ninety-five percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis.

    C.   Grantee shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards above unless an historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.48.020 Service standards.
    A.  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Scheduled interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during a period of minimum use of the cable system, preferably between midnight and six a.m. local time.

    B.   The grantee shall maintain a repair force of technicians normally capable of responding to subscriber requests for service within the following time frames:

    1.   For a system outage: within two hours, including weekends, of receiving subscriber calls or requests for service which by number identify a system outage of sound or picture of one or more channels, affecting at least ten percent of the subscribers of the system.

    2.   For an isolated outage: within twenty-four hours, including weekends, of receiving requests for service identifying an isolated outage of sound or picture for one or more channels that affects five or more subscribers. On weekends, an outage affecting fewer than five subscribers shall result in a service call no later than the next business day.

    3.   For inferior signal quality: within two business days of receiving a request for service identifying a problem concerning picture or sound quality.

    C.   Grantee shall be deemed to have responded to a request for service under the provisions of this section when a technician arrives at the service location and begins work on the problem. In the case of a subscriber not being home when the technician arrives, the technician shall leave written notification of arrival.

    D.  Grantee shall not charge for the repair or replacement of defective or malfunctioning equipment provided by grantee to subscribers, unless the defect was caused by the subscriber, or the equipment owned by the subscriber requires repair or replacement.

    E.   Unless excused, grantee shall determine the nature of the problem resulting in a request for service within two business days of beginning work and resolve all cable system related problems within five business days unless technically infeasible. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.48.030 Billing and information standards.
    A.  Subscriber bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills shall be fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.

    B.   In case of a billing dispute, the grantee shall respond to a written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days.

    C.   Grantee shall provide pro rata credits or refunds to subscribers whose service has been interrupted for two or more hours if the interruption was not caused by the subscriber, and grantee knows or should have known of such interruption.

    Credits or refunds shall automatically be provided by grantee on a pro rata basis to any subscriber(s) affected by interruption(s) of service for more than three hours due to actions or outages under the control of the grantee, exclusive of scheduled repairs, maintenance or franchise-required construction that grantee has provided advance written notice of to subscribers. In cases where advance written notice is provided to subscribers, the time period detailed in said notice shall not exceed six hours in any twenty-four hour period. In cases where said notice has been given to subscribers and the service interruption exceeds the period detailed in said notice, the provisions of this section shall apply.

    In the event grantee has improperly or inadvertently disconnected cable services to a subscriber, grantee shall provide for restoration without charge to subscriber as soon as possible, but no later than within two days of discovery of disconnection. Grantee shall credit or provide refunds to any subscriber improperly or inadvertently disconnected from receiving cable services for the period of time without cable service.

    All credits or refunds for service shall be issued no later than the customer’s next billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted. For subscribers terminating service, refunds shall be issued promptly, but no later than thirty days after the return of any grantee-supplied equipment.

    D.  Grantee shall provide written information on each of the following areas: (1) at the time of the installation of service; (2) at least annually to all subscribers; and (3) at any time upon request:

    a.   Products and services offered; and

    b.   Prices and options for programming services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services; and

    c.   Installation and service maintenance policies; and

    d.   Instructions on how to use the cable service; and

    e.   Channel positions of programming carried on the system; and

    f.    Billing and complaint procedures, including the address and telephone number of the grantor office designated for dealing with cable-related issues.

    E.   Subscribers shall be notified of any changes in rates, programming services or channel positions as soon as possible in writing and in accordance with state and federal law. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of thirty days in advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the grantee. In addition, grantee shall notify subscribers thirty days in advance of any significant changes in the information required in subsection D of this section. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.48.040 Verification of compliance with standards.
    A.  Upon ten days’ prior written notice, grantee shall respond to a request for information made by grantor regarding grantee’s compliance with any or all of the standards required in Sections 4.48.010, 4.48.020 and 4.48.030. Grantee shall provide sufficient documentation to permit grantor to verify grantee’s compliance.

    B.   A repeated and verifiable pattern of noncompliance with the consumer protection standards of Sections 4.48.010 through 4.48.030, after grantee’s receipt of due notice and not less than a thirty day opportunity to cure, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement.

    C.   The grantor, pursuant to Section 4.48.010(C), may require grantee to acquire equipment to determine compliance with the telephone answering standards of this chapter. Should grantee have its own telephone equipment which can report on telephone line(s) usage, the grantee, upon written request from the grantor, shall submit such report from its own system in order to verify compliance with the telephone answering standards of this chapter.

    D.  Grantee shall take necessary steps to ensure that adequate telephone lines and/or staffing are available to permit grantee to satisfy its obligations under this division and the franchise. Consideration shall be given for periods of promotional activities or outages. The monthly billing period shall be considered as a normal, daily activity for purposes of determining the availability of adequate telephone lines and/or staffing. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.48.050 Subscriber complaints and disputes.
    A.  Grantee shall establish written procedures for receiving, acting upon and resolving subscriber complaints without intervention by the grantor. The written procedures shall prescribe the manner in which a subscriber may submit a complaint either orally or in writing specifying the subscriber’s grounds for dissatisfaction. Grantee shall file a copy of these procedures with grantor. The written procedures shall include a requirement that grantee respond to any written complaint from a subscriber within thirty days of receipt.

    B.   Upon prior written request, grantor shall have the right to review grantee’s response to any subscriber complaints in order to determine grantee’s compliance with the franchise requirements, subject to the subscriber’s right to privacy.

    C.   Subject to applicable law, it shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving cable service insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to rebuild, modify, or sell the system, or the grantor gives notice of intent to terminate or not to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive cable service so long as the franchise remains in force.

    D.  In the event of a change of control of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, the original grantee shall cooperate with the grantor, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such period, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system.

    E.   Grantee response to subscriber complaints, as well as complaints made by subscribers to grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, shall be initiated within one business day of receipt by grantor. The resolution of subscriber complaints shall be effected by grantee not later than five business days after receipt of the complaint, or a longer period if such complaint cannot reasonably be resolved within five business days. Should a grantee supervisor not be available when requested by a subscriber, a supervisor shall respond to the subscriber’s complaint at the earliest possible time, and in no event later than the end of the next business day. For complaints received by grantor and provided by grantor to grantee, grantee shall notify grantor of grantee’s progress in responding to, and resolving, said complaints. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.48.060 Other requirements.
    A.  In the event grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days other than for reasons beyond the control of grantee, without prior approval or subsequent excuse of the grantor, the grantor may, at its sole option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the grantor or a permanent operator is selected. If the grantor should fulfill this obligation for the grantee, then during such period as the grantor fulfills such obligation, the grantor shall be entitled to collect all revenues from the system, and the grantee shall reimburse the grantor for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of the revenues collected by grantor that are the result of grantee’s failure to perform.

    B.   All officers, agents or employees of grantee or its contractors or subcontractors who, in the normal course of work come into contact with members of the public or who require entry onto subscribers’ premises shall carry a photo-identification card in a form approved by grantor. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every vehicle of the grantee or its major subcontractors shall be clearly identified as working for grantee.

    C.   Additional service standards and standards governing consumer protection and response by grantee to subscriber complaints not otherwise provided for in this division may be established in the franchise agreement or by separate ordinance as permitted by federal law. If grantor establishes such additional service standards which exceed any standards established by the federal communications commission, grantee may be permitted by federal law or regulation to recover the incremental cost associated with meeting the more stringent standard (i.e., the incremental cost differential between meeting the existing standard and that of the newly established standard). A verified and continuing pattern of repeated and substantial noncompliance may be deemed a material breach of the franchise, provided that grantee shall receive due process, including prior written notification and a reasonable opportunity to cure, prior to any sanction being imposed. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.52 FRANCHISE FEE AND FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS
4.52.010 Franchise fee.
    A.  Following the issuance and acceptance of the franchise, the grantee shall pay to the grantor a franchise fee on gross annual cable service revenues in the amount and at the times set forth in the franchise agreement.

    B.   The grantor, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within one hundred twenty days of the close of the calendar year, either audited and certified by an independent certified public accountant or certified by an officer or authorized financial representative of the grantee, reflecting the total amounts of gross revenues and all payments, deductions and computations for the period covered by the payment. Upon thirty (30) days’ prior written notice, grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent financial audit of grantee’s gross annual cable service revenue and franchise fee records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting procedures (GAAP), and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of two percent or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable documented costs of such audit.

    C.   Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by the grantor shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the grantor may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this division or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee.

    D.  In the event that any franchise fee payment or payment of any adjustment to any franchise fee is not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement, unless otherwise excused, grantee shall pay:

    1.   An interest charge, computed from such due date, at an annual rate of eight percent; and

    2.   If the payment is late by thirty days or more, a sum of money equal to five percent of the amount due in order to defray those additional expenses and costs incurred by the grantor due to grantee’s delinquent payment.

    E.   Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule indicated in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.52.020 Security.
    A.  Grantor may require grantee to provide security, in an amount and form established in the franchise agreement. The amount of the security shall be established based on the extent of the grantee’s obligations under the terms of the franchise.

    B.   The security shall be available to grantor to satisfy all claims, liens and/or taxes due grantor from grantee which arise by reason of construction, operation, or maintenance of the system, and to satisfy any actual or liquidated damages arising out of a material breach of the franchise agreement, subject to the procedures and amounts designated in the franchise agreement.

    C.   If the security is drawn upon by grantor in accordance with the procedures established in this division and the franchise agreement, grantee shall cause the security to be replenished to the original amount no later than thirty days after receiving written confirmation from the issuer where such security is maintained that grantor has made a draw against the security. Failure to replenish the security shall be deemed a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.56 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
4.56.010 System construction.
    A.  Grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until grantee has secured the necessary permits from grantor, or other responsible public agencies. The grantee shall be subject to all permit and bonding requirements applicable to contractors working within the public rights-of-way. No provision of this division or the franchise agreement shall be deemed a waiver of the obligation of a grantee to pay grantor for the issuance of a permit.

    B.   In those areas of the city where transmission lines or distribution facilities of all public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground.

    C.   In those areas of the city where the grantee’s cables are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public and/or municipal utility providing telephone or electric power service, and in the event that the facilities of both the telephone and electric power utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall reconstruct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee’s cost. Certain of grantee’s equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above ground, may continue to remain in above-ground enclosures, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.

    D.  Any changes in or extensions of any poles, anchors, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals or other fixtures and equipment (herein referred to as “structures”), or the construction of any additional structures, in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets, alleys and public ways shall be made under the direction of the public works director or a designee, who shall, if the proposed change, extension or construction conforms to the provisions hereof, issue written permits therefor. The height above public thoroughfares of all aerial wires shall conform to the requirements of the California regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof.

    1.   All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the grantee shall be located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the public rights-of-way, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said public rights-of-way, and not to materially interfere with existing public and municipal utility installations.

    2.   In the event that any property or improvement of the grantor in the public rights-of-way is disturbed or damaged by the grantee or any of its contractors, agents or employees in connection with undertaking any and all work pursuant to the rights granted to the grantee pursuant to this division and the franchise agreement, the grantee shall promptly, at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor’s satisfaction said property or improvement which was so disturbed or damaged. If such property or improvement shall within two years (or in the case of street improvement, until the street is resurfaced if resurfaced prior to the expiration of the two years) of the date the restoration was completed, become uneven, unsettled or otherwise require additional restorative work, repair or replacement because of the initial disturbance or damage to the property by the grantee, then the grantee, as soon as reasonably possible, shall, promptly upon receipt of written notice from the grantor and at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, restore to the grantor’s satisfaction said property or improvement which was disturbed or damaged. Any such restoration by the grantee shall be made in accordance with such materials and specifications as may, from time to time, be established by the grantor.

    3.   Prior to commencing any work on the system in the public rights-of-way, the grantee shall obtain any and all permits, licenses and authorizations lawfully required for such work. If emergency work on the system in the public right-of-way is required, the grantee shall with all due diligence, seek to obtain any and all such required permits, licenses and authorizations within three working days after commencing such emergency work. Prior to performing any work in the public right-of-way, grantee shall give appropriate notice to the “underground service alert” (USA), or any similar type service provider as designated by the grantor.

    4.   There shall be no unreasonable or unnecessary obstruction of the public rights-of-way by the grantee in connection with any of the work provided for herein. The grantee shall maintain any barriers, signs and warning signals during any work performed on or about the public rights-of-way or adjacent thereto as may be necessary to reasonably avoid injury or damage to life and property.

    5.   If the grantor lawfully elects to alter or change the grade or location of any public right-of-way, the grantee shall, upon reasonable notice by the grantor, and in a timely manner, remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at it own expense provided that grantee shall be entitled to share in any grantor-provided funds or reimbursements provided to utilities or other users of the public rights-of-way for such location.

    6.   The grantee shall not place poles, conduits or other fixtures above or below ground where the same will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone fixtures, water hydrants or other utility, and all such poles, conduits or other fixtures placed in any street shall be so placed as to comply with all ordinances of the grantor.

    7.   In accordance with applicable law, the grantee or any utility user of the public rights-of-way may be required by the grantor to permit joint use of its poles and/or conduit located in the public rights-of-way, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of a reasonable rental fee for such usage. In the absence of agreement regarding such joint use, each party shall be entitled to exercise any rights and defenses provided by applicable law.

    8.   The grantee, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the grantor, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising or lowering of wires or fixtures shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than five business days prior written notice to arrange for the temporary wire or equipment changes.

    9.   Subject to provisions of this code, the grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees or other natural growth overhanging the public rights-of-way so as to prevent the branches of such trees or other natural growth from coming in contact with the grantee’s wires, cables and other equipment. The grantor may require all trimming of trees and natural growth to be done under its supervision and direction, at the expense of the grantee.

    10. Grantee shall be subject to any and all requirements established by the grantor with regard to the placement and screening of grantee’s facilities and equipment located in the public rights-of-way. Such requirements may include, but not be limited to, use of landscaping to screen pedestals and cabinets and requiring that construction be flush with the natural grade of the surrounding area. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.56.020 Multiple franchises.
    If the grantor authorizes or permits another cable system to operate within the municipal limits of the city, it shall do so on conditions that such new cable system entrant indemnify and hold harmless and reimburse the grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities and all other costs including those of grantee, the city and utilities, incident to inspections, make ready, and construction of an additional cable system in the franchise area; and grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to such new entrant cable system. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.60 STANDARDS
4.60.010 Applicable standards.
    A.  The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its cable system in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, regulations, construction standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards, and any detailed standards set forth in its franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the grantor, upon written request, a written report of the results of the grantee’s periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and guidelines.

    B.   Should the FCC no longer require proof of performance tests, the grantee shall make and submit such proof of performance tests and reports in response to a written request from the grantor such report shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty days of issuance of the grantor request. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.60.020 Noncompliance with standards.
    Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards shall constitute a material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.60.030 Costs of technical assistance.
    If the grantor determines through the use of an independent third party that grantee’s cable system does not comply with any material franchise-imposed technical requirements, the grantee shall pay the reasonable costs incurred by the grantor for obtaining any technical assistance deemed necessary by the grantor to determine said compliance. Any such payment by grantee shall not be credited against any franchise fees due to the grantor. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.64 INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
4.64.010 Hold harmless.
    Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold grantor, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any liability, claims, damages, costs or expenses, to the extent provided in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.64.020 Insurance.
    A.  On or before commencement of franchise operations, the grantee shall furnish to grantor certificates of insurance for liability, worker’s compensation and property insurance from appropriately qualified insurance companies, which shall be “admitted’ in the state of California. The certificates of insurance shall provide that the insurance is in force and will not be cancelled or modified without thirty days prior written notice to grantor. The certificates of insurance shall be in a form reasonably satisfactory to grantor. The grantee shall maintain at its cost throughout the term of the franchise, the insurance required herein and in any franchise agreement.

    B.   The policy of liability insurance shall:

    1.   Name grantor, its officers, agents and employees as additional insured;

    2.   Indemnify all liability for personal and bodily injury, death and damage to property arising from activities conducted and premises used pursuant to this division by providing coverage therefor, including but not limited to:

    a.   Negligent acts or omissions of grantee, and its agents, servants and employees, committed in the conduct of franchise operations; and/or

    b.   Use of motor vehicles;

    3.   Provide a combined single limit for comprehensive general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in the amount provided for in the franchise agreement.

    C.   The policy of workers’ compensation insurance shall comply with the laws of the state of California.

    D.  The policy of property insurance shall provide fire insurance with extended coverage on the franchise property used by grantee in the conduct of franchise operations in an amount adequate to enable grantee to resume franchise operations following the occurrence of any risk covered by this insurance.

    The certificates of insurance shall indicate the following information:

    1.   The policy number;

    2.   The date upon which the policy will become effective and the date upon which it will expire;

    3.   The names of the primary insureds and any additional insured required by the franchise agreement;

    4.   The subject of the insurance;

    5.   The type of coverage provided by the insurance; and

    6.   The amount or limit of coverage provided by the insurance.

    If the certificates of insurance do not provide all of the above information, grantor reserves the right to inspect the relevant insurance policies.

    E.   The commencement of franchise operations shall not begin until grantee has complied with the aforementioned provisions of this section.

    F.   In the event grantee fails to maintain any of the above-described policies in full force and effect, grantor shall, upon forty-eight hours’ notice to grantee, have the right to procure the required insurance and recover the cost thereof from grantee. Grantor shall also have the right to suspend the franchise during any period that grantee fails to maintain said policies in full force and effect. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.68 RECORDS AND REPORTS
4.68.010 Records required.
    A.  Grantee shall at all times maintain:

    1.   A written or computer-stored record of all service calls and interruptions or degradation of service experienced for the preceding two years, provided that such complaints result in or require a service call, subject to the subscriber’s right of privacy.

    2.   A full and complete set of plans and record drawings showing the locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber’s homes.

    3.   If requested by grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted to the grantor within thirty days following any written request by grantor, in a form reasonably acceptable to the grantor.

    4.   If requested by grantor, a complaint record which shall contain a semi-annual (through June 30th and December 31st) breakdown indicating the total number of complaints received for the preceding reporting period, and shall indicate the classifications of complaints as follows: construction, billing, customer relations/service and miscellaneous.

    5.   A full and complete record of rates for programming services, equipment, installations and other subscriber charges. This information shall include, but not be limited to, rates for the basic service tier, tiers of service beyond the basic tier, premium service, pay-per-view services, late fees, additional outlets, converters, remote controls and any charges for installation or service at the subscriber premises.

    B.   The grantor may impose requests for additional information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this division or the grantee’s franchise agreement.

    C.   Upon reasonable notice, and during normal business hours, grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the grantor of all:

    1.   Franchise property and facilities, together with any appurtenant property and facilities of grantee situated within the service area; and

    2.   All records relating to the franchise, provided they are necessary to enable the grantor to carry out its regulatory responsibilities under this division or the franchise agreement. Grantee shall have the right to be present at any such examination. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.68.020 Reports.
    A.  Within ninety days after the end of the calendar year, grantee shall submit a written report to grantor with respect to the preceding calendar year in a form approved by grantor, including, but not limited to, the following information:

    1.   A summary of the previous year’s (or in the case of the initial reporting year, the initial year’s) activities in development of the cable system, including but not limited to, services begun or discontinued during the reporting year;

    2.   A list of grantee’s officers and members of its board of directors;

    3.   A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding ten percent or more of the voting interest in grantee;

    4.   An indication of any residences in grantee’s service area where service is not available, and a schedule for providing service;

    5.   Information as to:

    a.   The number of homes passed;

    b.   Total subscribers; and

    c.   The number of basic and pay subscribers.

    6.   A full and complete set of maps showing the underground locations of the cable system installed or in use in the city, exclusive of subscriber service drops and equipment provided in subscriber’s homes. It is the intent of this section that the grantor have a complete set of “as-built” maps for the underground construction areas, and access to reviewing said maps for above ground construction. After the initial submission of drawings for underground areas, the grantee may satisfy the provisions of this section by providing updated portions of those sections of the drawings which have changed.

    7.   Any other information relevant to franchise regulation which the grantor shall reasonably request, and which is relevant to its regulatory responsibilities.

    B.   The grantor may impose requests for additional reports, information, records and documents from grantee, provided they reasonably relate to the scope of the city’s rights under this division or the grantee’s franchise agreement.

    C.   Upon request, grantee shall submit to grantor copies of all pleadings, applications and reports submitted by grantee to any federal, state or local court, regulatory agency, or other governmental body as well as copies of all decisions issued in response to such pleadings, applications and reports, which are nonroutine in nature and which will materially affect its cable system within the franchise area.

    D.  Information otherwise confidential by law and so designated by grantee, which is submitted to grantor, shall be retained in confidence by grantor and its authorized agents and shall not be made available for public inspection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, grantee shall have no obligation to provide copies of documents to grantor which contain trade secrets of grantee or which are otherwise of a confidential or proprietary nature to grantee unless it receives satisfactory assurances from grantor, as expressed in a written confidentiality agreement, that such information can and will be held in strictest confidence and protected by the grantor. To the extent possible, grantee may provide grantor with summaries of any required documents or copies thereof with trade secrets and proprietary matters deleted therefrom. The burden of proof shall be on grantee to establish the confidential nature of any information submitted, to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor.

    E.   If grantee is publicly held, a copy of each grantee’s annual and other periodic reports and those of its parent, shall be submitted to grantor within forty-five days of the publication of such reports.

    F.   Upon grantor’s request, but no more than annually, grantee shall submit to grantor a privacy report indicating the degree of compliance with the provisions contained in Section 4.84.030(C), (D) and (F) and all steps taken to assure that the privacy rights of individuals have been protected.

    G.  All reports required under this division, except those required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public inspection in the grantor’s offices during normal business hours.

    H.  All reports and records required to be delivered to grantor under this division shall be furnished at the sole expense of grantee, except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement.

    I.    The willful refusal, failure, or willful negligence of grantee to file any of the reports required as and when due under this division, may be deemed a material breach of the franchise agreement if such reports are not provided to grantor within thirty days after written request therefor, and may subject the grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor under this division or the franchise agreement.

    J.    Any materially false or misleading statement or representation made knowingly and willfully by the grantee in any report required under this division or under the franchise agreement may be deemed a material breach of the franchise and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are available to grantor. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.68.030 Opinion survey.
    Upon written request of the grantor, but not more than once every two years, the grantee shall conduct a subscriber satisfaction survey pertaining to quality of service, which may be transmitted to subscribers in grantee’s invoice for cable services. The survey shall be designed to be returned to the grantor and shall be subject to grantor’s prior review and approval, said approval to be in writing. The cost of such survey shall be borne by the grantor, said costs to be agreed to by grantor and grantee prior to transmittal to subscribers. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.72 REVIEW OF SYSTEM PERFORMANCE
4.72.010 Biannual review.
    A.  Every two years throughout the term of the franchise, if reasonably requested by prior written notice from the grantor, grantor and grantee shall meet to review system performance and quality of service. The various reports required pursuant to division, results of technical performance tests, the record of subscriber complaints and grantee’s response to those complaints, and the information acquired in any subscriber surveys, shall be utilized as the basis for review. In addition, any subscriber may submit comments or complaints during the review meetings, either orally or in writing, and these shall be considered. Within thirty days after the conclusion of such a review meeting, grantor may issue findings with respect to the cable system’s franchise compliance. Within thirty days of the issuance of such findings, the grantee shall provide the grantor with grantee’s written response to the findings.

    B.   If grantor determines that grantee is not in compliance with the requirements of this division or the grantee’s franchise agreement, grantor shall provide grantee, in the form of written findings, the specific details of each alleged noncompliance. Grantor may then direct grantee to correct the areas of noncompliance within a reasonable period of time. Failure of the grantee, after due notice, to:

    1.   Correct the area(s) of noncompliance within the period specified therefor; or

    2.   Commence compliance within such period and diligently achieve compliance thereafter; or

    3.   Demonstrate that the allegations of noncompliance are incorrect;

    shall be considered a material breach of the franchise, and grantor may exercise any remedy within the scope of this division and the franchise agreement considered appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.76 FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS
4.76.010 Remedies for violations.
    If grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation required by this division or a franchise granted hereunder, following reasonable written notice from the grantor and a not less than thirty-day opportunity to cure such nonperformance in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 4.76 and the franchise, grantor may at its option and in its sole discretion:

    A.  Cure the violation and recover the actual cost thereof from the security fund established in the franchise agreement if such violation is not cured within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of grantor’s intention to cure and draw upon the security fund, unless grantor has provided grantee with additional time to effectuate a cure, the granting of additional time not to be unreasonably withheld;

    B.   Assess against grantee liquidated damages in an amount set forth in the franchise agreement for any such violation(s) if such violation is not cured, or if grantee has not commenced a cure, on a schedule reasonably acceptable to grantor, within thirty days after written notice to the grantee of grantor’s intention to assess liquidated damages. Such assessment may be withdrawn from the security fund, and shall not constitute a waiver by grantor of any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law, including without limitation, its right to recover from grantee such additional damages, losses, costs and expenses, including actual attorney’s fees, as may have been suffered or incurred by grantor by reason of or arising out of such material breach of the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.76.020 Procedure for remedying franchise violations.
    Prior to imposing any remedy or other sanction against grantee specified in this division, grantor shall give grantee notice and opportunity to be heard on the matter, in accordance with the following procedures:

    A.  Grantor shall first notify grantee of the alleged violation in writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand correction, or evidence of nonviolation, within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty calendar days. If grantee fails to:

    1.   Correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed; or

    2.   Commence correction of the alleged violation within the time prescribed and diligently remedy such alleged violation thereafter; or

    3.   Provide evidence that there is no violation, the grantor shall then give, by personal delivery or registered or certified mail written notice of not less than thirty days of a public hearing to be held before the council. Said notice shall set forth in detail each of the violations alleged to have occurred.

    B.   Subsequent to the public hearing, the council shall hear and consider all other relevant evidence, and thereafter render findings and its decision.

    C.   If the council finds that:

    1.   The grantee has corrected the alleged violation; or

    2.   The grantee has diligently commenced correction of such alleged violation after notice thereof and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy such alleged violation; or

    3.   No material violation has occurred; the proceedings shall terminate and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.

    D.  If the council finds that material violations exist and that grantee:

    1.   Has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner; or

    2.   Has not diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such violation; then the council may impose one or more of the remedies provided in this division and the franchise agreement as it, in its discretion, deems appropriate under the circumstances. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.76.030 Grantor’s power to revoke.
    A.  Grantor may revoke any franchise granted pursuant to this division and rescind all rights and privileges associated with it in the following circumstances, each of which shall represent a default by grantee and a material breach under the franchise:

    1.   If grantee fails to perform any of its material obligations under this division or the franchise agreement and continues such failure to perform after receipt of due notice and a reasonable opportunity to cure;

    2.   If grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the insurance coverage or security fund as required in the franchise agreement;

    3.   If grantee violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to the grantee’s franchise, unless such order or ruling is being contested by grantee in good faith in an appropriate proceeding;

    4.   If grantee knowingly practices any material fraud or deceit upon grantor;

    5.   If grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged a bankrupt.

    B.   After completing the procedures set forth in Section 4.76.020, the grantor may make a formal request before the council that the grantee’s franchise be revoked. The council shall cause to be served on the grantee written notice of its intent to consider revoking grantee’s franchise. Such notice shall be served on grantee at least thirty days prior to the date of the hearing on the issue. The notice shall contain the time and place of the hearing and shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the franchise area ten days prior to the hearing date.

    C.   The council shall hear any person(s) interested in the revocation and within ninety days after the date of the hearing shall make its determination whether the grantee has committed a material breach of the franchise.

    D.  If the grantor determines that the grantee has committed a material breach, then the grantor may:

    1.   Declare the franchise revoked and any security fund and bonds forfeited; or

    2.   If the material breach is curable by the grantee, direct the grantee to take appropriate remedial action within the time and manner and under the terms and conditions reasonably specified by the grantor.

    The termination and forfeiture of the grantee’s franchise shall in no way affect any right of grantor to pursue any remedy under the franchise or any provision of law. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.76.040 Appeal of finding of revocation.
    The grantee may appeal a finding of revocation made pursuant to Section 4.76.030 to an appropriate court of jurisdiction. Any such appeal must be taken by the grantee within ninety days of the issuance of the grantor’s decision to revoke the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.80 ABANDONMENT OR REMOVAL OF FRANCHISE PROPERTY
4.80.010 Abandonment or removal.
    A.  If the grantee discontinues the use of any of its property within the public rights-of-way for a continuous period of twelve months, such property shall be deemed to have been abandoned by grantee. Any part of the cable system that is parallel or redundant to other parts of the system and is intended for use only when needed as a backup for the system or a part thereof, shall not be deemed to have been abandoned because of its lack of use.

    B.   Grantor, upon such reasonable terms as grantor may lawfully impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this division, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from grantor and shall restore to grantor’s satisfaction any affected public right-of-way. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public rights-of-way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles, or attachments. Grantor shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public rights-of-way, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this division and the security fund as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section.

    C.   Upon the approved abandonment of any franchise property, the grantee, if required by the grantor, shall submit to the grantor an instrument, satisfactory in form to the grantor, transferring to the grantor the ownership of the abandoned franchise property.

    D.  At the expiration, without renewal or extension, of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon its revocation, as provided herein, the grantor shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of the cable system from all streets and public ways within the service area within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty days.

    E.   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this division, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other franchise holder. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.80.020 Restoration by grantor—Reimbursement of costs.
    Upon reasonable written notice and upon the failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work to be done in any public right-of-way required by law or by the provisions of this division or the franchise agreement, within the time prescribed and to the reasonable satisfaction of the grantor, the grantor may cause the work to be commenced and/or completed. The grantor shall provide to the grantee an itemized work order setting forth in detail the exact nature of the work completed and the supplies used in such work. The grantee shall pay to the grantor the reasonable costs for such work no later than thirty days after receipt of the itemized work order. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.80.030 Extended operation and continuity of services.
    Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the grantor shall have the discretion to permit grantee to continue to operate the cable system for an extended period of time. Grantee shall continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this division as of the effective date of the franchise and the franchise, as existed immediately prior to said expiration or revocation, and to provide the regular subscriber service and any and all of the services that may be provided at that time. It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive all available services provided that financial and other obligations to grantee are honored. The grantee shall use reasonable efforts to provide continuous, uninterrupted service to its subscribers, including operation of the system during transition periods following franchise expiration or termination. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.80.040 Receivership and foreclosure.
    A.  At the option of the grantor and subject to applicable law, a franchise granted hereunder may be revoked one hundred twenty days after appointment of a receiver(s) or trustee(s) to take over and conduct the business of grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless:

    1.   The receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated within said one hundred twenty days; or

    2.   Such receivers or trustees within said one hundred twenty days shall have remedied all the defaults under the franchise or provided a plan for the remedy of such defaults which is satisfactory to the grantor; or

    3.   Such receivers or trustees shall, within said one hundred twenty days, have executed an agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the franchise.

    B.   In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the cable system, in whole or in part, the grantor may serve notice of revocation upon grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder shall be revoked thirty days after service of such notice, unless:

    1.   Grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, in the manner provided by law; and

    2.   The successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.84 GRANTOR AND SUBSCRIBER RIGHTS
4.84.010 Reservation of grantor rights.
    In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this division, the grantor reserves to itself every right and power which is required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the franchise. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.84.020 Waiver.
    A.  The grantor shall have the right to waive any provision of the franchise imposing an obligation on grantee, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the grantor determines: (1) that it is in the public interest to do so; or (2) that the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the grantee or on the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized representative of the grantor. Waiver of any provision in one instance shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such instance nor be deemed a waiver of any other provision of the franchise unless the statement so recites.

    B.   The grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this division or the franchise agreement by any failure of the grantor on any one or more occasions to require or seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.84.030 Rights of individuals.
    A.  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users, or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex or marital status. Grantee shell comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination.

    However, nothing in this division or the franchise shall limit the right of the grantee to deny service to any household or individual who has a negative credit or service history with the grantee, which may include nonpayment of bills or theft or damage to grantee’s equipment, or who has threatened or assaulted employees of the grantee in the course of their employment. In cases of bad or negative credit, grantee may require the payment of a deposit.

    B.   Grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now written or as amended from time to time.

    C.   Without a lawful court order or applicable valid legal authority, neither grantee, nor any person, agency, or entity shall, without the subscriber’s consent, tap, or arrange for the tapping, of any cable, line, signal input device, or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized service, polling with audience participation, or audience viewing surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where individual viewing behavior cannot be identified.

    D.  In the conduct of providing its cable services or in pursuit of any collateral commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, grantee shall take reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber’s or general citizen’s right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The grantee shall not without lawful court order or other applicable valid legal authority utilize the system’s interactive two-way equipment or capability, if such equipment or capability exists, for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or general citizen.

    E.   No cable line, wire amplifier, converter, or other piece of equipment owned by grantee shall be installed by grantee in the subscriber’s premises, other than in appropriate easements, without first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service, permission to install upon subscriber’s property shall be deemed granted.

    F.   Grantee shall comply with all laws and regulations regarding subscriber privacy including, but not limited to, Section 631 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. 551). (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 4.88 MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
4.88.010 Force majeure—Grantee’s inability to perform.
    In the event grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this division or a franchise granted hereunder is prevented by a cause or event not within grantee’s control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof; provided, however, that such inability to perform shall not relieve a grantee from the obligations imposed by Section 4.52.030 pertaining to refunds and credits for interruptions in service. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of grantee shall include without limitation acts of God, war, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, labor disputes, restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires, but shall not include financial inability of the grantee to perform or failure of the grantee to obtain any necessary permits or licenses from other governmental agencies or the right to use the facilities of any public utility where such failure is due solely to the acts or omissions of grantee, or the failure of the grantee to secure supplies, services or equipment necessary for the installation, operation, maintenance or repair of the cable system where the grantee has failed to exercise reasonable diligence to secure such supplies, services or equipment. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

4.88.020 Severability.
    If any provision of this division is held by any court or by any federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulation is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision thereof which had previously been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding on grantor and grantee, provided that grantor shall give grantee thirty days’ written notice of such change before requiring compliance with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably required for grantee to comply with such provision. (Ord. 960 § 2, 2000)

 

 

Chapter 4.90 STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
4.90.010 General provisions.
    A.  Purpose. This chapter is applicable to video service providers who have been awarded a state video franchise under the California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”)), to provide cable or video services in any location(s) within the incorporated boundaries of the city. It is the purpose of this chapter to implement within the incorporated boundaries of the city the provisions of DIVCA and the rules of the California Public Utilities Commission promulgated thereunder that are applicable to a “local franchising entity” or a “local entity” as defined in DIVCA.

    B.   Rights Reserved.

    1.   The rights reserved to the city under this section are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this section or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city.

    2.   Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:

    a.   Compliance with applicable requirements for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before facilities may be constructed for, or providing, nonvideo services;

    b.   Any permit or authorization required in connection with operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including, but not limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, pole attachment permits and street cut permits; and

    c.   Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other property of the city or any private person to which access is not specifically granted by the state franchise.

    3.   No permit issued by the city to a state franchise holder is itself a franchise, nor shall any permit create a vested right that would prohibit the city from revoking or amending the permit.

    C.   Compliance with City Ordinances. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed so as to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which may be hereafter adopted which are consistent with this chapter or Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., or any obligations under any franchise issued by the city insofar as those obligations may be enforced under Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq.

    D.  Compliance with DIVCA. When a video service provider holding a state franchise provides notice to the city pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 5840(m) that it is commencing to provide video service to the city, a holder of a local franchise is entitled to seek a state franchise pursuant to Public Utilities Code Section 5930(c). Upon the issuance of a state franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission for the franchise area, the local franchise shall terminate. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.020 Definitions.
    Definitions Generally—Interpretation of Language. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Words not defined in this section shall have the same meaning as established in: (1) DIVCA; and if not defined therein; (2) California Public Utilities Commission rules implementing DIVCA; and if not defined therein; (3) Title VI of Title 47 of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47USC Section 521 et seq.; and if not defined therein; (4) their common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and “including” and “include” are not limiting. The words “shall” and “will” are always mandatory, but the use of those terms grants no private rights to any person with respect to the city. References to governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.

    A.  “Gross revenues” shall have the meaning set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

    B.   “PEG access,” or “PEG” means the availability of a cable or state franchise holder’s system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including organizations, groups, or individual members of the general public, educational institutions, and the city and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder’s editorial control.

    C.   “State franchise holder” means a cable operator or video service provider that has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5830, within any portion of the incorporated limits of the city. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.030 Franchise fees.
    A.  State Franchise Fees. Any state franchise holder operating within the incorporated areas of the city shall pay to the city a state franchise fee equal to five percent of gross revenues that may be subject to a franchise fee under Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

    B.   Payment of Franchise Fees. The state franchise fee required pursuant to this section shall be paid quarterly, in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city, by check or other means which shall be agreed to by the city, a separate payment for the state franchise fee not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report detailing how the payment was calculated, and shall include such additional information on the appropriate form as designated by the city.

    C.   Examination of Business Records. The city may examine the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i).

    D.  Late Payments. In the event a state franchise holder fails to make payments required by this section on or before the due dates specified herein, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.040 Customer service.
    A.  Customer Service Standards. A state franchise holder shall comply with Government Code Sections 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and 53088.2; the FCC customer service and notice standards set forth in Sections 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603, and 76.1619 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations; Penal Code Section 637.5; the privacy standards of Section 551 of Title 47 of the United States Code; and, to the extent consistent with DIVCA, all other applicable state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service, include any such standards hereafter adopted. In case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and consumer protection standards under this paragraph shall be interpreted and applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or exceeding the goals of the standards.

    B.   Penalties for Violations of Standards. The city shall enforce the compliance of state franchise holders with respect to the state and federal customer service and consumer protection standards set forth in this section. The city will provide a state franchise holder with a written notice of any alleged material breaches, as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5900, of applicable customer service or consumer protection standards, and will allow the state franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied by a state franchise holder within the thirty-day time period, irrespective of the number of customers affected, will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

    1.   For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.

    2.   For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.

    3.   For a third material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred for each violation.

    C.   Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5900. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.050 Permits and construction.
    A.  Except as expressly provided in this chapter, all provisions of Title 12 (Streets, Sidewalks, and Public Places) of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, and all city administrative rules and regulations regarding development in the city or use of or encroachment into the public rights-of-way, as now existing or as hereafter amended, shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a state franchise holder on any city public rights-of-way, public property, or city easement.

    B.   Permits. Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required by Title 12, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12.12 of this code and shall comply with all other applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations, including but not limited to all applicable requirements of Division 13 of the California Public Resources Code, Section 21000, et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act).

    C.   The director of public works shall either approve or deny a state franchise holder’s application for any permit required pursuant to Chapter 12.12 of this code within sixty days of receiving a completed permit application from the state franchise holder.

    D.  If the director of public works denies a state franchise holder’s application for a permit, a department of public works designee shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial.

    E.   A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the director of public works may appeal the denial to the city manager. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city manager shall take one of the following actions:

    1.   Affirm the action of the director of public works without any further hearing; or

    2.   Refer the matter back to the director of public works for further review with or without instructions.

    F.   In rendering its decision on the appeal, the city manager shall not hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the record of the matter received from the director of public works unless the city manager will conduct a public hearing on the matter.

    G.  The issuance of a permit pursuant to Chapter 12.12 of this code is not a franchise, and does not grant any vested rights in any location in the public rights-of-way, or in any particular manner of placement within the rights-of-way. Without limitation, a permit to place cabinets and similar appurtenances aboveground may be revoked and the permittee required to place facilities underground, in accordance with applicable law. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.060 Emergency alert system.
    Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission, in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder’s network. As such capability was required under local franchises in effect in the city on January 1 to December 30, 2006, and as consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5880, each state franchise holder shall install and maintain equipment to allow the city of Pico Rivera Emergency Management Division to air audio and video messages on the video system to alert subscribers to emergency situations. This capability shall be remotely activated without the assistance of the state franchise holder and shall allow a representative of the city to override the audio and video on all channels, except those where the state franchise holder has, consistent with FCC regulations, agreed with the broadcaster, not to override the channel for EAS messages. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.070 Public, educational, and government access channel capacity, support, interconnection, and signal carriage.
    A.  PEG Channel Capacity.

    1.   A state franchise holder shall designate a sufficient amount of capacity on its network to allow three PEG channels to satisfy the requirement of Public Utilities Code Section 5870, within the time limits specified therein.

    2.   A state franchise holder shall provide an additional PEG channel when the city satisfies the standards set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5870(d) or any entity designated by the city to manage one or more of the PEG channels.

    B.   PEG Support.

    1.   Amount of PEG Support Fee. Any state franchise holder shall pay to the city—or if directed by the city, to the city’s designated PEG provider—a PEG fee equal to one percent of gross revenues.

    2.   The PEG support fee shall be used for PEG purposes in a manner that is consistent with state and federal law.

    3.   A state franchise holder shall remit the PEG support fee quarterly, within forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a summary, detailing how the PEG support fee was calculated.

    4.   In the event that a state franchise holder fails to pay the PEG support fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchise holder shall pay interest at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent, or the maximum rate specified by state law.

    5.   The PEG support fee authorized under subsection (B)(1), of this section is hereby reauthorized to the extent required by Public Utilities Code Section 5870(n).

    C.   PEG Carriage and Interconnection.

    1.   As set forth in Public Utilities Code Sections 5870(b) and 5870(g)(3), state franchise holders shall ensure that all PEG channels are receivable by all subscribers, whether they receive digital or analog service, or a combination thereof, without the need for any equipment other than that needed to receive the lowest cost tier of service. PEG access capacity provided by a state franchise holder shall be of similar quality and functionality to that offered by commercial channels (unless the PEG signal is provided to the state franchise holder at a lower quality or with less functionality), shall be capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal, and shall be carried on the state franchise holder’s lowest cost tier of service. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated numerically from other channels carried on the lowest cost tier of service and the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used by any incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law. After the initial designation of the PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not be changed without the agreement of the city, unless federal law requires the change.

    2.   Where technically feasible, each state franchise holder and each incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means authorized under Public Utilities Code Section 5870(h). Each state franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of PEG channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a state franchise holder and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement for PEG carriage, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow each state franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator’s network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise holder’s network as identified by the state franchise holder. If no technically feasible point of interconnection is available, each state franchise holder shall make interconnection available to each PEG channel originator that is programming a channel in the city, and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by each state franchise holder requesting the interconnection, unless otherwise agreed to by the parties. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

 

4.90.080 Notices.
    A.  Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city a copy of all applications or notices that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the California Public Utilities Commission.

    B.   Unless otherwise specified in this section, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this section or the Public Utilities Code shall be provided to both the city manager and the city manager’s designee in charge of cable and telecommunications, or their successors or designees. (Ord. 1118 § 2, 2018)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 5.08 BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 5.12 FEES FOR LICENSES
Chapter 5.16 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 5.18 PROHIBITION OF ADVERTISING BENCHES
Chapter 5.22 ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 5.23 ADULT BUSINESS PERFORMER LICENSE
Chapter 5.24 ADULT PUBLICATIONS
Chapter 5.28 AMBULANCES
Chapter 5.30 AMUSEMENT PLACES
Chapter 5.32 AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS
Chapter 5.34 AUTO WRECKERS
Chapter 5.36 BILLIARD HALLS AND POOLHALLS
Chapter 5.38 BINGO
Chapter 5.40 CAFÉS, FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HAWKERS
Chapter 5.44 DANCE STUDIOS
Chapter 5.45 ENTERTAINMENT
Chapter 5.46 FIREARMS—RETAIL SALE
Chapter 5.48 FORTUNETELLING
Chapter 5.50 GUARDS AND PATROLMEN
Chapter 5.52 HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION
Chapter 5.54 SIDEWALK VENDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.56 HOUSE-NUMBER PAINTERS
Chapter 5.58 LOCKSMITHS
Chapter 5.60 MASSAGE
Chapter 5.61 MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, STILL PHOTOGRAPHY FILMING AND PRODUCTION
Chapter 5.62 MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
Chapter 5.64 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 5.66 (RESERVED)
Chapter 5.68 SOUND TRUCKS
Chapter 5.70 TAXICABS
Chapter 5.72 BUSINESSES REQUIRING FIRE INSPECTION
Chapter 5.74 PLASTIC BAGS

Chapter 5.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
5.04.010 Title and scope of provisions.
    Title 5 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code may be cited as the “Business License Law” of the city of Pico Rivera. It is not intended by the Business License Law to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by the Business License Law. Where the Business License Law imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or personal property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, the provisions of the Business License Law shall control. (Prior code § 6100)

 

5.04.020 Interpretation of language.
    For the purpose of the Business License Law, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this chapter. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. (Prior code § 6101)

 

5.04.030 Specific definitions.
    The following businesses, professions and trades, set out in this chapter, are further defined for the purposes of this title. (Prior code § 6104)

 

5.04.040 Adult entertainment.
    A.  “Adult entertainment” means artist/body-painting studios, adult bookstores, adult coin-operated entertainment businesses, adult modeling studios, adult motel-hotels, adult physical cultural businesses, adult theaters, adult topless or bottomless entertainment businesses, bathhouses, massage parlors, and other adult uses presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities or “specified anatomical areas.”

    B.   “Specified anatomical areas,” as used in this section, means and shall be defined as:

    1.   Less than completely or opaquely covered:

    a.   Human genitals,

    b.   Pubic region,

    c.   Buttocks,

    d.   Female breast area below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

    2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

    C.   “Specified sexual activities” means:

    1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

    2.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;

    3.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or breast. (Prior code § 6104.6(a))

 

5.04.050 Advertising by sound trucks.
    “Advertising by sound trucks” means and includes every person operating the business of advertising by means of any vehicle containing amplifiers, phonograph, loudspeaker, microphone, broadcasting radio or a device for public address, or carrying advertising signs, and which is used for announcing or advertising upon the public streets or public grounds in the city. (Prior code § 6104.5)

 

5.04.060 Ambulance driver.
    “Ambulance driver” means any person who drives an ambulance, not pursuant to any contract with the city, in which is transported any person needing medical attention, which person entered or was placed in such ambulance at any location in the city of Pico Rivera. (Prior code § 6104.2)

 

5.04.070 Ambulance operator.
    “Ambulance operator” means any person who, for any monetary or other consideration, or as an incident to any other occupation, and not pursuant to any contracts with the city, transports in one or more ambulances one or more persons from any location in the city to any hospital or other place giving first aid or medical treatment, regardless of the location of such hospital or other place. (Prior code § 6104.1)

 

5.04.080 Amusement and kiddie rides, coin-operated.
    “Amusement and kiddie rides which are coin-operated,” including coin-operated merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, slides, swings, boat rides, airplanes, trains, automobiles and other similar coin-operated amusement rides, shall not be considered within the definition of coin-operated amusement devices requiring a permit under this title. (Prior code § 6104.35)

 

5.04.090 Amusement device.
    An “amusement device” or machine means and includes any device or machine operated by coin or coins for the purpose of amusement, which does not require the use of any physical or mental dexterity in the manipulation or operation of such machine, and which does not vend merchandise or goods, and is used solely for the purpose of amusement and entertainment. (Prior code § 6104.33)

 

5.04.100 Amusement games, rides and booths.
    “Amusement games, rides and booths” means and includes every person managing or carrying on an amusement game, ride or booth by charging or receiving a gratuity or consideration from the public for the use thereof, including every person managing or carrying on a shooting gallery, marksmanship contest, dart game, archery, ball-throwing, ring-tossing, Ferris wheel, loop-the-loop, rollercoaster, or other similar type of amusement booth or ride which is not defined under Section 5.04.090. (Prior code § 6104.36)

 

5.04.110 Antique dealer, antiques.
    A.  “Antique dealer” means a person who is predominantly engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in antiques.

    B.   “Antiques” means a work of art, collections in illustration of the progress of the arts, works in bronze, marble, terra-cotta, parian, pottery, porcelain, or objects of ornamental character or educational value, or items referred to as “curios and collectibles” due to their historical or cultural significance. (Prior code § 6104.38)

 

5.04.120 Auction establishment.
    “Auction establishment” means a fixed place of business where any goods, wares or merchandise are sold or offered for sale or trade by public outcry or auction. (Prior code § 6104.6)

 

5.04.130 Auto repair shop, automobile repairer.
    A.  “Auto repair shop” means:

    1.   Any place where motor vehicles of others are repaired for a charge;

    2.   Any place where the work of repairing of motor vehicles is carried on as an incident to the business of selling new or used motor vehicles, or new or used motor vehicle parts, or as an incident to any other traffic in motor vehicles or their parts or equipment.

    B.   “Automobile repairer” means any person who manages, conducts or runs an automobile repair shop. (Prior code § 6104.3)

 

5.04.140 Auto wrecker.
    “Auto wrecker” means every person who buys any motor vehicle, as the term “motor vehicle” is defined in the State Vehicle Code, for the purpose of dismantling or disassembling, or who disassembles any such motor vehicle, whether for the purpose of dealing in any of the parts thereof or using the same for the purpose of reconditioning any other vehicle, or for the purpose of selling or otherwise dealing in materials of such motor vehicles. (Prior code § 6104.4)

 

5.04.150 Bankrupt stock, bankrupt sales or closing-out sales.
    “Bankrupt stock, bankrupt sales or closing-out sales” businesses include every person engaged in the business of selling any goods, advertised or designated as sheriff’s assignee’s, creditor’s, bankrupt’s, consignee’s, trustee’s, receiver’s, closing-out or closing business, or special sale of damaged goods, damaged by fire, water or otherwise.

    A.  Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the sale of goods which are actually in good faith in the possession of the law enforcement agency or trustee in bankruptcy or in possession of any court of the state or of the United States, or the goods belonging to an established business, paying a license, which have been damaged within the city, and which are being disposed of in good faith by the person engaged in such business to close out the same;

    B.   Except that such sales provided in this section shall be certified to by the director of finance that such sale is a bona fide sale held by an established licensee to conduct such business in the city; and provided, further, that any inventory or merchandise to be sold at such sale shall be furnished by the licensee to the director of finance and the law enforcement agency; and provided, further, that permission to hold such sale shall not include the right to increase the stock or merchandise or inventory after the sale has been publicly advertised. (Prior code § 6104.7)

 

5.04.160 Businesses, professions and trades.
    “Businesses, professions and trades” means and includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for the purpose of earning a profit of livelihood, whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby. Businesses, professions and trades shall include, but are not limited to, trades and occupations of all and every kind of calling carried on within the city, salesmen, brokers, retailers, manufacturers, processors, wholesalers, vendors, suppliers, peddlers, professions, and the renting or supplying of living quarters or rooms, or board, or both, for six or more guests, tenants or occupiers, or any other type of endeavor entered into within the city for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit, whether paid for in money, goods, labor or otherwise, and whether or not such business, profession or trade has a fixed place of business in the city. (Prior code § 6102)

 

5.04.170 Café, food establishment, public eating place and hawker.
    “Café, food establishment, public eating place and hawker” means those businesses or occupations as defined in this chapter and Chapter 5.40 of this code. “Public eating place” shall also include all places where sandwiches, lunches and food or drinks of any and all kinds are prepared for sale or gift to the public, whether sold or given or consumed on the premises, whether prepared or not. (Prior code § 6104.11)

 

5.04.180 Carnival, circus and rodeo.
    “Carnival, circus and rodeo” means and includes any place of amusement erected or maintained for recreation, amusement or entertainment purposes where the public is invited or allowed to assemble, and where are exhibited any feats of horsemanship, trained animals, clowns, acrobats or trapeze performances, or amusement devices, games or other forms of skill or amusement as are commonly provided in circuses or rodeos or carnivals. (Prior code § 6104.12)

 

5.04.190 Concessions.
    “Concessions” means every person who rents, leases or otherwise occupies floor space or ground space in a place where a business, profession or trade is conducted within the city, and where such floor or ground space is occupied for the purpose of conducting a business, profession or trade by such concessionaire, and where such person pays for such space occupied on a cash rental, commission basis, or otherwise. (Prior code § 6104.13)

 

5.04.230 Dance studio.
    “Dance studio” means and includes any place where dancing lessons are given for a charge or other consideration. (Ord. 1104 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6104.15)

 

5.04.240 Dance, teenage.
    “Teenage dance” means a nonprofit public dance or club dance for minors between the ages of thirteen and nineteen years of age to which no person twenty years of age or over, or under thirteen years of age, is admitted as a participant. (Prior code § 6104.15)

 

5.04.250 Employee.
    “Employee” means all persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, and includes any member of the owner’s family, agent, manager, solicitor, and any and all other persons employed or working in such business. (Prior code § 6104.16)

 

5.04.270 Fortunetelling business.
    A.  “Fortunetelling business” means and includes every person engaged in the activity of, or advertising by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine or other publication, or by any other means whatsoever, the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary processes of knowledge, for or without pay, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature, or engaging in, practicing or carrying on any art, profession or business, the advertisement and practice of which is regulated by this title.

    B.   Excepted from the aforementioned definition are the following:

    1.   The provisions of this title shall not apply to any person solely by reason of the fact that he or she is engaged in the business of entertaining the public by demonstrations of mindreading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons, and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of telling fortunes. Nothing in this section, however, shall be construed as exempting any person from the payment of the applicable license fee, if any, required to be paid by the licensing provisions of this title.

    2.   No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided, further, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the church or religious association; provided, further, that the person holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as set forth in this section, shall, before practicing the profession specified in this section, file with the city clerk a certified copy of his or her certificate of ordination, with his or her name, age and street address in this city where he or she intends to carry on the business. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may, however, pay to its ministers, missionaries, mediums or workers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage basis, provided that the agreement between the church and the minister, missionary, medium or worker is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association.

    C.   No person shall be required to pay any fee or take out any license for carrying on the art of reading tea leaves in any bona fide, regularly established restaurant, for the purpose of amusement to the patrons of the restaurant, where no charge for such readings is made. (Ord. 703 § 3, 1985; prior code § 6104.17)

 

5.04.280 Gross receipts.
    “Gross receipts” means the total amount of the sale price of all sales, and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether or not such service, act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods, wares or merchandise. Included in “gross receipts” shall be all other receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature except as hereinafter excluded, and any amount for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser, without any deduction therefor on account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses, or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross receipts” shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; any tax which is measured by the sales price or the gross receipts from the sale or which is a stated sum per unit of such property sold, included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; and such part of the sale price as is refunded either in cash or by credit; or any property given by the purchaser to the seller as part of the purchase price and so accepted by the seller for resale; and amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee, to the extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. (Prior code § 6102.1)

 

5.04.290 Guard.
    “Guard” means a person who guards property and who is not a member of a private patrol system or a patrol system, and who is employed exclusively and regularly by one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only, and where there exists an employer-employee relationship. (Prior code § 6104.23(a))

 

5.04.300 Handbills.
    A.  “Commercial handbill” means any handbill which is distributed for the purpose of advertising for sale goods, wares, merchandise or services, or any other commercial activity; however, for the purpose of this title, “commercial handbill” means and includes the distribution or circulation of samples of goods, wares and merchandise.

    B.   “Handbill” means a printed (“printed” shall include all forms of reproduced writing) paper or circular, which is circulated or distributed, other than by United States mail, for the purpose of advertising orders for such; “handbill” shall not include newspaper. For the purpose of this subsection, “newspaper” means a periodical published primarily for the dissemination of news and intelligence of a general character, or printed paper or circular, or drawing attention or soliciting support or opposition to any public issue or political figure or party, partisan or nonpartisan.

    C.   “Handbill permit” means a permit required pursuant to this title for the distribution of commercial handbills.

    D.  “Noncommercial handbill” means any handbill other than a commercial handbill.

    E.   “Notice” means a notice given by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified, at his or her last known address. (Prior code § 6104.37)

 

5.04.310 House-number painter.
    “House-number painter” means any individual, firm, corporation or organization engaged in the activity of painting upon public curbs, streets, roadways, sidewalks or other public property, house numbers or house addresses or other printed or painted material. (Prior code § 6104.18)

 

5.04.320 Junk collector.
    “Junk collector” means a person engaged in the business within the city of going from house to house or place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in any old rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals, furniture, appliances or other articles commonly known as junk. (Prior code § 6104.19)

 

5.04.330 Junk dealer.
    “Junk dealer” means a person not an auto wrecker engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business within the city of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in either the wholesale or retail of any old magazines, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, metals (including gold and mercury), or other articles commonly known as junk. (Prior code § 6104.20)

 

5.04.340 Locksmith.
    “Locksmith” means any person whose business, trade or occupation, in whole or in part, is the making, furnishing or duplicating of keys for locks or similar devices, or who constructs or repairs or adjusts locks, or who opens and closes locks for others by mechanical means other than with the regular keys furnished for that purpose by the manufacturer of the locks. The definition of “locksmith,” for the purpose of the Business License Law, shall include persons who are not principally engaged in the locksmith business as hereinbefore defined, but who duplicate keys for locks or similar devices. (Prior code § 6104.21)

 

5.04.350 Machines, games of skills.
    “Machines, games of skills” means and includes any machine or device operated by a coin or coins, requiring the use of physical or mental dexterity in the manipulation or the operation of such machine, device or game. (Prior code § 6104.34)

 

5.04.360 Patrolman.
    “Patrolman” means an individual engaged in the act of guarding property as the owner, member or employee of a street-patrol system. (Prior code § 6104.23)

 

5.04.370 Patrol system.
    A.  “Patrol system” means any street-patrol system furnishing street-patrol service or street-patrol officers, herein referred to as “patrolmen,” furnishing or purporting to furnish to members or subscribers any watchman or guard, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol the streets of the city for the purpose of guarding or watching any property or performing services or acts customarily performed by the law enforcement agency.

    B.   The definition of patrol system does not include a private patrol operator or operator of a private patrol system defined under Section 7521 of the Business and Professions Code of the state as being one who agrees to furnish or furnishes a watchman, guard, patrolman or other person to protect persons or property, or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss, embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind; or performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman or other person for any of such purposes, unless such acts are performed as a part of a street-patrol system or service as defined in subsection A of this section.

    C.   The definition of patrol system contained in this section shall not include a person employed exclusively and regularly by one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only, and where there exists an employer-employee relationship. (Prior code § 6104.22)

 

5.04.380 Pawnbroker.
    “Pawnbroker” means any person engaged in any one or more of the following businesses:

    A.  Pawnbroking;

    B.   Lending money for himself or any other person upon personal property, pawns or pledges, in the possession of the lender;

    C.   Purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors or assignees at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchases. (Prior code § 6104.24)

 

5.04.390 Pawnshop.
    “Pawnshop” means any room, store, building or other place in which the business of pawnbroker is engaged in, carried on or conducted. (Prior code § 6104.25)

 

5.04.400 Person.
    “Person,” as used in the Business License Law, means and includes the individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations, or any officers, agents, employees, factors, or any kind of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, or for any other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law. (Prior code § 6103)

 

5.04.410 Public billiard rooms or hall or poolrooms or halls.
    “Public billiard rooms, or hall or poolrooms or halls” means any place open to the public where billiards, bagatelle or pool is played, or in which any billiards, bagatelle or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to pay or do play thereon, whether any compensation or reward is charged for the use of such table or not. (Prior code § 6104.8)

 

5.04.420 Rubbish, waste and garbage.
    A.  “Rubbish, waste and garbage” means the business of collecting within the city any garbage or waste or rubbish or refuse for reward or consideration, or for anything of value. “Rubbish, waste or garbage,” as used in this title, means and includes garbage, waste and refuse, food-plant waste, market refuse, trash, rubbish, offal, leaves, cuttings, trimmings, shrubs, grass, combustible rubbish, inorganic refuse, and other refuse, combustible or noncombustible, as well as other waste matters placed with such person for the purpose of collection and disposal.

    B.   The definition contained in this section of “rubbish, waste or garbage” shall not include householders hauling occasional loads of waste or refuse or manure not containing garbage from their own premises to a legal point of disposal; nor shall the same apply to the hauling or disposing of grass cuttings, pruning, manure or other rubbish not containing garbage to or at a legal point of disposal as part of gardening or horticulture. (Prior code § 6104.26)

 

5.04.430 Secondhand dealer.
    “Secondhand dealer” means a person other than a used-car dealer, or dealers who deals in secondhand books or magazines, or is engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares and merchandise, but does not include a person who does not sell or offer to sell secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, except such as received by such person as payment or part payment for new articles sold by him. (Prior code § 6104.27)

 

5.04.440 Soliciting.
    “Soliciting” means and includes any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of going from house to house, or place to place, other than commercial business houses, or at, on or along the public streets, sidewalks or public places, selling or taking orders for, or offering to sell or take orders for goods or for services to be performed in the future, or for things of value to be delivered in the future, or performing services which require further development, consummation or completion elsewhere than at the place where performed. (Prior code § 6104.28)

 

5.04.450 Sound truck.
    “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle, horse-drawn vehicle or other vehicle having mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment. The words “sound-amplifying equipment,” as used in this section, shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. (Prior code § 6104.29)

 

5.04.460 Taxicab driver.
    “Taxicab driver” means an individual who drives or operates a taxicab in which passengers are solicited or accepted for hire either at a taxicab stand or elsewhere in the city. (Prior code § 6104.30)

 

5.04.470 Taxicab operator.
    “Taxicab operator” means a person engaged in the business of running, driving or operating one or more taxicabs and soliciting or accepting passengers in such taxicab or taxicabs for hire, either at a taxicab stand or elsewhere in the city. (Prior code § 6104.30)

 

5.04.480 Taxicabs.
    “Taxicabs” means a motor vehicle, as that term is defined in the Vehicle Code, used for the transportation of passengers for hire, when driven by the owner or by an agent of the owner at rate per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month, or per other period of time, which vehicle is routed under the direction of the passengers or other persons hiring such vehicle. (Prior code § 6104.30)

 

5.04.490 Theater.
    “Theater” means any place containing a stage or other place upon which fixed or moveable scenery or theatrical appliances are used, or where musical, theatrical, vaudeville or similar performances are given either to private patrons or guests or to public assemblages, and where such theatrical or vaudeville show or review is the primary or principal attraction of the place. (Prior code § 6104.31)

 

5.04.500 Theaters or places displaying moving, motion or still pictures.
    A.  “Theaters or places displaying moving, motion or still pictures” means any theater, drive-in theater, bar, restaurant, cafe, coffee shop, drive-in restaurant, cabaret, club, beer garden, beer hall, hotel, motel, dancehall or dance studio where motion or still pictures are shown by projection through electrical or mechanical means for the display or view of the public guests or patrons and for which a fee is charged or collected or received, or as an attraction or inducement to enter or remain in any such place, whether or not the main or principal attraction of such place, excepting, however, the following:

    1.   Display of such film in a private residence for the occupants or guests thereof;

    2.   Occasional and incidental display of such film by any group or organization formed for educational or civic or fraternal or religious or veteran or charitable purposes at any meeting thereof for the entertainment or education of members or guests;

    3.   Occasional and incidental display of such film by any governmental, educational, industrial, manufacturing, business or scientific establishment or group at any meeting thereof for the entertainment, education or training of employees or members or guests;

    4.   Display of such film by means of television transmission under license, franchise or regulation of federal, state or local government.

    B.   “Occasional and incidental use,” as used in this section, means and has reference to the use or display of such film by such organization for members, employees and guests as aforementioned in connection with and only incidental to the other purposes of such organizations, and where the use thereof is not so regulated as to require, for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, the regulations provided in Chapter 5.62 of this title. (Prior code § 6104.31a)

 

5.04.510 Vending machine.
    “Vending machine” means and includes any machine vending merchandise, wares, edibles or liquids, whether bottled or otherwise, and where operated by inserting therein a coin or coins. (Prior code § 6104.32)

Chapter 5.08 BUSINESS LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Article I. Licenses
5.08.010 Business license requirements.
    A.  No person shall transact, engage in, permit, commence or carry on, either directly or indirectly, any business, profession or trade or occupation, as defined in this title, within the city, whether or not such person has a fixed place of business within the city or elsewhere, without first having procured a business license and paid the business license fee as required by the provisions of this title, unless exempt therefrom as provided in this title, and without otherwise complying with all the terms and provisions of this title.

    B.   The required business license fee is imposed for the purpose of raising revenue for general municipal purposes. The payment of a business license fee, its acceptance by the city, and the issuance of a business license to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he or she has complied with all of the requirements of this code and all other applicable laws for the proposed business activity and business location, including adherence to zoning laws and building codes regulating the lawful establishment, use and occupancy of real property, and buildings, structures, and business premises thereon.

    C.   The transacting, engagement, permitting, commencement or carrying on of any such business or profession or trade or occupation without first having procured and maintained in good standing a business license that is current and valid, as well as a regulatory business permit where required under this title, or without first complying with any and all laws, requirements, and regulations pertaining to said business as provided in this title and code, shall constitute a separate violation of this code for each and every day that the business, profession or trade or occupation is so carried on. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6200)

 

5.08.015 Application and processing fees.
    The city council may set by resolution any necessary fees to offset the cost of applications and processing of business licenses and business permits. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; Ord. 843 § 2, 1993)

 

5.08.020 Application required.
    Each applicant for a business license shall submit an application for a business license, with any required supporting information, evidence or documentation, upon such form or in such manner as made available and required by the director of finance, or his or her designee. It is unlawful for any person to withhold or misrepresent information requested on a business license application. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6217)

 

5.08.030 Certain information confidential.
    The director of finance, or his or her designee, shall keep confidential all information concerning the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of books, records and equipment of any person required to obtain a business license, in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof set forth in any statement or business license application. However, this section does not prevent:

    A.  Disclosure of certain information under the California Public Records Act, pursuant to Government Code Section 6250 et seq.;

    B.   The disclosure to, or the examination of books, records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for the collection of business license fees for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provision of this title or collecting business license fees imposed herein;

    C.   The disclosure of information to, or the examination of books, records and equipment by, federal or state officials, or to the tax officials of another city or county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists;

    D.  The disclosure of information to a grand jury or court of law upon subpoena;

    E.   The disclosure of information and the results of the examination of books, records and equipment of particular business license holders, or relating to particular business license holders, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any business license fee liability to the city;

    F.   The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the business license holder, or to his or her successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid business license fee, any unpaid business license fee or amounts of business license fee required to be collected, interest and penalties. However, the city attorney, after conferring with the director of finance, or his or her designee, must approve each such disclosure to confirm compliance with any and all applicable laws;

    G.  The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business;

    H.  The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a business license holder files a claim for refund of business license fees, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him or her by the city for business license fees, or when acting upon any other matter;

    I.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding business license fees collected or business conducted in the city. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6222)

 

5.08.040 Fees—Computation.
    A.  The license fee shall be in the amounts established in Chapter 5.12 of this title. The amount of the business license fee shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5.12 of this title and upon the information supplied by the applicant as well as in accordance with any information supplied to the director of finance, or his or her designee, by any other city officer or enforcement agency.

    B.   In addition, computation of the license fee shall be governed by the following rules:

    1.   Gross Receipts. Where the license fee is based in whole or in part upon the gross receipts of the licensee, such gross receipts shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.04.280 of this title.

    2.   Estimated Fees. If the director of finance, or his or her designee, determines that information contained in the business license application is not correct, that the amount of fees was not correctly computed, or that any fee is due or may be due to the city under the provisions of this title, the director of finance, or his or her designee, may compute and determine the amount to be paid and make an assessment upon the basis of the facts contained in the application or upon the basis of any information in the city’s possession or that may come into the city’s possession, including as a result of the inspection, examination, or audit of the location of business, books, records or equipment, as authorized in this title. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6218)

 

5.08.050 Fees—Payable in advance.
    All license fees in accordance with the terms and provisions of Title 5 of this code shall be paid in advance to the city in lawful money of the United States. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6215)

 

5.08.060 Application—Failure to submit.
    Any person who fails to submit any required application, whether to procure or renew a business license, shall become liable for the penalty set forth in this title from the first date such person should have submitted the application, and the penalty shall be added to the amount of the license fee. The director of finance, or his or her designee, determines the fee such person would have paid if the person had applied and obtained a license or renewal as required under this title. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6219)

 

5.08.070 Failure to submit an application—Fee determination.
    A.  If any person fails to submit an application required by this title within the time prescribed by this title, or after demand therefore made by the director of finance, or his or her designee, or fails to submit a corrected application, the director of finance, or his or her designee, may determine the amount of the license fee due from such person from such information as he or she may be able to obtain and, if necessary, may estimate the fee required to be paid hereunder upon the basis of external indices on hand, capital invested, dividends paid, sales or other taxes paid, number of persons employed, or by considering other facts or as estimated pursuant to Section 5.08.040(B)(2) of this chapter.

    B.   In such a case, the director of finance, or his or her designee, shall give notice of the amount so assessed that is due, including any penalties, and demand payment, by serving the same personally or by depositing the same in the United States Post Office in the city of Pico Rivera, with postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person so assessed at his or her last known address. The amount herein set forth shall be assessed as of that date, and shall be due and owing as of the first time such amount would have been due and owing under this title. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6220)

 

5.08.080 Submittal of time extension and fee adjustments.
    The director of finance, or his or her designee, shall have, in addition to all other powers conferred upon him or her or her, for good cause shown, the power to extend the time for submittal of an application or required supporting information, evidence, documentation, for a period of not to exceed thirty days, and in such case waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued; and, with the approval of the city council and the written approval of the city attorney, to compromise any claim for license fee subject to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6221)

 

5.08.090 Issuance restrictions and prohibitions.
    No license for any succeeding current or unexpired license period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for any license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license fee; provided that the director of finance or his or her designee may enter into an agreement with any person indebted to the city for the nonpayment of license fees for any past license period, agreeing with such person that such person may pay delinquent license fees for any past license period in equal installments extending over a period not to exceed one year. In such agreement, such debtor shall acknowledge its debt to the city and agree, in case default is made in the payment of any installment agreed to be paid thereunder, that the whole amount agreed to be paid shall become immediately due and payable, and that in case suit is brought to enforce collection of the amount agreed to be paid under such agreement, that the debtor will pay all costs of suit incurred by the city. In case such agreement is executed, licenses for any current or ensuing license period may be issued to any such person paying the fee prescribed for the current or ensuing license period, together with penalties, if any. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6204)

 

5.08.100 Exemptions—Certain organizations.
    A.  The provisions of this title shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license fee to conduct, manage or carry on any business, or require the payment of any license of any institution or organization so conducted, managed or carried on fully for the benefit of charitable purposes, or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.

    B.   Nor shall any license be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subject, whenever the receipts of such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school, or to any religious or benevolent purpose in the city.

    C.   Nor shall any license or permit be required for the conducting of any recreation, entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objectives for which such association or organization was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.

    D.  The provisions of this title shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational or military organization or association conducting casual sales, concerts, dances, entertainment, exhibitions or lectures, or other activities for fundraising purposes, and where the funds so derived are retained strictly for charitable, religious, educational, fraternal or military purposes, and do not go to the benefit or use or profit of any person. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(a))

 

5.08.110 Exemptions—Occasional and incidental business.
    A.  Any person otherwise coming within the definition of the Business License Law, who does not have a fixed place of business within the city and who is called into the city or called upon to perform a service or act within the city which is merely occasional and incidental to a business being conducted elsewhere, shall be entitled to an exemption from the securing of a business license and payment of any license fee imposed under the Business License Law.

    B.   The city council finds that “occasional and incidental” shall have the following meaning:

    1.   Delivery from outside the city to a point within the city, or delivery from a point within the city to a place outside the city of goods, wares, merchandise, food products or personal property of any nature where five or less of any such deliveries are made by the person making the deliveries within any fiscal year, as established by the city council; or

    2.   The performance of acts or services of an emergency nature in order to protect the health, life or property or right or rights of anyone living, residing, owning property or being situated within the city, and where performed five or less times within the city during any fiscal year established by the city council. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(c))

 

5.08.120 Exemptions—Public utility and franchise holders.
    All public utilities or privately owned public utilities which are holders of a franchise from the city shall be exempt from the provisions of the Business License Law. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(g))

 

5.08.130 Exemptions—Under federal or state law.
    Every person claiming to be entitled to an exemption from payment of any license fee provided for in this chapter upon the ground that such license fee is exempt under the Constitutions of the United States or California, or any federal or state law shall submit an application in accordance with Section 5.08.020 of this title disclosing the character of the business entitling such exemption. The application shall state the name and location of the company or firm claiming the exemption, the type of business conducted, and facts establishing that such person, organization or firm comes within the exemption of the state law. Additional information shall be supplied to the director of finance, or his or her designee, or city attorney upon request in order to ascertain whether or not the claimant meets the exemption of the Constitutions of the United States or California, or any federal or state law. In case of dispute, the decision of the city attorney shall be final. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(f))

 

5.08.140 Exemptions—Interstate commerce.
    A.  Every person claiming to be entitled to exemption from the payment of any license provided for in this chapter upon the ground that such license casts a burden upon his or her rights to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the several states, or conflicts with the regulations of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall submit an application in accordance with Section 5.08.020 of this title disclosing the interstate or other character of his or her business entitling such exemption. Such application shall state the name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and his or her address, the kind of goods to be delivered, the name from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state, the method of delivery, the name and location of the residence of the applicant, and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption. Upon the request of the director of finance, his or her designee, or city attorney, a copy of the order blank, contract form or other papers used by such person in taking orders shall be submitted in such form or manner as requested.

    B.   If it appears that the applicant is entitled to such exemption, the director of finance, or his or her designee, shall forthwith issue a business license, without the imposition of a business license fee. In case of dispute, the decision of the city attorney shall be final. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(e))

 

5.08.150 Submittal of application to establish exemption.
    A.  Unless explicitly affirmed otherwise within this chapter, any person claiming an exemption from the business license fee imposed by this chapter shall notwithstanding submit a complete business license application pursuant to Section 5.08.020 of this chapter, along with the submittal of any required and proper information or documentation, including any applicable tax designation or classification from federal or state taxing authorities. The burden of proof in all cases shall be upon the applicant to establish pursuant to the provisions of this title a valid basis for the exemption for the payment of a fee imposed by this title.

    B.   Any such business license exempt from paying a business license fee shall be issued by the director of finance, or his or her designee, only for the minimum license period of any such business, and may be renewed for the same period under the same conditions and in the same manner as originally obtained. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(i))

 

5.08.160 Revocation of exemptions.
    At any time that it shall appear to the director of finance, or his or her designee, that a condition specified in this chapter as meriting exemption from payment of business license fees or business license requirements does not exist as to any person to whom any such exemption has been allowed, the exemption shall be void and payment of the entire business license fee, along with any penalties and interest, shall be immediately due. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6223(j))

 

5.08.170 Specific business regulations.
    Businesses or business activities specifically enumerated within this title that are required to adhere to specific business regulations and/or procure a regulatory business permit shall also adhere to the business license provisions of this title. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6400)

 

5.08.180 License posting and display.
    Except as otherwise specifically provided by the provisions of this title, all licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:

    A.  Subject to other provisions of this title, any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted;

    B.   Any person engaged in business in the city, but not operating from a fixed place of business, shall keep the license issued to him or her upon his or her person at all times while engaged in such business. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6207(a), (b))

 

5.08.190 Display of decals or plates or business licensing information for vehicles, carts and baskets.
    A.  As directed by the director of finance, or his or her designee, each person driving, operating or having control of any wagon, cart or other vehicle, or using or controlling any tray, basket or other receptacle, or controlling, possessing or operating any machine, device or equipment, including vending or other coin-operated machines, where a license is required under the provisions of this title, shall affix thereon a city-issued license tag or plate or decal and at the place directed by the director of finance, or his or her designee; or, if the director of finance, shall so direct, shall procure a license holder and fix thereon for the purpose of holding the city license; or, if the director of finance, shall so direct, shall carry a license or identification card, as directed by the director of finance, upon his or her person. Any license plate or tag or decal shall be conspicuously placed so that it is always plainly visible.

    B.   No person shall keep any license or plate or tag or decal or identification card longer than thirty days after the expiration of the term for which the license is issued, and no person, except the licensee or his or her authorized agent, shall take or remove any license, plate, tag or identification card from the person lawfully entitled to the same, or remove from the place where posted or fixed. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6207(c))

 

5.08.200 Identification cards required when.
    Wherever specified in this title, persons engaged in business within the city at a place other than a fixed place of business, or based on other criteria as determined by the director of finance or his or her designee, shall at all times while so engaged in such business within the city, carry upon their person an identification card issued by the director of finance, or his or her designee, setting forth the name and address of the licensee as well as the name and address of the employee if the person so engaged in the business is one other than the licensee and, in addition, setting forth such other identification matter deemed necessary by the director of finance, or his or her designee. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6207(d))

 

5.08.210 Duplicate license fees.
    A duplicate license may be issued by the director of finance, or his or her designee, to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the applicant therefor submitting an affidavit attesting to such fact and at the time of submitting such affidavit paying to the director of finance, or his or her designee, a fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1001 § 1, 2003; prior code § 6206)

 

5.08.220 Term and validity of license.
    Except in cases specifically provided for otherwise in this title, the license term for licenses issued hereunder shall be for a term of twelve months, commencing from the first day of the calendar year quarter in which the license is first issued.

    A.  Semiannual licenses shall be from the first day of the quarter of the calendar year in which the same are issued, for a period of six months.

    B.   Quarterly licenses shall be from the first day of the calendar quarter in which the license is issued to and through the last day of the calendar quarter.

    C.   Monthly licenses shall be from the first day of the calendar month in which such licenses are issued to the end of the calendar month.

    D.  Weekly licenses shall commence on Monday of each week and shall terminate on Sunday.

    E.   Daily licenses shall commence at one minute past midnight of any day and shall terminate at midnight of that day.

    A business license shall be valid only for the term for which it was issued, and shall expire after the term designated therein. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6213)

 

5.08.230 Renewal—Delinquency penalty.
    Unless specified otherwise in this title, or in any special permit or license, all licenses shall be subject to renewal upon the anniversary date of the license, and the fee for same shall then be immediately due and owing. Every person failing to pay the license fee thirty calendar days after the due date shall become subject to a delinquent penalty of ten percent of the amount of such license, and an additional delinquent penalty of ten percent of the amount of such license for each thirty days thereafter shall accrue until same plus such penalty has been paid in full. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6214)

 

5.08.240 Licenses not transferable or assignable.
    No license issued pursuant to this Business License Law shall be transferable or assignable in any manner, nor shall it authorize any person other than the licensee, or the licensee’s employees, therein named to engage in the licensed business. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6205)

 

5.08.250 Unlawful businesses not authorized.
    No license issued under the provisions of this title shall be construed as authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017; prior code § 6201)

 

5.08.260 Separate business license for each location.
    For each business operating from a fixed location, a separate business license shall be obtained for each separate branch, establishment or location of the business. Each business license shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed therefor at the location and in the manner designated on the business license. (Ord. 1108 § 3, 2017)

 

 

Article II. Permits
5.08.290 Permit and license hearing board.
    The city council does hereby create a license and permit hearing board, which shall consist of at least three members, as shall be designated by the city council. The board shall have the power to grant all permits required by this title and to revoke or suspend any permit or license granted or issued under the provisions of the Business License Law. The board shall be governed by the procedures set out in Article II of this chapter. (Prior code § 6302)

 

5.08.300 Permits—Procedure generally.
    The permit and license hearing board shall formulate all necessary rules and regulations governing the application for a permit, investigation of the application, and pertaining to any hearing before the board on such application. (Prior code § 6302(a))

 

5.08.310 Permits—Required when.
    In addition to the payment of a license fee as provided for in this title, certain businesses, professions, trades or occupations, as set forth in this title, shall first obtain, as provided in this title, a permit to operate such business, profession, trade or occupation within the city. No person shall operate a business, profession, trade or occupation, as set forth in this title, without first obtaining a permit to do so. The director of finance, or authorized deputy, shall not issue a license or accept a license fee from any person to conduct a business, profession, trade or occupation as hereinafter set forth, unless such person has in existence a valid and unexpired permit to perform such business, profession, trade and/or occupation. (Prior code § 6300)

 

5.08.320 Fees.
    The license fee prescribed in Chapter 5.38 of this title for the particular business shall be in addition to any permit application or processing fees. (Ord. 843 § 1, 1993; prior code § 6303)

 

5.08.330 Businesses requiring permits.
    Businesses, professions, trades and occupations requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter include:

    1.   Adult entertainment (see also Chapter 5.22);

    2.   Advertising on benches (see also Chapter 5.20);

    3.   Ambulances and ambulance drivers (see also Chapter 5.28);

    4.   Amusement games, rides and booths;

    5.   Bankrupt stock, bankrupt sales or close-out sales;

    6.   Billiard and pool halls;

    7.   Carnival, Circus and Rodeo. No permit shall be granted for any carnival, circus or rodeo unless located within the proper zone therefor;

    8.   Coin-operated amusement devices;

    9.   Coin-operated games of skill;

    10. Entertainment (see also Chapter 5.45);

    11. Food and ice cream vendors and hawkers (see also Chapter 5.40);

    12. Fortunetelling (see also Chapter 5.48);

    13. Guards and patrolmen (see also Chapter 5.50);

    14. Handbill Distributors.

    a.   No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill within the city except in compliance with the provisions of this title,

    b.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title the contrary, application fees for permits and for annual renewal thereof pertaining to handbill distribution shall be five dollars per person (see also Chapter 5.52);

    15. Hawkers, vendors, peddlers and solicitors (see also Chapters 5.40 and 5.54);

    16. House-number painter;

    17. Locksmith;

    18. Massage parlors;

    19. Rodeo;

    20. Solicitor. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, solicitor permits shall be renewed annually on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of such permit. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, application fees for permits and for the annual renewal thereof pertaining to solicitors shall be five dollars per person;

    21. Sound trucks, advertising by (see also Chapter 5.68);

    22. Street vendors (see also Chapter 5.54);

    23. Taxicab Driver, Annual Renewal; Permit Fee. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, taxicab driver permits shall be renewed annually on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit. Such permit may be renewed by the director of finance, provided he or she has received a favorable report therefor from the law enforcement agency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, application fees for permits and for the annual renewal thereof pertaining to taxicab drivers shall be five dollars each (see also Chapter 5.70);

    24. Taxicab operator. (Ord. 1104 § 4, 2017; prior code §§ 6305(a)—(c), (e)—(m), (o)—(x), (aa), (cc), (dd), (hh))

 

5.08.340 Businesses not enumerated.
    It is the intention of this title to provide a special permit procedure for those businesses enumerated in this title. The omission to enumerate other businesses and activities covered in other sections of the code requiring permits or subject to franchises shall not be deemed or construed as an intention upon the part of the city council to relieve such businesses or occupations from the permit procedure or franchise procedure under which they may be governed by other sections of this code or state law. (Prior code § 6301)

 

5.08.350 Modification of permits.
    Any permit may be modified, or the terms and provisions of any permit modified, amended or changed upon application and a hearing before the permit hearing board. Such application for a modification shall be processed in the same manner as the original application, and shall be subject to the payment of fees and all the terms and provisions imposed in this title in respect to the processing of the original application. (Prior code § 6306)

 

5.08.360 Permit issuance for specific businesses.
    A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.08.370, providing for the issuance of permits for the aforementioned businesses by the permit hearing board or the city council, the director of finance may issue permits for the hereinafter named businesses without submission of the same to the permit hearing board or the city council when he or she has obtained the necessary clearance from the law enforcement agency, health agency, or other investigating agency, and where he or she has received no evidence indicating that the public health, safety or welfare or the purposes of this title will be injured by the granting of such a permit, and where, in addition, there are no protests or objections to the permit. In the event any of the foregoing should exist, the director of finance must refer the application for a permit to the permit hearing board, or the city council if so directed by the permit hearing board. In addition, the director of finance may refer any of the hereinafter mentioned applications for hearing before the permit hearing board without considering the same him or her or herself, in his or her discretion, and the director of finance must refer all applications for permits for the hereinafter enumerated businesses for hearing before the permit hearing board when the action of the director of finance would be to deny such permit.

    B.   This section applies to the following enumerated businesses enumerated in this title:

    1.   Adult entertainment (Chapter 5.22);

    2.   Advertising by benches, provided in addition, however, that the director of finance shall not authorize the placement of any such bench at a location other than at a regular bus stop (Chapter 5.20);

    3.   Ambulance driver (Chapter 5.28);

    4.   Ambulances (Chapter 5.28);

    5.   Amusement games, rides and booths (Chapter 5.30);

    6.   Bankrupt stock, bankrupt sales or close-out sales;

    7.   Coin-operated amusement devices (Chapter 5.30);

    8.   Coin-operated games of skill (Chapter 5.30);

    9.   Fortunetelling (Chapter 5.48);

    10. Guard (Chapter 5.50);

    11. Hawkers and retail vendors of food and ice cream products (Chapter 5.54);

    12. Locksmith (Chapter 5.58);

    13. Motion picture filming and related activities (Chapter 5.61);

    14. Pawnbroker (Chapter 5.64);

    15. Peddlers (Chapter 5.54);

    16. Solicitor (Chapter 5.54);

    17. Street vendors (Chapter 5.54);

    18. Taxicab driver (Chapter 5.70). (Ord. 769 § 1, 1990; Ord. 696 § 10, 1985; Ord. 694 § 22, 1985; prior code § 6307)

 

5.08.370 Grant or denial of permit—Conditions.
    A.  The permit hearing board, after hearing, shall have the power to grant or deny a permit. Except as otherwise provided in this title, all special permits required by this title shall be issued only pursuant to hearing before the board, wherein any pertinent evidence shall be received and considered by the board in determining, in accordance with the following principles, whether or not such a permit should be granted or denied. Upon receipt of an application for a permit under this title, the same shall be referred by the director of finance to the appropriate agencies for investigation and report pertaining to relevant zoning, building, health, safety, fire, law enforcement and other factors, and upon receipt of such reports the matter shall be set for hearing before the board upon prior written notice to the applicant of not less than five days, unless the notice should be waived by the applicant.

    B.   At the time of the hearing, the board shall consider and hear all reports and any relevant and material evidence. In any such hearing, the applicant shall be given an opportunity to appear either personally or by counsel, and to be heard and to call witnesses on his or her behalf. The hearing may be continued from time to time as determined necessary by the board, or upon request of the applicant upon cause being shown therefor.

    C.   If a permit is denied, the license fee paid shall be refunded, but the permit fee shall not be refundable.

    D.  The board, or the city council, as the case may be, shall have the right to refuse to grant any permit if it determines that the granting of the same or the conduct of the business will be contrary to the preservation of the public peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the city or its inhabitants. In addition, no permit shall be granted if:

    1.   The granting of the permit would result in the establishment of the use or occupancy of land in violation of the zoning ordinance or zoning law or zoning map of the city;

    2.   The granting of the permit would result in an occupancy or use in violation of any other provision or regulation of this code;

    3.   The granting of the permit would be contrary to any other standards or provisions of this chapter applicable thereto;

    4.   The granting of the permit or occupancy or use pursuant thereto would result in the creation or maintenance of a public nuisance;

    5.   The granting of the permit by reason of special or unusual circumstances would be detrimental to the public interest or endanger the public health, safety, morals or welfare;

    6.   The applicant therefor is a person unfit to be trusted with the privileges granted by such a permit, and it is in the public interest that he or she not be granted such a permit;

    7.   The applicant therefor has knowingly made a false statement on a material matter in his or her application, or in his or her testimony before the board or city council and it is, therefor, in the public interest that he or she not be granted such a permit.

    E.   In granting any such permit, the board or city council, as the case may be, may in the application of the aforementioned standards and principles, and in order to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals and welfare, impose reasonable conditions or regulations pertaining to the conducting of such business, or the occupancy or use of any land or building in connection therewith, in addition to but not limited by those regulations contained in this title, where necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, morals and welfare. (Prior code § 6302(b))

 

5.08.380 Permits not transferable.
    No permit issued under this title shall be transferable except by the consent of the council. (Prior code § 6304)

 

5.08.390 Revocation or suspension—Conditions.
    Any license or permit issued under the Business License Law may be revoked or suspended in the following instances:

    A.  Where the board has found and determined that the preservation of the public health, safety and peace demand revocation of the license or permit;

    B.   Where the licensee or permittee has violated any provisions of the Business License Law or any other provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, or any other provision of law;

    C.   Where a permit or license has been granted on false or fraudulent evidence, testimony or application;

    D.  Where the licensee or permittee has violated the terms and provisions of the license or permit. (Prior code § 6302 (c)(part))

 

5.08.400 Revocation or suspension—Exemptions.
    Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provision of this title to the contrary, licenses issued to chiropractors, laboratory technicians, dentists, medical doctors, opticians, physical therapists, nurses, psychologists, pharmacists, veterinarians, accountants, advertising agencies, architects, landscape architects, building designers, attorneys, barbers, engineers, collection agencies, contractors, cosmetologists, private detectives, funeral directors, shorthand reporters, structural pest-control operators, land surveyors, ship brokers, cleaners and dyers, electronic repair dealers, real estate agents and brokers, marriage counselors, auto dealers, boxers and wrestlers, furniture and bedding dealers and manufacturers, manufacturers of paints, petroleum activities, dealers in secondhand goods, or any other business, profession or trade where the determination of issuance or revocation of the right of any person to engage in such business, profession or trade is vested in a state board or agency, shall be issued upon filing the requisite application and payment of the requisite fees, and shall not be subject to revocation or suspension, except any such licenses may be revoked for nonpayment of fees, or upon revocation of the state board or agency license. (Prior code § 6302 (c)(part))

 

5.08.410 Revocation or suspension—Hearing.
    A.  No license or permit shall be revoked or suspended until the permittee has had a public hearing before the permit board and has had an opportunity either personally or by counsel, or by both, to defend himself and present evidence on his or her behalf. Such public hearing shall be preceded by reasonable notice as provided in the rules and regulations of the permit board.

    B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director of finance may suspend pending such a hearing any license or permit where it has been determined that:

    1.   Upon the recommendation of the law enforcement agency or upon the recommendation of the city council that an immediate suspension of the license is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare;

    2.   In the event of such a suspension, the director of finance shall, within twelve hours after the suspension, cause to be served upon the licensee or permittee a written statement containing the grounds for the suspension, and a notice of hearing to show cause before the permit hearing board why such license should not be permanently revoked, which such hearing shall be held not later than five days following the service of the notice. (Prior code § 6302(d))

 

5.08.420 Appeal from decision at hearing.
    A.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the permit hearing board may appeal from the same by filing with the city clerk within ten days after receiving notification of the decision of the board, a written statement signed by the person so aggrieved, that he or she has elected to appeal from the decision of the board, and that he or she requests a hearing on his or her appeal before the city council. The city clerk shall thereafter set the matter for hearing before the city council within thirty days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. The hearing before the city council may be continued from time to time. The city clerk shall mail a notice to, or personally serve, the person aggrieved, notifying him or her of the time and place of the hearing, notice to be mailed and served not less than five days prior to the hearing.

    B.   At the time of the hearing, the city council shall consider the report and the decision of the hearing board, and the record and the evidence heard and submitted to the board. In addition, the city council may by majority action grant the person aggrieved a new hearing de novo before the city council. Following the conclusion of the hearing before the city council, the city council shall render its decision within thirty days. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Prior code § 6302(e))

Chapter 5.12 FEES FOR LICENSES
5.12.010 Fees levied—Purpose—Duration.
    The following license fees, set out in this chapter, are levied for the purpose of revenue and not for regulation. The fee for any license required by the Business License Law shall be as specified in Section 5.12.020 unless a different fee is otherwise specifically hereinafter required. The fee and the duration of the license shall be annual unless specifically designated otherwise. (Prior code § 6600)

 

5.12.020 Businesses, trades and professions.
    A.  Businesses, professions, trades and occupations, as defined in Section 5.12.040 of the Business License Law unless specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, shall procure a business license and pay a fee annually as follows:

 

$50.00, plus $0.50 per $1,000 of gross receipts for the first $500,000.

Gross receipts in excess of $500,000 shall be taxed at the following rate:

$500,001 to $100,000,000

$0.30 per $1,000

$100,000,001 to $1,000,000,000

0.26 per $1,000

$1,000,000,001 to $5,000,000,000

0.15 per $1,000

Over $5,000,000,000

0.13 per $1,000

 

    B.   The words “gross receipts,” as used in this section, mean gross receipts as defined in Section 5.04.280 of this title.

    C.   Where a business comes within the license provisions of this Section 5.12.020 and is not otherwise specifically provided for, the business license fee hereinbefore set forth shall apply to each separate and independent business location or situs within the city. “Independent,” as used in this section, means an independent operating business, although branch businesses or businesses under the same management and ownership may have overlapping services, management or personnel or equipment. (Prior code § 6601)

 

5.12.030 Principal solicitors.
    A.  Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provision of this title, the director of finance or an authorized deputy may issue a principal solicitor’s license to every person either employing or contracting with one or more individuals for solicitors’ services, as defined in this title. If a principal solicitor should elect to use the provisions of this section, no principal solicitor’s license shall be issued until the applicant has a contract, and unless the applicant executes an agreement that he or she will, within five days thereafter, notify the director of finance in writing of every change in personnel of those so soliciting for him or her or her. In addition, no principal solicitor’s license shall be issued until all regulatory provisions of the Business License Law have been complied with. In such an event, the application fee for a solicitor’s permit shall be included within the principal solicitor’s license fee, but each individual solicitor must obtain a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Business License Law.

    B.   Nothing herein contained shall be deemed to grant to a principal solicitor the privilege of soliciting unless there is maintained in full force and effect for each individual solicitor a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Business License Law.

    C.   The license fee for a principal solicitor’s license shall be two hundred fifty dollars annually, plus five dollars for each solicitor to whom a permit is issued. (Prior code § 6601.1)

 

5.12.040 Fees for specific businesses.
    The following businesses, professions, trades and/or occupations, set out in Sections 5.12.050 through 5.12.210 of this chapter, because of their nature and circumstances, shall have a different license fee than that set forth in Section 5.12.020, which shall be in the amount hereinafter set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 6602)

 

5.12.050 Amusement games, rides and booths.
    The fee for amusement games, rides and booths shall be fifty dollars per game or booth, and fifteen dollars per ride. (Prior code § 6602.1a)

 

5.12.060 Antiques, stamp and coin dealers.
    The fees for antique dealers, stamp dealers and coin dealers shall be as follows:

    A.  Antique Dealers. Fifty dollars, plus fifty cents per one thousand dollars on the first five hundred thousand dollars of gross receipts. Gross receipts over five hundred thousand dollars will be taxed at the rates specified in Section 5.12.020.

    B.   Stamp Dealers. Fifty dollars, plus fifty cents per one thousand dollars on the first five hundred thousand dollars of gross receipts. Gross receipts over five hundred thousand dollars will be taxed at the rates specified in Section 5.12.020.

    C.   Coin Dealers. Fifty dollars, plus fifty cents per one thousand dollars on the first five hundred thousand dollars of gross receipts. Gross receipts over five hundred thousand dollars will be taxed at the rates specified in Section 5.12.020. (Prior code § 6602.13)

 

5.12.070 Billiard or pool halls.
    The fee for billiard or pool halls shall be one hundred dollars for the first table and five dollars for each additional table. (Prior code § 6602.1)

 

5.12.080 Bingo games.
    The fee for organizations authorized to conduct bingo games shall be fifty dollars. If an application for a license is denied, one-half of any license fee paid shall be refunded to the applicant. (Prior code § 6602.14)

 

5.12.090 Boardinghouses, apartments and hotels.
    Every person conducting an apartment house, as defined in Section 15003 of the Health and Safety Code, a hotel as defined in Section 15020 of the Health and Safety Code, a bungalow court, a boardinghouse, or any other building or group of contiguous buildings containing three or more rental units shall pay a license fee as follows: Three to ten rental units, seventy-five dollars, plus five dollars for each rental unit over ten. (Prior code § 6602.2)

 

5.12.100 Bowling alleys.
    The fee for bowling alleys shall be fifty dollars for the first alley, plus twelve dollars for each additional alley. (Prior code § 6602.3)

 

5.12.110 Carnivals, circuses and rodeos.
    The fee for carnivals, circuses and rodeos shall be one hundred fifty dollars per day. (Prior code § 6602.4)

 

5.12.120 Adult entertainment.
    A.  Any person conducting an adult business, as defined in this title, shall pay a single license fee of five hundred dollars per year.

    B.   Any person employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained in an adult business to participate in or give any live performance displaying “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities,” as defined in this title, shall pay a single license fee of five hundred dollars per year. (Ord. 1104 § 5, 2017; Ord. 980 § 2, 2002; prior code § 6602.5)

 

5.12.130 Deliveries and limousines.
    A.  The fee for deliveries and limousines shall be forty-five dollars per vehicle, for all types of deliveries, including pickup and delivery, whether wholesale or retail, of goods, liquids, materials, edibles, personal property of any nature, petroleum products, and all other kinds and types of property where there is no fixed place of business.

    B.   “Limousines,” for the purpose of this section, means and includes large, luxurious sedans, vans, buses and every motor vehicle for hire used in the business of carrying passengers from one location to another. The destination and route of the vehicle for hire is under the control of the passengers being carried therein. “Limousines” do not include taxis or ambulances. (Prior code § 6602.6)

 

5.12.140 Drive-in and take-out restaurants, beer bars.
    The fee for drive-in restaurants, take-out restaurants and beer bars shall be one hundred dollars for the first twenty-four thousand dollars of gross receipts, plus fifty cents for each one thousand dollars of gross receipts exceeding twenty-four thousand dollars. (Prior code § 6602.12)

 

5.12.150 Fortunetelling businesses.
    Every person engaged in the business of fortunetelling shall pay an annual license tax of five hundred dollars. (Ord. 703 § 4, 1985; prior code § 6602.6a)

 

5.12.160 Handbill distribution.
    The fee for handbill distribution is five dollars per applicant that is issued a business license pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 6602.15)

 

5.12.170 Rubbish, waste or garbage.
    The fee for rubbish, waste or garbage collection or transportation shall be four hundred dollars, plus fifty dollars per vehicle. (Prior code § 6602.7)

 

5.12.180 Secondhand businesses.
    A.  Secondhand businesses include:

    1.   Auto wreckers;

    2.   Pawnbrokers;

    3.   Secondhand dealers;

    4.   Junk dealers.

    B.   The license fee for the above-named businesses shall be as follows: Minimum fee, three hundred dollars for the first five hundred thousand dollars of gross receipts, plus additional taxes as computed in Section 5.12.020 for all gross receipts over five hundred thousand dollars.

    C.   Junk Collectors. The fee for junk collectors shall be one hundred dollars, plus seventy-five dollars per vehicle. (Prior code § 6602.8)

 

5.12.190 Street vendors and solicitors.
    The fee for street vendors and solicitors (other than principal solicitors and mobile vendors) shall be as follows:

    A.  Daily fee, twenty dollars per vendor;

    B.   Yearly fee, one hundred sixty dollars per vendor. (Prior code § 6602.16)

 

5.12.200 Theaters.
    A.  The fees for theaters shall be as follows:

    1.   Walk-in, five hundred dollars;

    2.   Drive-in, seven hundred dollars.

    B.   This fee shall apply to any place displaying moving, motion or still film and coming within the definition of Section 5.04.100 of this title, and shall be in addition to any other fee imposed upon such business by this chapter. (Prior code § 6602.9)

 

5.12.210 Trailer parks.
    The fee for trailer parks shall be seventy-five dollars for the first five spaces, plus eight dollars for each additional space. (Prior code § 6602.17)

 

5.12.220 Vending machines.
    Every person engaged in the business of operating, maintaining or letting the use of any mechanical device within the city which dispenses or vends an article of value, the operation of which depends upon the insertion of a coin or other thing representative of value, shall pay an annual license fee in the following amounts:

    A.  One dollar per year per machine, for each machine located within the city which is operated by the insertion of a coin or thing of value in the denomination of four cents or less;

    B.   An amount based on one percent of gross receipts derived within the city directly attributable to the vending machines located within the city, which machines are operated by the insertion of a coin or thing of value in the denomination of five cents or more. (Prior code § 6602.11)

Chapter 5.16 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
5.16.010 Director of finance.
    The director of finance, or his or her designee, shall serve as administrator of this title. The director of finance, or his or her designee, may formulate in writing all necessary rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this law and to aid in its enforcement, and in general shall do all things necessary and proper to carry out the spirit and intent of this law. Determinations concerning information submitted to aid in the computation of a fee, qualifications for an exemption, or other duties to carry out the provisions of this law, shall be an administrative function of the director of finance, or his or her designee. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code § 6203)

 

5.16.020 Director of finance’s designee.
    The director of finance’s deputies, staff, contractual representative or agent of the city, any other person having the authority to enforce the provisions of this title or code, or as deemed appropriate by the director of finance to carry out and enforce the provisions of this law, shall collectively be the director of finance’s “designee.” The director of finance’s designee shall be directly responsible to the director of finance and under his or her supervision, control and direction. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code § 6212)

 

5.16.030 Enforcement.
    It shall be the duty of the director of finance, or his or her designee, or law enforcement to enforce each and all of the provisions of this title and of any other chapter of this code requiring the submittal of a complete business license and/or permit application, securing of a business license and/or permit, and payment of any license and/or permit fee. In addition, the director of finance, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for the issuance of permits and licenses provided for in this title, and/or for the proper processing as required in this title of all applications and permits. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code § 6208)

 

5.16.040 Enforcement—Right of entry, inspection and examination of places of business, and right to audit and examine books, records and equipment.
    A.  The director of finance, or his or her designee, shall have the authority and power to inspect and examine all places of business in the city to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this title have been complied with.

    B.   The director of finance, or his or her designee, or the city attorney shall have the power and authority to audit and/or examine all necessary books, records, and equipment of all persons doing business in the city required to be licensed or permitted or that have been granted certain exemptions by the terms of this title for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of license fee required to be paid by the provisions of this title, and/or for the purpose of verifying any information, evidence, or documentation submitted, or having failed to submit contrary to the provisions of this title.

    C.   The director of finance, his or her designee, or the city attorney shall have the power and authority to enter free of charge and at any reasonable time any place of business required to be licensed or permitted by the provisions of this title and to demand an exhibition of a current and valid business license or permit, books, records or equipment, or other matters of record.

    D.  Failure to exhibit such current and valid business license or permit upon demand shall be deemed to be a violation of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code §§ 6209, 6210)

 

5.16.050 Effect of repeals and amendments.
    Except where a repealing or amendatory ordinance specifically provides otherwise, the amendment or repeal of any provision of this title shall not be construed to operate as a release or waiver of any requirement, liability, or sum of money which may be due or owing to the city by any person pursuant to provisions of said title as they existed prior to such amendment or repeal. The rule of construction required by this section is declared to be in clarification and confirmation of the existing intent of this title, and is not to be construed as applying solely to the effect of repealing or amending ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this section. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017)

 

5.16.060 Violation—Penalty.
    A.  No person shall violate any provision, restriction, regulation, or requirement of this title, or any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this title. Any person violating any provision, restriction, regulation or requirement of this title, or any condition of a permit issued pursuant to this title, is guilty of a misdemeanor, consistent with Section 1.20.010 of this code.

    B.   The conviction or imprisonment of any person for violating any of the provisions of the Business License Law shall not relieve such person from paying the license fee to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any license fee prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of the provisions of the Business License Law.

    C.   All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the prosecution for violations of this title.

    D.  Whenever in this title any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code § 6211)

 

5.16.070 Refunds.
    No fee shall be refunded unless it is determined by the director of finance, or his or her designee, that a fee has been paid in error, computed incorrectly, or overpaid. No refund shall be made unless a request is received by the director of finance, or his or her designee, within one year of the payment of the fee to the city. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code § 6216)

 

5.16.080 License fee payment—Suit for recovery.
    Any person required to have a business license under the terms and provisions of the Business License Law who fails to pay any sum therein required of such person to the city when due and owing shall be deemed indebted to the city and shall be liable in an action by and in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such amount, plus penalties, as set forth in this title, together with all appropriate costs of collection, including reasonable attorney fees, if litigation is reasonably required to collect same. All remedies prescribed or permitted by law shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1108 § 5, 2017; prior code § 6202)

Chapter 5.18 PROHIBITION OF ADVERTISING BENCHES
5.18.010 Advertising benches unlawful.
    It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain on any public street, road, alleyway, parkway, sidewalk or public property in the city any advertising bench. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2000)

 

5.18.020 Advertising bench defined.
    “Advertising bench,” for the purposes of the herein chapter and Chapter 5.20, Repealed, means a seat for the use and accommodation of a person and/or persons awaiting transportation, which seat is located upon any public thoroughfare or public right-of-way including a sidewalk, parkway or any public property bordering upon a public right-of-way, regardless of whether said seat contains advertising material or not. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2000)

 

5.18.030 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to any advertising bench placed or maintained on any public street, road, alleyway, parkway, sidewalk or public property within the city. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2000)

 

5.18.040 Lawfully existing advertising benches.
    Any advertising bench lawfully in existence on the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Chapter 5.18, shall be allowed to continue in use for the period of time specified in the existing permit issued pursuant to the prior Chapter 5.20, Repealed, for that advertising bench plus six months, subject to the regulations contained in Chapter 5.20, Repealed, the following conditions and any other provisions contained hereto Chapter 5.18.

    A.  All license fees as well as all permit issuance fees and additional fees required under Chapter 5.20, Repealed, must have been paid.

    B.   All deposits required by Section 5.20.050 of Chapter 5.20, Repealed, shall have been paid. Such deposit or remainder thereof shall be refundable to the permittee at the expiration of the permit, pursuant to the provisions set forth in the aforementioned code section of Chapter 5.20, Repealed.

    C.   A policy of liability insurance shall be on file with the city engineer in the amount of one million dollars, as was required by Section 5.20.060 of Chapter 5.20, Repealed. Such insurance shall name the city as additional insured, and shall provide the city with thirty days’ prior notice of any cancellation of such insurance. If such insurance is at any time canceled during the term of the permit, the permit is immediately revoked. In such case, all such advertising benches covered by the permit must be removed within forty-eight hours of the cancellation of such insurance, or they will be impounded by the city engineer.

    D.  Only those advertising benches that are currently located at locations previously approved by the city engineer pursuant to Section 5.20.030 of Chapter 5.20, Repealed, shall be allowed to remain.

    E.   Lawfully existing advertising benches shall be placed not more than twenty-five feet from the bus stop the bus serves and not less than two feet from the curb face at its closest point. Said advertising benches shall be located on cement concrete. If a curbside sidewalk is not available, the permittee shall install a cement concrete pad not less than forty-eight inches by ninety-six inches in size. Such pad shall extend from the inside edge of the curb and shall be constructed in accordance with city standards. All benches shall be anchored in an approved manner to the concrete slab or sidewalk, unless written approval has been otherwise granted by the city engineer.

    F.   Each lawfully existing advertising bench shall bear the name and telephone number of the owner of the bench in letters not less than one inch in height and not more than two inches in height. This information must be visible from the street.

    G.  Each lawfully existing advertising bench shall be maintained by the permittee in good, safe, neat and clean condition and shall be repaired, removed or replaced within ten days after notification by the city engineer, provided, however, that in the event the city engineer determines that the same is unsafe or creates a dangerous or defective condition, the city engineer may order the same removed within twenty four hours. If any bench is not repaired or removed by the permittee within the time specified by the city engineer, the same may be removed by the city and the cost thereof shall be chargeable to the permittee.

    H.  Written notification must be given to the city by the permittee within ten days of the removal of any bench. Benches shall not be moved from one location to another.

    I.    Any advertising bench lawfully existing upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section shall comply with the provisions of the herein Chapter 5.18 within sixty days. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2000)

 

5.18.050 Illegal benches— Impoundment procedure.
    A.  Any advertising bench so placed or maintained on public property without a permit to do so is declared to be a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public and shall be immediately impounded by the city engineer. Notice of such action and the right to request a hearing in accordance with this title shall be mailed to the person, if known, maintaining such advertising bench, within five working days after such action. The request for such hearing must be presented to the city engineer in writing within five working days of the date the notice was mailed.

    B.   If a hearing on the impounding of the advertising bench is not timely requested, or if the advertising bench is not returned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer may sell or otherwise dispose of the advertising bench and deposit the proceeds, if any, from any sale or other disposition in the city treasury.

    C.   A claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of an impounded advertising bench may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the impounding, and if a hearing pursuant to this chapter is held concerning the advertising bench may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the decision at such hearing becomes final, obtain a return of the advertising bench upon paying an impound fee of twenty-five dollars plus the reasonable additional cost, if any, of impounding the advertising bench in excess of twenty-five dollars. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2000)

 

5.18.060 Revocation of permit conditions.
    A.  Any permit issued for such advertising bench may be revoked at any time following a determination by the city engineer that the continual maintenance of the bench would constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public using such street, road, alleyway, sidewalk, parkway, or other public property in the city.

    B.   The city engineer shall notify the permittee of such determination. The permittee may request in writing, in the manner set forth in Section 5.18.050 of this chapter, a hearing before the city engineer or his or her designate. A decision shall be rendered within five working days after the close of the hearing. The city engineer or his or her designate may give oral notice of the decision at the close of the hearing or may send written notice of the decision by mail. (Ord. 955 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 5.22 ADULT BUSINESSES
5.22.010 Purpose.
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the operations of adult businesses, which tend to have judicially recognized adverse secondary effects on the community, including, but not limited to, increases in crime in the vicinity of adult businesses; decreases in property values in the vicinity of adult businesses; increases in vacancies in residential and commercial areas in the vicinity of adult businesses; interference with residential property owners’ enjoyment of their properties when such properties are located in the vicinity of adult businesses as a result of increases in crime, litter, noise, and vandalism; and deterioration of neighborhoods. Special regulation of these businesses is necessary to prevent these adverse secondary effects and the blighting or degradation of the neighborhoods in the vicinity of adult businesses while at the same time protecting the First Amendment rights of those individuals who desire to own, operate or patronize adult businesses.

    It is, therefore, the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform operational standards for adult businesses. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.020 Definitions.
    In addition to any other definitions contained in the Municipal Code, the following words and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be defined as follows, unless it is clearly apparent from the context that another meaning is intended. Should any of the definitions be in conflict with any current provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall prevail.

    A.  “Adult arcade” means a business establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and where coin, card or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled devices, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images on a regular or substantial basis, where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” Such devices shall be referred to as “adult arcade devices.”

    B.   “Adult retail store” means a business establishment having as a regular and substantial portion of its stock in trade, “adult oriented material.”

    C.   “Adult booth/Individual viewing area” means a partitioned or partially enclosed portion of an adult business used for any of the following purposes:

    1.   Where a live or taped performance is presented or viewed, where the performances and/or images displayed or presented are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or

    2.   Where “adult arcade devices” are located.

    D.  “Adult business” means:

    1.   A business establishment or concern that as a regular and substantial course of conduct operates as an adult retail store, adult motion picture theater, adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motel or hotel, adult modeling studio; or

    2.   A business establishment or concern which as a regular and substantial course of conduct offers, sells or distributes “adult oriented material” or “sexually oriented merchandise,” or which offers to its patrons materials, products, merchandise, services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” but not including those uses or activities which are preempted by state law.

    E.   “Adult cabaret” means a business establishment (whether or not serving alcoholic beverages) that features “adult live entertainment.”

    F.   “Adult hotel/Motel” means a “hotel” or “motel” (as defined in the Municipal Code) that is used for presenting on a regular and substantial basis images through closed circuit television, cable television, still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, holograms, virtual reality devices or other image-producing devices that are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting or describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

    G.  “Adult live entertainment” means any physical human body activity, whether performed or engaged in, alone or with other persons, including but not limited to singing, walking, speaking, dancing, acting, posing, simulating, wrestling or pantomiming, in which: (1) the performer (including but not limited to a topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, or similar performers) exposes to public view, without opaque covering, “specified anatomical areas”; and/or (2) the performance or physical human body activity depicts, describes, or relates to “specified sexual activities” whether or not the specified anatomical areas are covered.

    H.  “Adult modeling studio” means a business establishment which provides for any form of consideration, the services of a live human model, who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, displays “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, filmed, painted, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons paying for such consideration. “Adult modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the state of California.

    I.    “Adult motion picture theater” means a business establishment, with or without a stage or proscenium, where, on a regular and substantial basis and for any form of consideration, material is presented through films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser disks, digital video disks, holograms, virtual reality devices, or similar electronically-generated reproductions that is characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

    J.    “Adult oriented material” means accessories, paraphernalia, books, magazines, laser disks, compact discs, digital video disks, photographs, prints, drawings, paintings, motion pictures, pamphlets, videos, slides, tapes, holograms or electronically generated images or devices including computer software, or any combination thereof that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.” “Adult oriented material” shall include “sexually oriented merchandise.”

    K.  “Child day care facility.” Any child day care facility as defined in Section 1596.750 of the California Health and Safety Code other than family day care homes.

    L.   “Establishment of an adult business” means any of the following:

    1.   The opening or commencement of any “adult business” (as defined above) as a new business;

    2.   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an “adult business”, to any “adult business”;

    3.   The addition of any “adult business” to any other existing “adult business”;

    4.   The relocation of any “adult business”; or

    5.   Physical changes that expand the square footage of an existing “adult business” by more than ten percent.

    M.  “Owner/Permit holder” means any of the following:

    1.   The sole proprietor of an adult business;

    2.   Any general partner of a partnership that owns and operates an adult business;

    3.   The owner of a controlling interest in a corporation that owns and operates an adult business; or

    4.   The person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult business owned and operated by the corporation.

    N.  “Performer” means a person who is an employee or independent contractor of an adult business or any other person who, with or without any compensation or other form of consideration, provides adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business.

    O.  “Sexually oriented merchandise” means sexually oriented implements, paraphernalia, or novelty items, such as, but not limited to: dildos, auto sucks, sexually oriented vibrators, benwa balls, inflatable orifices, anatomical balloons with orifices, simulated and battery operated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sado-masochistic activity or distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”

    P.   “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of the following:

    1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered, and/or simulated to be reasonably anatomically correct, even if completely and opaquely covered human:

    a.   Genitals, pubic region;

    b.   Buttocks, anus; or

    c.   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

    2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.

    Q.  “Specified sexual activities” means and includes any of the following, irrespective of whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

    1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;

    2.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual stimulation or arousal;

    3.   Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation;

    4.   Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain, or bondage and/or restraints;

    5.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation; and/or

    6.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock, or female breast. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.030 Adult business regulatory permit required.
    All adult businesses are subject to the adult business regulatory permit requirements of this chapter as well as all other applicable ordinances of the city and laws of the state of California.

    A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult business within the City of Pico Rivera unless the person first obtains, and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult business regulatory permit as herein required. Any occurrence of the “establishment of an adult business” as defined in Section 5.22.020(D), shall require a new application for an adult business regulatory permit. The adult business regulatory permit shall be subject to the development and operational standards of this chapter and the underlying zone where the facility is located.

    B.   The city director of community development or his/her designee shall grant or deny adult business regulatory permits in accordance with these regulations.

    C.   The city planning commission shall suspend or revoke adult business regulatory permits in accordance with these regulations.

    D.  Permit applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified application on a form provided by the planning department. Such application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

    1.   If the permit applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen years of age.

    2.   If the permit applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

    3.   If the permit applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process.

    4.   A signed and verified statement that the permit applicant, if an individual, or partners, officers, directors, if a partnership or corporation, has not pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex or sex-related offense and (a) more than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) more than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) more than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period.

    5.   The permit applicant shall sign the application. All persons who sign the application must also provide names, aliases, addresses, and date of birth.

    6.   If the permit applicant intends to operate the adult business under a name other than that of the permit applicant, the permit applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name.

    7.   A description of the type of adult business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult business will operate, plus the names and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult business site.

    8.   The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed.

    9.   A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be oriented to the north or some other designated street or object and drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.

    10. A diagram of the off-street parking areas and entries to the premises of the adult business, also showing the location of the lighting system required by this chapter.

    E.   The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. The amount of such fees shall be set by the city council.

    F.   The completeness of an application for an adult business regulatory permit shall be determined by the director of community development or his/her designee within five working days of its submittal. If the director of community development or his/her designee determines that the permit application is incomplete, the director of community development shall immediately notify in writing the permit applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Such writing shall be deposited in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid, immediately upon determination that the application is incomplete. Within five working days following the receipt of an amended application or supplemental information, the director of community development or his/her designee shall again determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the provisions set forth above. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided herein until such time as the application is found to be complete.

    G.  The fact that a permit applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the permit applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business regulatory permit. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.040 Investigation and action on application for adult business regulatory permit.
    A.  Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the director of community development or his/her designee shall immediately write or stamp the application “Received” and, in conjunction with city staff, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether an adult business regulatory permit shall be granted. Investigation shall not be grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application, nor is it grounds to extend the time period to conduct a hearing pursuant to this section.

    B.   Within twenty-one days of receipt of the completed application, the investigation shall be completed and the director of community development or his/her designee shall notice and conduct a public hearing with notice of such hearing to be made pursuant to California Government Code §§ 65091 and 65905.

    C.   In reaching a decision, the director of community development or his/her designee shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence in the California Evidence Code.

    D.  The director of community development or his/her designee shall render a written decision on the application for an adult business regulatory permit within two working days of the public hearing required by this section. The failure of the director of community development or his/her designee to render any decision within the time frames established in any part of this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval, subject to appeal to the city council, pursuant to Section 5.22.080. The director of community development or his/her designee decision shall be hand delivered or mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application, and shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this code.

    E.   Notwithstanding any provisions in this Section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this section or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending application. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

    F.   The director of community development or his/her designee shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this Section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

    1.   The director of community development or his/her designee shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

    2.   If the application is denied, the director of community development or his/her designee shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial.

    3.   If the application is granted, the director of community development or his/her designee shall attach to the application an adult business regulatory permit.

    G.  The director of community development or his/her designee shall grant the application and issue the adult business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets, or will meet, all of the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter, unless the application is denied based upon one or more of the criteria set forth in subsection I of this section.

    H.  If the director of community development or his/her designee grants the application, the applicant may begin operating the adult business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and operational standards and requirements of this chapter. The permit holder shall post the permit conspicuously in the premises of the adult business.

    I.    The director of community development or his/her designee shall deny the application if the applicant fails to establish any of the following:

    1.   The adult business complies with the city’s zoning requirements as to its underlying zoning designation.

    2.   The adult business complies with the development, operational or performance standards found in this chapter.

    3.   The permit applicant is at least eighteen years of age.

    4.   The required application fees have been paid.

    5.   The application complies with Section 5.22.030(D).

    J.    A person cannot re-apply for an adult business regulatory permit for a particular location within one year from the date of prior denial.

    K.  Any affected person may appeal the decision of the director of community development or his/her designee in writing within five days in accordance with the provisions of Section 18.64.040. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.050 Operating standards.
    A.  Hours of Operation. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or employee of an adult business to allow such adult business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee or performer to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service, or solicit a service, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day excepting herefrom an “adult hotel/motel.”

    B.   Exterior Lighting Requirements. All exterior areas, including parking lots, of the adult business shall be illuminated at a minimum of one and one-half foot-candle, maintained and evenly distributed at ground level with appropriate devices to screen, deflect or diffuse the lighting in such manner as to prevent glare or reflected light from creating adverse impacts on adjoining and nearby public and private properties. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within twenty-four hours of occurrence.

    C.   Interior Lighting Requirements. All interior areas of the adult business excepting therefrom adult hotels/motels shall be illuminated at a minimum of one foot-candle, maintained and evenly distributed at floor level. Inoperable and/or broken lights shall be replaced within twenty-four hours of occurrence, excepting herefrom an “adult hotel/motel.”

    D.  Regulation of Adult Booth/Individual Viewing Area.

    1.   No adult booth/individual viewing area shall be occupied by more than one individual at a time.

    2.   Each adult booth/individual viewing area within the adult business shall be visible from a continuous and accessible main aisle in a public portion of the establishment, and shall not be obscured by any door, curtain, wall, two-way mirror or other device which would prohibit a person from seeing the entire interior of the adult booth/individual viewing area from the main aisle. A manager shall be stationed in the main aisle at all times. Further, no one shall maintain any adult booth/individual viewing area in any configuration unless the entire interior wherein the picture or entertainment that is viewed is visible from one main aisle. The entire body of any patron in any adult booth/individual viewing area must be visible from the main aisle without the assistance of mirrors or any other device.

    3.   No doors are permitted on an adult booth/individual viewing area. No partially or fully enclosed adult booth/individual viewing areas or partially or fully concealed adult booth/individual viewing areas shall be maintained.

    4.   No holes or other openings (commonly known as “glory holes”) shall be permitted between adult booths/individual viewing areas. Any such hole or opening shall be repaired within twenty-four hours of an occurrence using “pop” rivets to secure metal plates over the hole or opening to prevent patrons from removing the metal plates.

    5.   No beds shall be permitted in an adult booth/individual viewing area.

    E.   On-Site Manager—Security Measures. All adult businesses shall have a responsible person who shall be at least eighteen years of age and shall be on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. No performer may serve as the manager. The individual(s) designated as the on-site manager shall provide his/her name to the director of community development or his/her designee to receive all complaints and be given by the owner and/or operator the responsibility and duty to address and immediately resolve all violations taking place on the premises.

    All adult businesses shall provide a security system that visually records and monitors all parking lot areas, or in the alternative, state-licensed, uniformed security guards to patrol and monitor the parking lot areas during all times during which the business is open. If the business employs security guards, they shall provide written confirmation to the sheriff or his/her designee prior to their employment that the guards are duly registered. No performer may serve as a security guard.

    A sign indicating compliance with this provision shall be posted on the exterior of the premises in a visible location. The sign shall not exceed two feet by three feet and shall at a minimum be one foot by one and one-half feet and shall utilize red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size with a contrasting background.

    F.   Interior of Premises. No exterior door or window on the premises of an adult business shall be propped or kept open at anytime while the business is open and any exterior doors and/or windows shall be covered with opaque coverings at all times.

    G.  Signs. All adult businesses shall comply with the following sign requirements, in addition to those of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. Should a conflict exist between the requirements of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code and this subsection, the more restrictive shall prevail.

    1.   If an adult business does not serve alcohol, it shall post a notice inside the establishment, within ten feet of every entrance used by customers for access to the establishment, stating that persons below the age of eighteen years of age are prohibited from entering onto the premises or within the confines of the adult business. This notice shall be posted on a wall in a place of prominence. The dimensions of the notice shall be no less than six inches by six inches, with a minimum typeface of twenty-five points. If the adult business serves alcohol, it shall comply with all notice and posting requirements of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department.

    2.   No adult-oriented material shall be displayed in window areas or any area where it would be visible from any location other than within the confines of the adult business.

    H.  Regulation of Public Restroom Facilities. If the adult business provides restrooms for patron use, it shall provide separate restroom facilities for male and female patrons. The restrooms shall be free from adult oriented material. Only one person shall be allowed in each restroom at any time, unless otherwise required by law, in which case the adult business shall employ a restroom attendant of the same sex as the restroom users who shall be present in the public portion of the restroom during operating hours. The attendant shall insure that no person of the opposite sex is permitted into the restroom, and that not more than one person is permitted to enter a restroom stall, unless otherwise required by law, and that the restroom facilities are used only for their intended sanitary purposes. Access to restrooms for patron use shall not require passage through an area used as a dressing area by performers.

    I.    Trash. All interior trash cans shall be emptied into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag at least once a day. The holder of the permit or his/her designee, at least four times a day, shall cause the front and rear exteriors of any adult business to be inspected for trash and debris and any trash and debris found shall be immediately removed and placed into a single locked trash bin lined with a plastic bag.

    J.    Adult Live Entertainment—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult businesses providing adult live entertainment:

    1.   No person shall perform adult live entertainment for patrons of an adult business except upon a permanently fixed stage at least eighteen inches above the level of the floor.

    2, No performer shall be within three feet of a patron while the performer is performing. This three foot separation shall be marked by a continuous railing or other physical barrier designed to obstruct any contact between the performer and the patron(s).

    3.   No performer shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer, while the performer is performing on the premises. In addition, while on the premises, no performer shall have physical contact with a patron and no patron shall have physical contact with a performer, which physical contact involves the touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, cleft of the buttocks, perineum, anal region, or female breast with any part or area of any other person’s body either before or after any adult live entertainment by such performer. This prohibition does not extend to incidental touching. Patrons shall be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size. And, if necessary, patrons shall also be advised of the separation and no touching requirements by employees or independent contractors of the establishment.

    4.   All employees, except therefrom performers while performing on the fixed stage, while on or about the premises or tenant space, shall wear at a minimum an opaque covering which covers their specified anatomical areas.

    5.   If patrons wish to pay or tip performers, payment or tips shall be placed in containers placed at least ten feet from the stage or other area used by the performers. Patrons shall not throw money to performers, hand money directly to performers, place monies in the performers’ costumes or otherwise place or throw monies on the stage. Patrons shall be advised of this requirement by signs conspicuously displayed and placed on the barrier between patrons and performers and utilizing red or black printing of letters not less than one inch in size with a contrasting background.

    6.   The adult business shall provide dressing rooms for performers, that are separated by gender and exclusively dedicated to the performers’ use and which the performers shall use. Same gender performers may share a dressing room. Patrons shall not be permitted in dressing rooms.

    7.   The adult business shall provide an entrance/exit to the establishment for performers that is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons, which the performers shall use at all times.

    8.   The adult business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms that is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult business shall provide a minimum three foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers and the patrons must also be seven feet away from the walk aisle. Nothing in this section is intended to exempt the adult business from compliance with the provisions of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations pertaining to handicapped accessibility.

    9.   Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this subsection.

    K.  Adult Motion Picture Theater—Additional Operating Requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to adult motion picture theaters:

    1.   If the theater contains a hall or auditorium area, the area shall comply with each of the following provisions:

    a.   Have individual, separate seats, not couches, benches, or the like, to accommodate the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hail or auditorium area;

    b.   Have a continuous main aisle alongside the seating areas in order that each person seated in the hall or auditorium area shall be visible from the aisle at all times;

    c.   Have a sign posted in a conspicuous place at or near each entrance to the hall or auditorium area which lists the maximum number of persons who may occupy the hall or auditorium area, which number shall not exceed the number of seats within the hall or auditorium area; and

    2.   If an adult motion picture theater is designed to permit outdoor viewing by patrons seated in automobiles, it shall have the motion picture screen so situated, or the perimeter of the establishment so fenced, that the material to be seen by those patrons may not be seen from any public right-of-way, child day care facility, public park, school, or religious institution or any residentially zoned property occupied with a residence. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.060 Transfer of adult businesses or adult business regulatory permits.
    A.  A permit holder shall not operate an adult business under the authority of an adult business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult business stated in the application for the permit.

    B.   In the event of a transfer of ownership of the adult business or the adult business regulatory permit, the new owner shall be fully informed of the requirements of this chapter, including the operational and development standards herein.

    C.   In the event of a transfer of the adult business or the adult business regulatory permit, the transferee must provide the director of community development or his/her designee with the following information within seven days of the transfer:

    1.   If the transferee is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, and address, and shall submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least eighteen years of age.

    2.   If the transferee is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, and whether the partnership is general or limited; and shall attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any.

    3.   If the transferee is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of the state of California, the names and capacities of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent, and the address of the registered office for service of process. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.070 Suspension or revocation of adult business regulatory permits.
    A.  On determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the director of community development or his/her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permit holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a public hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Pico Rivera Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permit holder, or shall be delivered to the permit holder personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. Public hearings pursuant to this section shall be noticed in accordance with Government Code §§ 65091 and 65905 and conducted by the planning commission or its designee, including a third party hearing officer. Public hearings pursuant to this section shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the planning commission but, at a minimum shall include the following:

    1.   All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel.

    2.   The planning commission shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

    3.   Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the permit holder. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a permit holder shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on permit suspensions or revocations.

    4.   The planning commission’s decision may be appealed in accordance with Section 5.22.080.

    B.   A permit may be suspended or revoked based on the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permit holder, or an employee, independent contractor, partner, director, or manager of the permit holder:

    1.   The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the adult business fails to comply with all provisions of these regulations and this section relating to adult businesses, including the adult business development and operational standards contained in Chapter 5.22, and all other applicable building, fire, electrical, plumbing, health, and zoning requirements of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    2.   The permit holder has failed to obtain or maintain all required city permits.

    3.   The permit holder has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business regulatory permit.

    4.   The permit is being used to conduct an activity different from that for which it was issued.

    5.   That an individual employed by the adult business (whether classified as an employee or independent contractor) has been convicted of two or more sex-related offenses that occurred in or on the licensed premises within a twelve month period and was an employee of the adult business at the time the offenses were committed.

    6.   That the use for which the approval was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six months or more.

    7.   That the transferee/new owner of an adult business or adult business regulatory permit failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

    8.   The permit holder, partner, director, or manager has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of any of the following on the premises of the adult business; or a permittee has been convicted of violating any of the following state laws on the premises of the adult business:

    a.   Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation;

    b.   Use of the establishment as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation openly occur;

    c.   Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code;

    d.   The occurrence of acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Sections 315, 316, 318 of the California Penal Code;

    e.   Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4;

    f.    Any act constituting a felony involving the sale, use, possession, or possession for sale of any controlled substance specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the California Health & Safety Code;

    g.   An act or omission in violation of any of the requirements of this division if such act or omission is with the knowledge, authorization, or approval of the permit holder or is as a result of the permit holder’s negligent supervision of the employees of the adult facility. This includes the allowance of activities that are or become a public nuisance which includes the disruptive conduct of business patrons whether on or immediately off the premises where such patrons disturb the peace, obstruct traffic, damage property, engage in criminal conduct, violate the law and otherwise impair the free enjoyment of life and property.

    C.   After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the planning commission finds and determines that there are grounds for suspension or revocation, the planning commission shall impose one of the following:

    1.   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months; or

    2.   Revocation of the permit.

    The planning commission shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the permit holder within five days of the public hearing.

    D.  Any affected person may appeal the decision of the planning commission in writing within five days in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.22.080.

    E.   In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business regulatory permit to operate an adult business shall not be granted to the permittee within twelve months after the date of such revocation. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.080 Appeal procedures.
    A.  After approval, denial, suspension or revocation of a permit, any affected person may appeal the decision to the city council in writing within five days after the written decision.

    B.   Consideration of an appeal of the decision shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Government Code §§ 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within thirty days of the filing or initiation of the appeal.

    C.   The city council action on the appeal of the decision shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the appeal. The city council’s decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within four working days of the hearing, such written decision to be immediately mailed to the party appealing the planning commission’s decision.

    D.  In reaching its decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

    E.   Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this division or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

    F.   Failure of the city council to render a decision to grant or deny an appeal of a permit denial within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval of the adult business regulatory permit.

    G.  The time for a court challenge to a decision of the city council is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.

    H.  Notice of the city council’s decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.

    I.    Any applicant or permit holder whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.090 Employment of and services rendered to persons under the age of eighteen years prohibited; twenty-one if liquor is served.
    A.  Employees. Employees of an adult business must be at least eighteen years of age. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not at least eighteen years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, employees of the adult business must be at least twenty-one years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to employ, contract with, or otherwise retain any services in connection with the adult business with or from any person who is not twenty-one years of age. And said persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons seeking to contract with, be employed by, or otherwise service the adult business.

    B.   Patrons. Patrons of an adult business must be at least eighteen years of age. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least eighteen years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, patrons must be at least twenty-one years of age. If liquor is served at the adult business, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, partner, director, officer, shareholder with a ten percent or greater interest, employee, or other person in charge of any adult business to permit to enter or remain within the adult business any person who is not at least twenty-one years of age. And said persons shall exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the true age of persons entering the adult business.

    C.   X-rated Movies. The selling, renting and/or displaying of X-rated movies, videotapes, digital video disks (DVDs), compact disks (CDs) and laser disks shall be restricted to persons over eighteen years of age. If an establishment that is not otherwise prohibited from providing access to the establishment to persons under eighteen years of age sells, rents, or displays movies, videos, DVDs, or laser disks that have been rated “X” or rated “NC-17” by the motion picture rating industry (“MPAA”), or which have not been submitted to the MPAA for a rating, and which consist of images that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, said movies, videos, DVDs, CDs, and laser disks shall be located in a specific section of the establishment from which persons under the age of eighteen shall be prohibited. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.100 Inspections.
    Each owner, operator, manager, employee of an adult business or other person in charge of an adult business shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning department, license and code services division and other city departments, to inspect the adult business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the laws and operating standards applicable to adult businesses at any time it is occupied or open for business. Such inspections shall be conducted in a reasonable manner. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.110 Regulations non-exclusive.
    The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse non-compliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.120 Violations.
    A.  Any owner, operator, manager, employee or independent contractor of an adult business violating or permitting, counseling, or assisting the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult businesses shall be subject to any and all civil remedies, including permit revocation. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

    B.   In addition to the remedies set forth in Section 5.22.120(A), any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation.

    C.   The restrictions imposed pursuant to this section constitute a permitting process, and do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of this ordinance related to sexual conduct or activities. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.130 Public nuisance.
    In addition to the penalties set forth in this chapter, any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

 

5.22.140 Severability.
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 980 § 3, 2002)

Chapter 5.23 ADULT BUSINESS PERFORMER LICENSE
5.23.010 Purpose.
    It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the licensing of adult business performers in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the city. The goals of the performer licensing provisions are:

    A.  To protect minors by requiring that all performers be over the age of eighteen years;

    B.   To assure the correct identification of persons performing in adult businesses;

    C.   To enable the city to deploy law enforcement resources effectively; and

    D.  To detect and discourage the involvement of crime in adult businesses by precluding the licensing of performers with certain sex-related convictions in a set time period.

    It is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to invade the privacy of performers or to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of these regulations to restrict or deny access by adults to communicative materials or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of adult businesses to their intended lawful market. Nothing in these regulations is intended to authorize, legalize, or permit the establishment, operation, or maintenance of any business, building, or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof.

    The definitions contained in Chapter 5.22 of this code shall govern for purposes of these regulations. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.020 Adult business performer license.
    A.  No performer shall be employed, hired, engaged, or otherwise retained in an adult business to participate in or give any live performance displaying “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” without first having a valid adult business performer license issued by the city.

    B.   The director of finance or his or her designee shall grant, deny, and renew adult business performer licenses in accordance with these regulations.

    C.   License applicants shall file a written, signed, and verified application or renewal application on a form provided by the director of finance. Such application shall contain the following information:

    1.   The license applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

    2.   Principal place of residence;

    3.   Age, date and place of birth;

    4.   Height, weight, hair and eye color and tattoo descriptions and locations;

    5.   Each present and/or proposed business address(es) and telephone number(s) of the establishments at which the applicant intends to work;

    6.   Driver’s license or identification number and state of issuance;

    7.   Social security number;

    8.   Satisfactory written proof that the license applicant is at least eighteen years of age;

    9.   The license applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the sheriff’s department and a color, two by two inch photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. Fingerprints and photograph shall be taken within six months of the date of application;

    10. Whether the license applicant, has pled guilty or nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period;

    11. If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the license applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.

    D.  The information provided in Section 5.23.020(C) which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to the risk of harm will not be disclosed under the California Public Records Act. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address, telephone number, date of birth and age, driver’s license and social security number. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code § 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweigh by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interest are protected. The city clerk shall cause the same to be redacted from any copy of a completed application form made available to any member of the public, the above mentioned information.

    E.   The completed application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee and an annual license fee. The amount of such fees shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees established by the city council.

    F.   The completeness of an application shall be immediately determined by the director of finance upon its submittal. The director of finance must be available during normal working hours, as posted, to accept adult business performer applications. If the director of finance determines that the application is incomplete, the director of finance shall immediately inform the applicant of such fact and the reasons therefor, including any additional information necessary to render the application complete. Upon receipt of a completed adult business performer application and payment of the license fee specified above, the director of finance shall immediately issue a temporary license which shall expire of its own accord ten business days from the date of issuance and shall only be extended as provided in Section 5.23.030.

    G.  This temporary adult business performer license shall authorize a performer to commence performance at an adult business establishment that possesses a valid adult business regulatory permit authorized to provide live entertainment.

    H.  The fact that a license applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the license applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult business performer license. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.030 Investigation and action on application for adult business performer license.
    A.  Upon submission of a completed application, payment of license fees, and issuance of a temporary adult business performer license pursuant to Section 5.23.010, the director of finance shall immediately stamp the application “Received” and in conjunction with city staff, including members of the sheriff’s department, shall promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the license applicant should be issued an adult business performer license.

    B.   Investigation shall not be grounds for the city to unilaterally delay in reviewing a completed application. The director of finance’s decision to grant or deny the adult business performer license shall be made within ten business days from the date the temporary license was issued and in no case shall the decision to grant or deny the license application be made after the expiration of the temporary license.

    C.   The director of finance shall render a written decision to grant or deny the license within the foregoing ten day period. Said decision shall be mailed first class postage prepaid or hand delivered to the applicant, within the foregoing ten day period, at the address provided by the applicant in the application.

    D.  The director of finance shall notify the applicant as follows:

    1.   The director of finance shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

    2.   If the application is denied, the director of finance shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for the denial. Such notice shall also provide that the license applicant may appeal the denial to the city council in accordance with Section 5.23.050.

    3.   If the application is granted, the director of finance shall attach to the application an adult business performer license.

    4.   The application, as acted upon, and the license, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, or hand delivered, addressed to the license applicant at the residence address stated in the application in accordance with the time frames established herein.

    E.   The director of finance shall grant the application and issue the license unless the application is denied based on one of the grounds set forth in Section 5.23.030(F).

    F.   The director of finance shall deny the application based on any of the following grounds:

    1.   The license applicant has made false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult business performer license.

    2.   The license applicant is under eighteen years of age.

    3.   The adult business performer license is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by laws of the state or city or a business that does not have a valid adult business regulatory permit.

    4.   The license applicant, has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and (a) less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor, or (b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or (c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period.

    G.  Failure of the director of finance to render a decision on the license within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval, subject to appeal to the city council, pursuant to Section 5.23.050.

    H.  Each adult business performer license, other than the temporary license described in Section 5.23.020(F), shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the director of finance a written request for renewal, accompanied by the annual license fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. If said application conforms to the previously approved application and there has been no change with respect to the license holder being convicted of any crime classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense, the business licensing officer or designee shall renew the license for one year. Any plea to or conviction of a sex-related offense requires the renewal application to be set for hearing before the director of finance in accordance with the provisions of this section. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the license. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon as provided herein for action upon applications for license. The director of finance’s denial of a renewal application is appealable pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.23.050. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.040 Revocation/suspension of adult business performer license.
    A.  On determining that grounds for license revocation or suspension exist, the business licensing officer or his or her designee shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the license holder. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing and the ground or grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent Pico Rivera Municipal Code sections, and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the license holder, or shall be delivered to the license holder personally, at least ten days prior to the hearing date.

    B.   The applicant shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing upon the issues and may be represented by counsel. The director of finance shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness at the request of the licensee. Extensions of time or continuances sought by a licensee shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on license suspensions or revocations.

    C.   A license may be revoked, based on any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permit holder:

    1.   The licensee has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a performer license.

    2.   The licensee has pled guilty, nolo contendere or been convicted of an offense classified by this or any other state as a sex-related offense and:

    a.   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor; or

    b.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement of conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a felony; or

    c.   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction to the date of application, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are two or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period.

    3.   Failure to comply with the operating standards of Chapter 5.22 or the requirements of this chapter.

    D.  After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this section, if the director of finance finds and determines that there are grounds for revocation or suspension, the director of finance shall revoke or suspend the license. The director of finance shall render a written decision that shall be hand delivered or overnight mailed to the license holder within two days of the hearing. The director of finance’s failure to render such a decision within this time frame shall constitute an approval or reinstatement of the license, subject to appeal to the city council, pursuant to Section 5.23.050.

    E.   Any applicant may appeal the decision of the director of finance in writing within five days in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.23.050.

    F.   In the event a permit is revoked pursuant to this section, another adult business performer license shall not be granted to the licensee within twelve months after the date of such revocation. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.050 Appeal of denial or revocation of adult business performer license.
    A.  Any applicant may appeal the decision of the director of finance to the city council in writing within five days after the director of finance’s written decision.

    B.   Consideration of an appeal of the director of finance’s decision shall be at a public hearing, notice of which shall be given pursuant to California Government Code §§ 65091 and 65905 and which hearing shall occur within twenty days of the filing or initiation of the appeal.

    C.   The city council action on the appeal of the director of finance’s decision shall be by a majority vote of the members present and upon the conclusion of the de novo public hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the appeal. The city council’s decision shall be final and conclusive and shall be rendered in writing within seven days of the hearing, such written decision to be immediately mailed to the party appealing the director of finance’s decision.

    D.  In reaching its decision, the city council shall not be bound by the formal rules of evidence.

    E.   Notwithstanding any provisions in this section regarding the occurrence of any action within a specified period of time, the applicant may request additional time beyond that provided for in this division or may request a continuance regarding any decision or consideration by the city of the pending appeal. Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered delay on the part of the city or constitute failure by the city to provide for prompt decisions on applications.

    F.   Failure of the city council to render a decision on any appeal within the time frames established by this section shall be deemed to constitute an approval or reinstatement of the adult business performer license.

    G.  The time for a court challenge to a decision of the city council is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.

    H.  Notice of the city council’s decision and its findings shall include citation to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8.

    I.    Any applicant or license holder whose permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked, pursuant to this section shall be afforded prompt judicial review of that decision as provided by California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.8. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.060 Display of license identification cards.
    The director of finance shall provide each adult business performer required to have a license pursuant to this chapter with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and permit number of such performer. Every performer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which he or she is on the premises of the adult business at which he or she performs. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.070 Adult business performer license non-transferable.
    No adult business performer license may be sold, transferred, or assigned by any licensee or by operation of law, to any other person, group, partnership, corporation, or any other entity. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the adult business performer license, and the license thereafter shall be null and void. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.080 Time limit for filing application for permit.
    All persons required by to obtain an adult business performer license must apply for and obtain such adult business performer license within thirty days of the effective date of this section. Failure to do so and continued performance that displays “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities” in an adult business after such time without a permit or license shall constitute a violation of this section. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.090 Violations.
    A.  Any licensee violating or causing the violation of any of these provisions regulating adult business performer licenses shall be subject to license revocation/suspension pursuant to Section 5.23.040, a fine of not more than one thousand dollars pursuant to Government Code §§ 36900 and 36901, and any and all other civil remedies. All remedies provided herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Any violation of these provisions shall constitute a separate violation for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

    B.   In addition to the remedies set forth in Section 5.23.090(A), any violation of any of these provisions regulating adult business performer licenses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and may be abated or enjoined.

    C.   The restrictions imposed pursuant to this section are part of a regulatory licensing process, and do not constitute a criminal offense. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, the city does not impose a criminal penalty for violations of the provisions of this ordinance related to sexual conduct or activities. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.100 Regulations non-exclusive.
    The provisions of this chapter regulating adult business performer licenses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse non-compliance with any other regulations pertaining to the licensing provisions as adopted by the city council of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

 

5.23.110 Severability.
    If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part or any part thereof is held for any reason to be unconstitutional, invalid, or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases shall not be affected thereby. The city council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and the ordinance to which it is a part regardless of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases may be determined to be unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (Ord. 980 § 4, 2002)

Chapter 5.24 ADULT PUBLICATIONS
5.24.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as ascribed to them by this section:

    A.  “Harmful Matter.” The term or meaning of the term “harmful matter to minors” has no applicability to this chapter.

    B.   “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or legal entity. (Prior code § 6450(a))

 

5.24.020 Sealing of materials— Required when.
    No person shall for commercial purposes knowingly display, cause to be displayed or permit to be displayed in any business open to minors, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, any book, magazine or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or pictorial representation of any of the anatomical parts of a person’s genitals or anus, or any act of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, masturbation or bestiality, whether actual or simulated, when to the average adult person such photograph or pictorial representation has as its primary purpose, design or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront, unless such book, magazine or other publication or matter is sealed in a plastic wrapper, is stapled closed, or is by any other means sealed in such a manner as to reasonably restrict and deter its being opened prior to sale, whereby such photograph or pictorial representation may become exposed to the view of any minor. (Prior code § 6450(b))

 

5.24.030 Sealing of materials— Exemptions.
    Any book, magazine or other publication or matter described in Section 5.24.020 need not be wrapped, stapled, closed or sealed when displayed from an area which places such book, magazine or other publication or matter beyond the reach of any minor. However, if such book, magazine or other publication or matter depicts any photograph or pictorial representation, as defined in Section 5.24.020, on its cover or elsewhere, whereby such photograph or pictorial representation may be readily viewed by a minor, such photograph or pictorial representation shall be covered from view, whether or not wrapped, stapled closed, or by any other means sealed as required in Section 5.24.020. (Ord. 694 § 24, 1985; prior code § 6450(c))

 

5.24.040 Posting of signs required when.
    Any business in which, for commercial purposes, there is displayed any book, magazine or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or pictorial representation, as defined by Section 5.24.020 of this chapter, and which is not wrapped, stapled, closed, sealed or covered as required by Sections 5.24.020 and 5.24.030, shall have a sign posted at each of its doors normally used or intended to be used for public admittance, which shall read: “Notice, this business displays sexually explicit materials. Admission to minors is prohibited by law unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. Pico Rivera Municipal Code Ordinance No. 627.” The sign shall be not less than one square foot in area, and the letters shall be not less than two inches in height. (Prior code § 6450(d))

 

5.24.050 Acts constituting violations.
    To commit a violation of Section 5.24.020 or 5.24.030 of this chapter, it is not required that a minor have actually viewed or physically gained control of any book, magazine or other publication or matter, as defined by Section 5.24.020 or 5.24.030 of this chapter, when such book, magazine or other publication is not wrapped, stapled closed, sealed or covered as required by Sections 5.24.020 and 5.24.030 of this chapter. (Prior code § 6450(e))

 

5.24.060 Defense to prosecution for violations.
    A.  It shall be a defense in any prosecution for any violation of this chapter that the book, magazine or other publication or matter, by virtue of its apparent character, outward appearance or contemporary Los Angeles County-wide reputation, would not cause the average adult person to reasonably know or suspect that it depicted any photograph or pictorial representation, as defined by the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    B.   It may also be evidence of a violation of this chapter in any such prosecution that the book, magazine or other publication or matter, by virtue of its apparent character, outward appearance or contemporary county-wide reputation, would cause the average adult person to reasonably know or suspect that it depicted any photograph or pictorial representation as defined by this chapter in Section 5.24.020. (Prior code § 6450(f))

 

5.24.070 Exemptions—Parents and guardians.
    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any parent or guardian from having his or her child or ward accompany him or her into any business otherwise in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6450(g))

 

5.24.080 Exemptions—Persons with no managerial control of business.
    The provisions of this chapter, with respect to the display, causing to be displayed, or permitted to be displayed any book, magazine or other publication or matter, as defined in this chapter in Sections 5.24.020 or 5.24.030, shall apply only to persons having proprietary interest in or managerial control of the ordinary and routine operation of the business wherein and at which time there occurs a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6450(h))

 

5.24.090 Violation—Business persons exempt when.
    Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from admitting a minor into any business which displays any unwrapped, unstapled, unsealed or uncovered book, magazine or other publication or matter which depicts any photograph or pictorial representation, as defined by Section 5.24.020 of this chapter, provided that the minor is accompanied by an adult who represents himself to be the parent or guardian of the minor and whom the person, by the exercise of reasonable care, does not have reason to know is not the parent or guardian of the minor; or that a minor who, when not accompanied by a parent or guardian, presented false documentation of being at lest eighteen years of age, when to the average and prudent person such documentation would appear legitimate. (Prior code § 6450(i))

 

5.24.100 Violation—Penalty— Prior violations.
    Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction. Every person having been twice convicted for any violation of this chapter, is upon each subsequent violation guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than thirty days, or both, provided that both of the prior violations occurred within two years of the period of the subsequent violation. (Prior code § 6450(j))

Chapter 5.28 AMBULANCES
5.28.010 Ambulance operator— Exceptions.
    The words “ambulance operator” do not include a person who maintains ambulances for the use of his or her own employees in connection with the operation by such person of a plant, hospital or first-aid station for such employees. (Prior code § 6401.3)

 

5.28.020 Ambulance operator— Insurance requirements.
    A.  An ambulance operator shall keep in full force and effect at all times and file a certificate of that fact with the director of finance, a policy of liability insurance not less than the sum of fifty thousand dollars for injury to any one person or the death of any one person in any one accident, and the sum of one hundred thousand dollars for the injury of two or more persons, or death of two or more persons, or the injury to one person or more in any one accident, and in the sum of twenty thousand dollars for injury or destruction of property in any one accident.

    B.   The insurance policy required before an ambulance permit is issued shall provide that the same shall not be canceled unless a five-day written notice thereof shall be first given to the director of finance. (Prior code § 6401)

 

5.28.030 Ambulance operator— Rates.
    An ambulance operator shall charge those rates specified in the permit for services rendered. (Prior code § 6401.2)

 

5.28.040 Ambulance operator— Rebates prohibited.
    An ambulance operator shall not give, directly or indirectly, or cause to be given, any rebates, commissions, reserve rebates, or any reduced rates or cash discounts to any person or persons or groups of any nature. (Prior code § 6401.1)

 

5.28.050 Ambulance driver permit requirements.
    A.  Permit Issuance Conditions. The director of finance shall not issue a permit to any ambulance driver until the ambulance driver shall, within thirty days after applying for an ambulance driver’s permit, register with the American Red Cross and obtain and keep in his or her possession a standard Red Cross Aid Card.

    B.   Annual Permit Renewal—Fee. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, ambulance driver permits shall be renewed annually on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit. The permit may be renewed by the director of finance, provided he or she has received a favorable report therefor from a law enforcement agency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, application fees for permits and for the annual renewal thereof pertaining to ambulance drivers shall be five dollars each. (Prior code § 6305(b)(part), (c)(part))

Chapter 5.30 AMUSEMENT PLACES
5.30.010 Amusements—Application to do business.
    A.  Any person who shall desire to carry on or conduct any such amusement during the hours prohibited by Section 5.30.020 shall file a written application therefor with the city clerk for presentation to the city council. Such application shall contain a detailed statement of the type of amusement which the applicant desires to carry on or conduct, and a statement of the reasons which, in his or her opinion, warrant the granting of the same.

    B.   Such applications shall be filed with the city clerk at least five days prior to the date upon which the applicant desires the granting of such permission, and five days prior to the meeting of the city council next succeeding the filing of such application. Thereupon, the city clerk shall refer the application to the sheriff for investigation and his or her recommendation thereon.

    C.   The city council may grant such permission to the applicant when, in its discretion, the nightly conduct of such amusement will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, morals or welfare. (Ord. 1104 § 6, 2017; Ord. 696 § 4, 1985; prior code § 4241.2)

 

5.30.020 Amusements—Hours of operation.
    No person shall carry on or assist in carrying on any amusement to which the public is invited, or in which the public may participate, at any time between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. (Ord. 1104 § 7, 2017; prior code § 4241)

 

5.30.030 Game arcades—Defined.
    As used in Sections 5.30.030 through 5.30.060:

    A.  “Coin-operated game” means any amusement machine or skill-testing device which is operated or put into operation in whole or in part by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object. This definition does not include coin-operated weighing machines, stamp-vending machines, photograph, music or motion-picture machines or any coin-operated vending or other machine vending personal property, food or drink, or performing cleaning, repair or other services.

    B.   “Game arcade” means any number of coin-operated games of skill or amusement where such constitutes the primary use of the premises, or four or more coin-operated games of skill or amusement when accessory to another use at the same place of business. (Prior code § 4241.3(A), (B))

 

5.30.040 Game arcades—Existing coin-operated games.
    A.  All persons owning, possessing, operating or maintaining for pay in the C-C, C-G, P-A, C-M, I-L or I-G zones, coin-operated games, as defined in Section 5.30.030, shall remove from any premises, public or private, open to business or public use, such games on or before the ninetieth day from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, except as follows:

    1.   Such person is in compliance with the terms and provisions of Sections 5.30.030 through 5.30.060 and subsection D of Section 18.40.050 of this code;

    2.   Such amusement game would be a valid and legal use of the premises, and in compliance with local and state law, on the effective date of Ordinance No. 652, adopted March 15, 1982, but for the provisions of Ordinance 652.

    B.   A person owning, maintaining, operating or possessing such coin-operated amusement games must remove the same from such premises, or close said premises to public and private use, within one year of the effective date of Ordinance No. 652, or within not more than three years from the effective date of Ordinance No. 652 where the director of planning has ruled in writing that the maintenance or operation of the amusement game on the premises where located is required by the terms and provisions of a written lease or contract in effect on the effective date of Ordinance No. 652. In that event, the director of planning is authorized to grant an extension of time beyond such one-year period, but not in any case exceeding the term of the lease or agreement, or three years from the effective date of Ordinance No. 652, whichever is sooner. (Prior code § 4241.3(E))

 

5.30.050 Game arcades—Operation and supervision.
    The owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any game arcade shall provide and maintain on the premises at all times the same are open for public use, at least one adult person, and such other number of persons as may be required by conditional use permit. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, proprietor and manager to maintain the premises so as not to constitute a public nuisance, to avoid overcrowding, and to comply with all orders and directions given by any member of the law enforcement agency of the city, its fire department, or any other officer or employee. (Prior code § 4241.3(D))

 

5.30.060 Game arcades—Disorderly persons prohibited.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any game arcade shall allow or permit any intoxicated, quarreling or disorderly person or persons to be or remain in such place, and such place shall be operated at all times so as not to constitute a public nuisance. (Prior code § 4241.3(C))

 

5.30.070 Entertainment prohibited without permit.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person carrying on or assisting in carrying on any amusement shall allow or permit entertainment, as defined in Section 5.45.020 of this title, without first obtaining a required entertainment permit, unless the entertainment is exempt under Section 5.45.040 of this title. (Ord. 1104 § 8, 2017)

Chapter 5.32 AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOPS
5.32.010 Certain businesses not regulated.
    “Automobile repair shop” does not include any place where only the following work is done:

    A.  Tire changing or tire repairing;

    B.   Lamp globe or lamp changing;

    C.   Fanbelt changing;

    D.  The charging or changing of batteries;

    E.   Work only for an automobile repairer, and not the owner of the motor vehicle;

    F.   Fitting and replacing glass in motor vehicle windows;

    G.  Cutting and fitting seat covers;

    H.  The installation of such minor parts or the making of such trivial repairs as is customarily done as an incident to the business of selling motor fuel, oil, or accessories. (Prior code § 6402)

 

5.32.020 Sign required on premises.
    Every repairer shall maintain upon the front of his or her place of business a sign displaying in plainly legible letters his or her name or any fictitious name under which he or she conducts his or her business. (Prior code § 6402.8)

 

5.32.030 Recordkeeping—Vehicle repairs.
    Every repairer shall keep a record upon forms prescribed by the law enforcement agency of every repair of a motor vehicle for which a charge of five dollars or more is made. (Prior code § 6402.2)

 

5.32.040 Recordkeeping—Wrecks or collisions.
    Every repairer shall keep a record upon forms prescribed by the law enforcement agency, of the repairs on every motor vehicle where there is physical evidence of a wreck or collision. (Prior code § 6402.1)

 

5.32.050 Recordkeeping—Serial numbers.
    Every repairer shall keep a record on forms prescribed by the law enforcement agency of all motor changes, frame changes, body changes, and the serial and factory numbers of all radios which he or she installs. (Prior code § 6402.4)

 

5.32.060 Recordkeeping—Secondhand parts.
    Every repairer shall keep a record upon forms prescribed by the law enforcement agency of the name and address of every person from whom secondhand parts were obtained. Such persons shall sign such records. The repairer shall require such persons to sign such records. (Prior code § 6402.3)

 

5.32.070 Secondhand parts— Customer notification.
    Whenever a repairer uses any secondhand parts in repairing or altering any motor vehicle, such repairer shall so inform the person for whom he or she is performing such repair or alteration, and shall also so state upon any bill rendered and upon any record required by this chapter. (Prior code § 6402.7)

 

5.32.080 Itemized statements of work performed.
    Upon the demand of such person, a repairer shall furnish an itemized statement of parts and labor used in repairing any motor vehicle, and of the charges made therefor, to:

    A.  The legal owner of such motor vehicle;

    B.   The registered owner of such motor vehicle;

    C.   The insurer of such motor vehicle, or of the legal or registered owner or operator thereof. (Prior code § 6402.6)

 

5.32.090 Inspection of records.
    For a period of not less than one year after the completion of the work, a repairer shall make available to inspection by the law enforcement agency or by any other peace officer, during business hours, all records required by this chapter. (Prior code § 6402.5)

Chapter 5.34 AUTO WRECKERS
5.34.010 Recordkeeping requirements.
    Every auto wrecker shall keep records upon forms prescribed by the law enforcement agency, and made and given in the manner prescribed by the law enforcement agency, of the required information relative to automobiles wrecked, dismantled, and purchases, pledges or consignments. (Prior code § 6403)

Chapter 5.36 BILLIARD HALLS AND POOLHALLS
5.36.010 Hours of operation— Designated.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person having charge of any billiard room or poolhall shall keep the same open or allow or permit the same to be kept open, or allow or permit any game to be played therein from two a.m. until six a.m. of any day, or allow or permit any person except such owner, manager proprietor or person in charge thereof, or the servants regularly employed in and about the same, to be or remain therein between the hours aforesaid. (Prior code 6404)

 

5.36.020 Hours of operation— Exemptions.
    Any person having charge of any billiard room or poolhall may apply to the license and permit hearing board for a permit to keep open his or her billiard room and/or poolhall from two a.m. until six a.m. The license and permit hearing board may grant such a permit if the following conditions are met:

    A.  The operation of the billiard room and/or poolhall is on the same premises in connection with another business which is normally and regularly operated between the stated hours;

    B.   That there is no objection to the issuance of the permit by the city’s law enforcement agency. (Prior code 6404-a)

 

5.36.030 Obstructing entrances prohibited.
    A person shall not maintain any billiard room or poolhall, or similar place of business to which the public is invited, or any social billiard club, where there is placed, constructed or maintained any screen, partition, barrier, closet, alcove or object which may obstruct the visibility of any part of such establishment, except restrooms:

    A.  From the street or sidewalk, if such establishment is located on the ground floor;

    B.   From the entrance of any establishment which is located either entirely below the level of the street or sidewalk, or on the second or higher floor of any building or other structure. (Prior code 6404.7)

 

5.36.040 Persons under eighteen— Restrictions.
    A person under the age of eighteen years shall not enter, be or remain on or in any billiard room or poolhall except when such person is accompanied by a spouse of legal age, or his or her parent or guardian, or except where authorized by the permit. No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any billiard room or poolhall, or a permittee, shall permit or allow any such person to enter or to be in or to remain in any poolhall or billiard room contrary to the provisions of this section. (Prior code 6404.2)

 

5.36.050 Disorderly persons prohibited.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any billiard room or poolhall shall allow or permit any intoxicated, quarreling or disorderly person or persons to be or remain in such place. (Prior code 6404.1)

 

5.36.060 Entertainment prohibited without permit.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any billiard room or poolhall shall allow or permit entertainment, as defined in Section 5.45.020 of this title, without first obtaining a required entertainment permit, unless the entertainment is exempt under Section 5.45.040 of this title. (Ord. 1104 § 9, 2017)

Chapter 5.38 BINGO
5.38.010 Bingo defined.
    “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. (Prior code § 6504)

 

5.38.020 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over any provisions of this code which are inconsistent herewith, including but not by way of limitation the provisions of Chapters 5.04, 5.08 and 5.16 of this title. (Prior code § 6500)

 

5.38.030 Games permitted when.
    Bingo games for charitable purposes are authorized pursuant to Section 19, Article IV, of the California Constitution, and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6501)

 

5.38.040 Organizations eligible for license.
    Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and mobile home park associations and senior-citizen organizations, are eligible for a license to conduct bingo games, and provided that the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes. In addition, no such organization shall be eligible for a license unless it has been organized and established in the city for a minimum of one year continually preceding the filing of the application for such license. (Prior code § 6502)

 

5.38.050 License—Required.
    No organization shall engage in, carry on, maintain, conduct or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted a bingo game in the city without first having secured a license in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, nor without complying with the regulations contained in this chapter pertaining to the operation of bingo games. (Prior code § 6503)

 

5.38.060 License—Application procedure.
    The application procedure provided for in this chapter shall be followed with regard to licenses sought pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 6505)

 

5.38.070 Application—Contents.
    Every person desiring a license pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form to be provided by the city clerk, and at such time pay the required fee and penalty, if any. The application shall be filed at least sixty days prior to the conduct of any bingo game(s), and shall specify:

    A.  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.38.040;

    B.   The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the corporation or community chest, and the trustee of any trust;

    C.   A list of the names of the members of the applicant organization who will, from time to time, operate and staff bingo games;

    D.  A detailed schedule of the date(s), hours, location and occupancy capacity of such location of each bingo game to be held;

    E.   A detailed description of the record system to account for the receipts, prizes, expenses and profits of each bingo game;

    F.   The location and signatures of the special bank account(s) required by Section 5.38.380;

    G.  A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be summarily suspended by the sheriff upon violation of any such provisions;

    H.  The annual license fee fixed by the city council shall accompany the application;

    I.    Except as to mobile home park associations and senior citizens’ organizations (unless the same are qualified under any of the applicable Revenue and Taxation Code sections), the applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate of determination of exemption pursuant to the Revenue and Taxation Code section which is applicable to the applicant organization, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under such applicable section;

    J.    The application shall be verified as provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the verification of pleadings;

    K.  The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed, and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the licensee;

    L.   Whether the application is for a new license or a renewal of an existing license;

    M.  The particular property within the city, including the street number and indication of whether owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, or on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place. (Prior code § 6506)

 

5.38.080 Action on receipt of license fee.
    Upon receipt of a license fee, the city clerk shall:

    A.  Issue a date receipt showing the location for which an application has been made;

    B.   Transmit copies of the license fee referral memorandum to interested departments of the city, including but not limited to the city manager, sheriff, the director of planning, the city engineer, the city health officer and the fire marshal, to determine if the appropriate zoning ordinances and regulations, building code ordinances, the health code ordinance and the fire code ordinance have been or will be complied with. (Prior code § 6507)

 

5.38.090 Application—Reports by city officers and departments.
    Every officer and department to which an application is referred shall, in writing, advise the city clerk of all material facts necessary to determine whether the license should be granted, granted subject to conditions, or denied, and their approval or disapproval of the application. (Prior code § 6508)

 

5.38.100 Application—Additional information.
    Every officer and department to which an application for a license is referred may require such additional information and the filing of such additional forms as he or she deems necessary. (Prior code § 6510)

 

5.38.110 Access to criminal history information.
    The chief of police shall have the authority to obtain criminal history information for each person operating or assisting in the operation of a bingo game, for purposes of determining those who have been convicted within the past five years of crimes involving lotteries, gambling, larceny, perjury, bribery, extortion, fraud or similar crimes involving moral turpitude, and to present such information pursuant to Section 5.38.090. (Prior code § 6508.5)

 

5.38.120 Application—Denial recommendations.
    If any officer or department to which an application is referred shall advise the city clerk, in writing, that the license should be denied, he or she shall so notify the applicant, as provided in subsection K of Section 5.38.070. (Prior code § 6509)

 

5.38.130 License—Issuance conditions.
    The city manager shall be the issuing authority. Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant. (Prior code § 6511)

 

5.38.140 Additional issuance conditions.
    If the city manager finds that the facts are such that the application for the license would be subject to denial if the license is issued without conditions, but that conditions can be imposed which will eliminate any ground for such denial, the city manager shall issue the license subject to such conditions. (Prior code § 6512)

 

5.38.150 License—Contents.
    The license shall contain the following information:

    A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;

    B.   The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

    C.   The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

    D.  The date of the expiration of such license;

    E.   The days and hours during which the licensee conducts or operates bingo games;

    F.   Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 6513)

 

5.38.160 License—Posting requirements.
    An organization licensed pursuant to this chapter shall not conduct or permit to be conducted a bingo game unless the license is posted in a conspicuous place, visible at the public entrance, during the conduct of any bingo game. The licensee shall produce and exhibit the same when applying for renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any peace officer or officer authorized to issue, inspect or collect the license. (Prior code § 6537)

 

5.38.170 License—Term—Not transferable.
    Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for a term of one year. Written application for renewal thereof shall be made to the city clerk at least one month prior to its expiration date. Licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable, either as to the licensee or the location. Any attempt to transfer shall render the license void. (Prior code § 6513.5)

 

5.38.180 Bingo manager—Required.
    No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city, the operation of a bingo game, unless such game is conducted under the personal direction of a bingo manager, duly licensed and present on the premises during all hours of operation, and bonded pursuant to this chapter for each bingo game. (Prior code § 6514)

 

5.38.190 Bingo manager—License—Application.
    To obtain a bingo manager license, such applicant shall file with the city clerk an application therefor in writing, together with the required fee. The application shall set forth, in addition to such information as may be required by the city clerk:

    A.  A statement that neither the bingo manager nor the members of the nonprofit organization which operates any bingo game organized by such organization, will receive any profit, wage or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game(s) or funds derived from bingo activities;

    B.   A statement that the bingo manager applicant has read and understands all requirements of the law in regard to conducting bingo games in the city, and that such bingo manager will accept full responsibility for the conduct of such bingo games and all bingo card/ticket salespeople under his or her direction. (Prior code § 6515)

 

5.38.200 Bingo manager—Bond—Required.
    At the time of so filing with the city clerk an application for a license as a manager, the applicant shall either:

    A.  File and thereafter maintain with the city clerk a good and sufficient bond in the aggregate sum of five thousand dollars, running to the city, for the use and benefit of interested persons and parties, executed by the applicant and two or more responsible sureties, or a surety company authorized to do business in the state, which sureties or surety company shall be approved by the city attorney;

    B.   Assign to the city savings and loan certificates in the sum of five thousand dollars; or

    C.   Request a waiver of the bond requirement which may be granted for good cause in the discretion of the city manager. (Ord. 866 § 4, 1995; prior code § 6517)

 

5.38.210 Bingo manager—Bond—Conditions.
    The total aggregate liability on the bond described above shall be five thousand dollars. The bond shall be conditioned upon the strict compliance, by the principal, with the provisions of this chapter, and the payment of any direct pecuniary loss sustained through any act of grand or petty theft or other wrongful act on the part of the principal, his or her agent(s) or employee(s). (Prior code § 6518)

 

5.38.220 Bingo manager—Bond—Term.
    The bond described above shall remain in force and effect for the entire period of the license. The sureties may cancel the bond and be relieved of further liability thereunder by delivering thirty days’ written notice to the city manager. Such cancellation shall not affect any liability incurred or accrued thereunder prior to the termination of the thirty-day period. If the bond is canceled, a new bond in like form shall be immediately filed and maintained, and applied as provided in Section 5.38.200. Upon failure to so file and maintain, the permit and license hearing board of the city shall forthwith suspend such manager’s license. (Prior code § 6519)

 

5.38.230 Bingo manager—Action on bond.
    A.  Any person who sustains any injury covered by the bond may, in addition to any other remedy which he or she may have, bring an action in his or her own name upon the bond for the recovery of any damage sustained by him. Upon such action being commenced, such bond shall not be void upon first recovery thereon, but may be sued upon from time to time until the whole of the penalty shall be exhausted.

    B.   The city manager may require the filing of a new bond, and immediately upon the recovery in any action on such bond, the manager shall file a new bond or assign saving and loan certificates to the city as provided for in this chapter. Upon failure to file a new bond or assign savings and loan certificates within ten days, the permit and license hearing board of the city shall forthwith suspend the bingo manager’s license. (Prior code § 6520)

 

5.38.240 Bingo manager—Certificates in lieu of bond.
    If in lieu of a bond an applicant assigns to the city savings and loan certificates, he or she shall agree in writing that if the city manager finds that any person sustains any pecuniary loss through any act of grand or petty theft or other wrongful act on the part of the principal, his or her agent(s) or employee(s), the city may redeem a sufficient number of such certificates, and from the proceeds reimburse such person for loss sustained. (Prior code § 6521)

 

5.38.250 Bingo manager—License—Issuance conditions.
    A.  The city manager shall issue a manager’s license if he or she finds:

    1.   That the applicant is of good moral character and does not have a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity;

    2.   That all of the statements made in such application are and each of them is true and not deceptive or misleading, and that the applicant has not violated any of the provisions of this chapter or engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise, and that the applicant intends to conduct his or her business fairly and honestly.

    B.   If the city manager determines that the applicant fails to meet the foregoing conditions, he or she shall deny the application and refuse to issue a license, and shall notify the applicant of its decision. (Prior code § 6522)

 

5.38.260 License—Suspension or revocation conditions.
    The permit and license hearing board, as constituted by Section 5.08.290, shall have the power to revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant to this chapter, pursuant to the rules, regulations, provisions and conditions set forth in Article II of Chapter 5.08 of this title. (Prior code § 6542)

 

5.38.270 Financial interest in licensee only.
    No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee organization shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Prior code § 6527)

 

5.38.280 Operation—Exclusively by licensee.
    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members and the manager of the licensee organization. Such members and manager shall not receive a profit, wage or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game; nor shall they receive payments from the organization for any purpose. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Prior code § 6528)

 

5.38.290 Operation—Location restrictions.
    A.  A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or donated to it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.

    B.   The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office or as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. (Ord. 866 § 1, 1995; prior code § 6530)

 

5.38.300 Operation—Hours and days.
    No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and ten a.m. Bingo games shall be permitted to operate only one day per week and one weekend, including Friday, Saturday and Sunday, per year. (Ord. 691 § 1, 1984; Ord. 690 § 1, 1984; prior code § 6533)

 

5.38.310 Operation—Open to public.
    All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Prior code § 6523)

 

5.38.320 Costs, prizes and rules to be posted.
    The licensee shall conspicuously post the costs, prizes and rules of each game to be played. Such signs shall be posted during the conduct of the bingo game in a conspicuous place on the outside and inside of the premises to be used for the conducting of a bingo game. (Prior code § 6538)

 

5.38.330 Attendance limitations.
    Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted, as determined by the fire department in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Prior code § 6524)

 

5.38.340 Equipment ownership.
    All equipment used in the operation of bingo games shall be owned by the organization authorized to conduct such games. (Prior code § 6533.5)

 

5.38.350 Participants must be present.
    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Prior code § 6534)

 

5.38.360 Prizes—Amount restrictions.
    The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars total, in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. Total prizes being offered at various stages during an ongoing series of numbers or symbols being called toward a larger game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars. (Prior code § 6525)

 

5.38.370 Prizes—Recordkeeping required.
    A record shall be kept, on forms approved by the sheriff, by the licensee, showing the name and written signature, the address, and the telephone number of the winner, and the consecutive serial number on the receipt for the prize. (Prior code § 6539)

 

5.38.380 Profits—Accounting requirements.
    A.  All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account, and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except:

    1.   Such proceeds may be used for prizes; and

    2.   A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses.

    B.   Each licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision, and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this code.

    C.   The city, by and through its authorized officer, shall have the right to examine and audit such records at any reasonable time without prior notice, and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. Such records shall be retained for such period of time as required by state and federal laws, and for a period of three years for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 866 § 2, 1995; prior code § 6526)

 

5.38.390 Receiving profit or wages—Misdemeanor.
    It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. (Prior code § 6529)

 

5.38.400 Cooperation with sheriff.
    No person shall interfere with, prevent or refuse to permit a sheriff or other peace officer to make an examination or inspection of any premises without notice, whether the premises is open to the public or not, or of any record kept by the applicant organization, or by any agent or employee thereof, for the purpose of determining whether the applicant organization and/or bingo manager are complying with all of the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, statutes, rules and regulations affecting the applicant’s business. (Prior code § 6541)

 

5.38.410 Admission fee prohibited.
    No admission, donation, dues or required fee shall be charged for entry onto the bingo premises. (Prior code § 6540)

 

5.38.420 Use of credit prohibited.
    No licensee shall issue chips, checks, tokens, markers or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to IOU’s and checks to be held), or allow any patron to play on credit. (Prior code § 6535)

 

5.38.430 Persons under eighteen prohibited.
    No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Prior code § 6531)

 

5.38.440 Intoxicated persons prohibited.
    No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, nor remain in any room where bingo is conducted and where alcoholic beverages are sold or dispensed, during the times that the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 866 § 3, 1995; prior code § 6532)

 

5.38.450 City may enjoin violations.
    The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code, or this chapter. (Prior code § 6536)

Chapter 5.40 CAFÉS, FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HAWKERS
5.40.010 Cafés, food establishments and hawkers—Permit required.
    No café, food establishment, public eating place or hawker shall remain in business or operate any business or café or food establishment or public eating place or hawking business within the city unless he or she has in effect a permit from the city health officer for conducting the same. (Prior code § 6405)

 

5.40.020 Hawkers and retail food and ice cream vendors—Permit requirements.
    A.  Except as prohibited in Sections 5.54.030, 5.54.040 and 5.54.050, every person peddling, selling or delivering liquids or edibles for human consumption from packs, baskets, handcarts, wagons or vehicles, retail from door to door, shall first obtain annually each year a health permit and then obtain a permit under the provisions of this title, which permit shall be for one year only, and shall be subject to annual renewal, provided said person complies with the provisions of this code.

    B.   This section does not apply to the following:

    1.   Persons selling or delivering to retail establishments;

    2.   Distributors of milk, bottled water, ice, or packaged or canned food products, rendering the service of delivering their products to regular customers;

    3.   A person who sells edibles from a wayside stand located on property owned or controlled by him or her or her, all of which edibles are grown or raised on such property by such person or by members of his or her immediate family;

    4.   The operator of a public eating place.

    C.   Notwithstanding any provisions of this title to the contrary, permits for hawkers and retail vendors of food and ice cream products shall be renewed annually on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of such permit.

    D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, the application fee for permits and for the annual renewal thereof shall be five dollars per person. (Ord. 696 § 8, 1985; prior code § 6305(i))

 

5.40.030 Hawkers and retail food and ice cream vendors—Operation.
    Hawkers and vendors of food products, as defined in Section 5.40.020 of this chapter, and not expressly excluded thereunder, shall not, between the hours of eight p.m. and eight a.m., operate any sound-amplifying equipment within the city. “Sound-amplifying equipment,” as used in this section, means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound, including radios, horns, bells or other sound or musical device used for the purpose of attracting customers to such vehicle or vendor. (Prior code § 6407)

 

5.40.040 Entertainment prohibited without permit.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any café, food establishment, or food hawker shall allow or permit entertainment, as defined in Section 5.45.020 of this title, without first obtaining a required entertainment permit, unless the entertainment is exempt under Section 5.45.040 of this title. (Ord. 1104 § 10, 2017)

Chapter 5.44 DANCE STUDIOS
5.44.010 Permit requirements—Rules and regulations.
    No person shall engage in, manage, conduct, maintain or carry on the business of a dance studio without a permit therefor, as provided in this title. Such persons shall comply with the terms and provisions of the permit and, in addition, the following rules and regulations set out in this chapter shall be applicable to all proprietors, managers, agents and employees of the permittee, as well as to any persons attending a dance studio and to whom the following regulations are made specifically applicable. (Prior code § 6406a)

 

5.44.020 Lighting during night hours.
    No permittee or his or her employee(s) shall hold or conduct any dance or instruction in dancing in any dance studio after sunset unless the room or hall in which the dance or instructions in dancing is held is well-lighted at all times. The intensity of such lighting shall not be less than a minimum of one footcandle at a plane three feet above the floor, at all points on such floor. No person shall shut or turn off the lights or lighting, or reduce the intensity thereof below the minimum specified in this section during any dance or instruction. (Prior code § 6406a(c))

 

5.44.030 Alcoholic beverages—Furnishing prohibited.
    No person shall sell, furnish, serve or give away any intoxicating liquor in any dance studio or in any room or place connected with or used in connection with any such dance studio, or at any place upon the premises, or within the same enclosure in which such dance studio is situated. (Prior code § 6406a(a))

 

5.44.040 Alcoholic beverages—Possessing and consuming prohibited.
    No person shall take, bring into or possess any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume which has been opened, or a seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed, on the premises of any dance studio. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume on the premises of any dance studio while dancing or dancing instruction is being carried on. (Prior code § 6406a(d))

 

5.44.050 Intoxicated persons prohibited.
    Any person who is intoxicated or in an intoxicated condition shall not appear in or be in any dance studio. The proprietor, manager or employees thereof conducting a dance studio shall not permit any intoxicated person or persons in an intoxicated condition to appear, be or remain at such place. (Prior code § 6406a(b))

 

5.44.060 Refusing to leave premises—Misdemeanor.
    Any person remaining on the premises of any dance studio after being asked by the permittee, proprietor, manager or employee thereof to leave, and refusing to do so, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 6406a(e))

 

5.44.070 Entertainment prohibited without permit.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any dance studio shall allow or permit entertainment, as defined in Section 5.45.020 of this title, without first obtaining a required entertainment permit, unless the entertainment is exempt under Section 5.45.040 of this title. (Ord. 1104 § 12, 2017)

Chapter 5.45 ENTERTAINMENT
5.45.010 Purpose and intent.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the operation of establishments that provide or otherwise allow entertainment for the public health, safety, and welfare. All permittees will be held responsible for controlling patron conduct in and around the establishments, making adequate provisions for security and crowd control, protecting the city’s youth from criminal activity and minimizing disturbances to neighboring residents and businesses as a result of the operation of the entertainment.

    It is the intent of this chapter to provide options to city staff and law enforcement in regulating the variety of businesses and events that provide or otherwise allow entertainment. The city council of the city of Pico Rivera finds that the imposition of conditions tailored to the particular establishment will allow the business or event to flourish while meeting the city’s public health and safety needs. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the words, terms, and phrases shall be defined as set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended. Words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter that are not specifically defined shall be construed according to their context and the customary usage of the language.

    “ABC license” shall mean a license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages.

    “After-hours” shall mean operation of an establishment with entertainment after twelve p.m.

    “Ambient or incidental recorded music” means pre-recorded music that is subordinate to the other functions of the establishment, and that is played at a level whereby a conversation spoken in a normal volume in any portion of the establishment can be clearly heard from three feet away. “Ambient or incidental recorded music” does not include any music that is played in conjunction with any form of live entertainment, or that is played through a portable speaker system.

    “City” shall mean the city of Pico Rivera.

    “City manager” shall mean the city manager of the city of Pico Rivera.

    “Dance” and “dancing” shall mean movement of the human body, accompanied by music or rhythm.

    “Disorderly conduct” shall mean any of the following: consumption of alcoholic beverages on public property, public drunkenness, obstruction of the free passage of pedestrians over public sidewalks, obstruction of the free passage of vehicles within the public right-of-way, littering, fighting, excessive noise in violation of Chapter 8.40 of this code, the operation of automobile audio systems in a manner that violates Chapter 8.40 of this code, and any other conduct that constitutes a public nuisance or violation of law.

    “Entertainment” shall mean any single event, a series of events, or an ongoing activity or business, occurring alone or as part of another business, to which the public is invited to watch, listen or participate, including, but not limited to, dancing (whether by performers or patrons of the establishment), live music or other live performances (including concerts, contests, sporting events, exhibitions, shows, or similar activities), musical entertainment provided by a disc jockey or karaoke, preset music playlists, or any similar entertainment activity involving amplified, or reproduced music.

    “Entertainment establishment” shall mean any building, structure, or premises upon which entertainment occurs.

    “Entertainment permit” shall mean a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing entertainment to be presented or allowed at an entertainment establishment and includes Category 1 and Category 2 entertainment permits, whichever is applicable.

    “Event” shall mean any activity requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter.

    “Hearing officer” shall mean the city employee or other representative appointed by the city manager, or designee, to hear all timely appeals set forth in this chapter.

    “Permittee” shall mean the holder of an entertainment permit and any persons required to be permitted under the provisions of this chapter, whether or not such persons are actually so permitted.

    “Premises” shall mean the location of an entertainment establishment.

    “Responsible person” shall mean the permittee (including any person for whom information was required to be provided for an entertainment permit pursuant to Section 5.45.050), owner, proprietor, manager, assistant manager, or other person exercising control over the operation of an entertainment establishment, whether or not that person is a named permittee.

    “Sheriff’s department” shall mean the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department or applicable law enforcement agency.

    “Special event” shall mean entertainment conducted on private property where all of the following circumstances exist:

    1.   The premises or location where the entertainment is to be conducted is not the subject of an existing entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;

    2.   The person sponsoring or offering the entertainment is not in the business of regularly offering entertainment to the public;

    3.   Entertainment will only be offered for a limited period of time, not to exceed five calendar days;

    4.   The entertainment is not a recurring or regularly scheduled event or celebration. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.030 Permit required.
    A.  Unless exempted pursuant to Section 5.45.040, it is unlawful for any person or persons, business, or entity to provide, permit, allow, or otherwise suffer any form of entertainment without a current and valid entertainment permit for said form of entertainment, issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. An entertainment establishment shall be required to obtain one of the following applicable permits:

    1.   Category 1 Entertainment Permit. A business is required to obtain a Category 1 entertainment permit if the business has entertainment, but does not qualify under any of the exemptions listed in Section 5.45.040.

    2.   Category 2 Entertainment Permit. A business is required to obtain a Category 2 entertainment permit, if the business has entertainment but does not qualify under any of the exemptions listed in Section 5.45.040 and all of the following apply:

    a.   The business has a dance floor or dancing;

    b.   The business possesses a license to sell alcohol; and

    c.   The business is open after-hours as defined in this chapter.

    B.   Possessing a Category 1 or 2 entertainment permit shall not relieve any person providing or allowing entertainment from complying with all other applicable laws, any ABC license requirements and regulations, all land use regulations, including any conditional use permit requirements or conditions of any applicable conditional use permit, or other land use entitlement applicable to the entertainment establishment or premises whereon the entertainment will be presented. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.040 Exemptions.
    A.  The following types of entertainment and events are exempt from the entertainment permit required by this chapter. However, an exemption does not relieve any person providing or allowing entertainment from complying with all other applicable laws, including, but not limited to, any ABC license requirements and regulations, all land use regulations, including any conditional use permit requirements or conditions of any applicable conditional use permit, and those regulating occupancy loads, noise levels, disturbances of the peace, and other public nuisances.

    1.   The presentation of ambient music played on juke box, radio, stereo, music recording machine, computer, tablet, smart phone, MP3 player, or other similar device without a DJ, so long as no other entertainment as defined in this chapter is provided or allowed and there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

    2.   The presentation of recorded or live sporting events so long as there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

    3.   Entertainment provided at a bona fide public eating place as defined under Business and Professions Code Section 23038 that closes no later than eleven p.m., provided that there is no dancing and there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the establishment.

 

    4.   Entertainment provided for those guests individually invited and admitted to a private event (such as a wedding, reception, recital, or celebration) at a residence where there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

    5.   Performances by the students at educational institutions as defined by Section 210.3 of the California Education Code where such performances are part of an educational or instructional curriculum or program.

    6.   Instruction of and performances by students at a dance studio, as defined in Chapter 5.04 of this code, so long as no other entertainment as defined in this chapter is provided or allowed and there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission to watch the instruction or student performances.

    7.   An adult-oriented business, as defined in Title 5 of this code, that has and is operating in accordance with a current and valid adult-oriented business permit issued pursuant to Title 5.

    8.   Entertainment, excluding dancing, conducted in any establishment or venue with a maximum occupancy of forty-nine or fewer persons, so long as the actual occupancy does not exceed forty-nine persons and there is no fee, charge, donation, or other compensation required for entry or admission into the entertainment establishment.

    9.   Entertainment sponsored by the city or any agency of the city or entertainment at or on property owned or leased by the city or any agency of the city.

    10. Entertainment conducted or sponsored by a corporation, organization, bona fide club, society or association that is exempt from taxation pursuant to United States Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) shall be exempt from the entertainment permit requirements under this chapter. However, such exempt entities shall nevertheless be required to obtain a temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.61 of this code for those events identified under Section 18.61.040(B) and (D). (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.050 Application and contents thereof.
    A.  Any person wishing to provide or allow entertainment as defined in this chapter shall file an application with the city manager, or designee, on forms approved by the city manager, or designee, at least sixty calendar days prior to the commencement of the offering of such entertainment. Such application shall, at a minimum, set forth the following information:

    1.   The name (if applicable) and address of the particular place for which the entertainment permit is desired;

    2.   The name(s), residence(s), business address, and telephone number(s) of the applicant(s), and, if the applicant(s) is/are a corporation, limited liability company, general or limited partnership, or any other fictitious entity, the name(s), residence(s), and telephone number(s) of:

    a.   All directors and officers of the corporation or limited liability company,

    b.   All persons who own or hold ten percent or more of an ownership interest in the corporation or limited liability company,

    c.   All persons who are members or managers of the limited liability company,

    d.   All persons who are partners in the general partnership,

    e.   All persons who are general partners in the limited partnership;

    3.   A brief description of the business and the proposed opening date and hours of operation of the entertainment establishment;

    4.   A detailed description of the specific type(s) of proposed entertainment, and the dates and times when the entertainment will be provided or allowed;

    5.   A statement as to whether food and/or alcoholic beverages are to be served or permitted upon the premises, and if so, the type and provisions for dispensing same for all hours of operation. A copy of the menu listing the food and/or alcoholic beverages that are served during all hours of operation will be sufficient for compliance with this section;

    6.   The maximum occupancy for all areas as approved by the city building official;

    7.   The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which entertainment is proposed to be provided or allowed;

    8.   Written consent from the owner of the real property authorizing entertainment on which the entertainment is to be conducted;

    9.   The signature, under penalty of perjury, of the applicant and all persons from whom information is required to be provided pursuant to Section 5.45.050; and

    10. Such other information as the city manager, or designee, deems necessary for the proper processing and review of the site plan, for fulfilling the goals of this chapter, and/or for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

    B.   A business requiring a Category 2 entertainment permit under this chapter shall also, in addition to providing the information set forth in subsection A, submit the following:

    1.   A fully-dimensioned, scaled and detailed site plan of the premises where the entertainment will be provided or allowed. The site plan shall depict, at a minimum, the following:

    a.   The location of primary entrances and exits for patron use;

    b.   The location of all emergency exits;

    c.   The location and dimensions of any area used for entertainment (including, but not limited to, stage, dance floor, etc.);

    d.   The location and dimensions of any fixed and/or mobile bar(s);

    e.   The location and square footage of the alcohol storage area;

    f.    The location of all restrooms and dressing rooms;

    g.   The location and seating capacity of all areas where tables and/or chairs will be placed for patron use;

    h.   The location of the parking area provided for patrons;

    i.    The location of the designated queuing area (interior and exterior, as applicable), including the location of any stanchions or other barriers;

    j.    The posting locations of any required security guards; and

    k.   The location of all security cameras.

    2.   For special or limited duration events, the date or dates, hours, and location of the proposed entertainment.

    3.   A security plan (subject to the approval of the sheriff’s department) that shall address, at a minimum, the following items:

    a.   The name, address, telephone number, and copy of city business license for who will be providing required security services. If security services will be provided by a private patrol operator (as defined by California Business and Professions Code Section 7582.1), information as to the private patrol operator shall be sufficient and need not include the name of any individual security guard;

    b.   A description and/or photograph of the uniform/clothing to be worn by the security personnel. Said uniform/clothing shall be approved by the sheriff’s department and shall not resemble a uniform of any law enforcement agency with jurisdiction in the city;

    c.   Procedures for management of queuing lines;

    d.   Procedures for counting the number of occupants entering and exiting the entertainment establishment for purposes of complying with and enforcing approved occupancy limits;

    e.   The method for establishing a reasonable ratio of employees to patrons, based upon activity level, in order to ensure adequate staffing levels to monitor beverage sales and patron behavior;

    f.    Procedures for verifying the age of patrons for purposes of alcohol sales;

    g.   Procedures for ensuring that servers monitor patrons to ensure that drinking limit/potential intoxication is not exceeded. This procedure should include a description of the procedure the server would use to warn, or refuse to serve, the patron;

    h.   Procedures for handling obviously intoxicated persons;

    i.    Procedures for the provision of alternate transportation services to patrons. This may include procedures for access to a telephone, the provision of a list of taxi services, or other service that will ensure the safe travel of any patron, particularly those who are intoxicated, in leaving the entertainment establishment;

    j.    Procedures for handling patrons involved in fighting, arguing, disruptive behavior, or loitering about the entertainment establishment and/or the immediate adjacent area that is owned, leased, rented, or used under agreement by the permittee;

    k.   Procedures for contacting the sheriff’s department regarding observed or reported criminal activity; and

    l.    Such other information as the sheriff’s department deems necessary for the proper processing and review of the security plan, for fulfilling the goals of this chapter, and/or for the safeguarding of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

    4.   The proposed security arrangements for the safety and control of patrons (including within all adjacent rights-of-way and parking areas).

    5.   The name or names of the person or persons managing or supervising the proposed entertainment, or any business or premises wherein the entertainment is proposed to be located.

    6.   Whether the applicant and/or any person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this section has ever had a permit for the same or any similar business denied, suspended, or revoked anywhere, and, if so, the circumstances, time and place of such denial, suspension, and/or revocation. The denial, suspension, revocation, or cancellation of any ABC license shall be considered as included for purposes of this section.

    7.   Whether the applicant and/or any person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this section has ever been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony and, if so, the details of such conviction.

    8.   The applicant and all persons for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to this section shall submit a complete set of fingerprints to the city manager, or designee, in a manner and form approved by the city manager, or designee. Any fees for the fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.

    C.   Any application submitted pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the appropriate non-refundable fee as established (and modified from time to time) by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.060 Investigation and action thereon.
    A.  Determination of Completeness. The city manager, or designee, shall, within fifteen calendar days, review the submission of any application for a Category 1 or Category 2 entertainment permit and supporting documents to determine if the application contains all of the requisite information set forth in Section 5.45.050. Any application that is missing information required pursuant to Section 5.45.050 or that is not accompanied by the requisite fee(s) shall be deemed incomplete and shall not be processed by the city manager, or designee. In such case, the city manager, or designee, shall issue a notice of incompleteness to the applicant specifying the information that is missing resulting in the incomplete application.

    B.   Investigation. Upon receipt of a complete entertainment permit application (and requisite fees), the city manager, or designee, shall conduct a thorough investigation of the application. The city manager, or designee, may request supplemental investigation, information, reports, and/or recommendations pertaining to relevant zoning, building, health, safety, fire, law enforcement, or other factors from any appropriate department of the city or other appropriate agency.

    Among other things, the city manager, or designee, shall check local and state summary criminal history information, and certify whether disqualifying criminal history has been discovered. Accordingly, pursuant to Penal Code Sections 11105 and 13300, the city council explicitly authorizes the city manager, or designee, to obtain such information as it relates to disqualifying convictions or conduct related to the crimes and offenses described in this chapter.

    C.   Approval. The city manager, or designee, shall, within sixty calendar days of the submission of a completed application for an entertainment permit (including payment of applicable fees), approve the issuance of an entertainment permit, subject to the conditions set forth in Section 5.45.070, unless the city manager, or designee, determines any of the following:

    1.   Other approvals, permits, licenses, or inspections are required for the activities at the subject premises or real property for which the permit is sought and the applicant and/or owner of the subject real property have not yet acquired same.

    2.   The issuance of the permit and conduct of the entertainment at the proposed location is inconsistent with federal, state, and/or local laws, rules, regulations, and/or any existing permit or land-use entitlement.

    3.   That issuance of the permit at the proposed location will constitute an undue burden on the neighborhood because of its proximity to residences, inadequate parking, or other neighborhood circumstances and, irrespective of reasonable conditions that could be imposed thereon, will otherwise interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the neighborhood by its residents and guests.

    4.   The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to Section 5.45.050 has, within the past seven years, been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to any felony or of any misdemeanor crime involving moral turpitude or which is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a proprietor, manager, or other responsible person for an entertainment establishment.

    5.   The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to Section 5.45.050 has a history of committing, permitting, or failing to prevent significant violations of federal, state, or local law, or of any terms or conditions contained in a license or permit, including but not limited to, ABC license(s), conditional use permit(s), other special permit(s), or any other land-use entitlement(s), in connection with an entertainment establishment or any business for which the applicant is/was an owner, operator, or otherwise responsible person.

    6.   Based upon the information before the city manager, or designee, the applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to Section 5.45.050, has knowingly provided false or misleading information, or has otherwise omitted information in the application or in any amendment or report required to be made under this chapter.

    7.   The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to Section 5.45.050 has had an entertainment permit denied or revoked within the twenty-four months preceding the current application in the city of Pico Rivera or in any other jurisdiction.

    8.   The applicant or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to Section 5.45.050 owes the city a fee authorized by Section 5.45.050(B) or an administrative penalty resulting from a violation of any provision of this chapter or of a condition of any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

    9.   The application is otherwise incomplete.

    D.  Denial. In the event the city manager, or designee, does not approve an entertainment permit, the city manager, or designee, shall issue a written notice of denial to the applicant to notify the applicant of the denial and the reasons therefor within sixty calendar days of the submission of a completed application for an entertainment permit (including payment of applicable fees). The notice of denial shall also advise the applicant of the applicant’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal) as set forth in Section 5.45.110. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.070 Conditions of approval.
    A.  Entertainment permits shall be subject to conditions in order to ensure compliance with this chapter, applicable federal, state, and local law, and otherwise to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

    B.   If the applicant or any person for whom information was required to be provided pursuant to Sections 5.45.050 has been issued an ABC license, conditional use permit, other special permit, or land-use entitlement applicable to the entertainment establishment or the entertainment sought to be provided or allowed, conditions placed thereon shall constitute conditions of the entertainment permit issued under authority of this chapter. The city manager, or designee, may require an applicant for an entertainment permit to demonstrate compliance with applicable conditions of existing ABC license, conditional use permit(s), other special permit(s), and/or land-use entitlement(s) prior to the issuance of the entertainment permit or may issue the permit conditioned on the applicant obtaining any other additional necessary special permit or other city, county, or state approval.

    C.   The operating standards set forth in Section 5.45.150 shall constitute conditions of any entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    D.  The city manager, or designee, may, based upon specific and articulable facts reasonably related to insuring the public health, safety, and welfare, impose conditions upon an entertainment permit (including the security plan) relating to the operation of the entertainment establishment including, but not limited to:

    1.   The days, hours and locations of operation.

    2.   Restrictions designed to prevent minors from obtaining alcoholic beverages, such as separate entrances, exits, and restroom facilities on the premises.

    3.   The number and age of persons allowed on the premises.

    4.   Whether licensed additional security guards are required, and if so, how many.

    5.   Specific measures the permittee must undertake to control the conduct of patrons so as to prevent or minimize disorderly conduct within the entertainment establishment, parking areas, and adjacent public rights-of-way.

    6.   Specific measures the permittee must undertake to remove trash attributable to the establishment or its patrons in and around the entertainment establishment, the surrounding neighborhood, and the adjacent public rights-of-way.

    7.   Specific measures the permittee must undertake to prevent the entertainment and its patrons from disturbing the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhood.

    8.   Specific measures the permittee must undertake to prevent its patrons from engaging in disorderly conduct in the surrounding neighborhood.

    9.   Whether the city manager, or designee, must receive advance notice of the date of a particular event if that event is not held as part of the regularly scheduled events of the business.

    10. Other matters related to the public health, safety, and welfare.

    E.   As a condition of approval, an applicant shall be required to indemnify the city, its officers, employees, agents, and commissioners as required under Section 5.45.160 of this chapter.

    F.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the city manager, or designee, to place conditions upon the permit that are more restrictive than the conditions of any applicable conditional use permit, special permit, or land-use entitlement, or of any applicable operating standard.

    G.  No condition may be imposed upon any entertainment permit that conflicts with federal, state or local law, or that conflicts with the permittee’s ABC license; however, nothing in this section is intended to prevent the city manager, or designee, from imposing any condition related to the age of patrons inside an entertainment establishment with an ABC license if the ABC license does not address that issue. The intent of this section is to allow the sale and service of food to minors in a bona fide eating establishment (ABC license types 41, 47, and various club licensed premises) with reasonable conditions imposed to prevent curfew violations and to protect minors from alcohol and other criminal activity.

    H.  Conditions shall be listed on, or attached to, the entertainment permit.

    I.    The imposition of any conditions other than those imposed by subsections B and C is subject to appeal in accordance with the time constraints and provisions set forth in Section 5.45.110. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.080 Duration.
    Entertainment permits issued pursuant to this chapter are valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Entertainment permits are not automatically renewed and it shall be the responsibility of the permittee to renew an entertainment permit in accordance with Section 5.45.130. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an entertainment permit issued for a special event is valid for the term stated in the permit, but in no event for a period greater than one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.090 Nontransferable.
    No person shall assign or transfer any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter, and any attempt to assign or transfer any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall render the entertainment permit null-and-void and shall be immediately surrendered to the city manager, or designee. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.100 Modification, suspension, or revocation.
    A.  General. The city manager, or designee, may modify the conditions of an entertainment permit, require the holder of a Category 1 entertainment permit to obtain a Category 2 entertainment permit, or suspend or revoke any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter if the city manager, or designee, makes any of the following findings and/or determinations:

    1.   There exists any ground for denial of the entertainment permit pursuant to Section 5.45.060 of this chapter;

    2.   The permittee or other responsible person has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact or has knowingly omitted a material fact in the application for the entertainment permit or any report or records required to be filed by law;

    3.   Entertainment has been conducted at the entertainment establishment in a manner contrary to the entertainment permit or conditions thereof;

    4.   The permittee or other responsible person has failed to comply with one or more conditions of the permit, or any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency (including any conditions of an ABC license or conditional use permit);

    5.   The permittee or other responsible person has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of the city, county of Los Angeles, state of California, or the United States of America, in the course of exercising any rights under the entertainment permit;

    6.   The permittee or other responsible person has operated an entertainment establishment or otherwise caused or allowed entertainment in violation of any notice of denial, order of suspension, or order of revocation issued pursuant to this chapter or allowed or caused an entertainment establishment to operate in violation of laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction;

    7.   The permittee or other responsible person has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance in the city of Pico Rivera or in any other jurisdiction; and/or

    8.   The continued operation under the entertainment permit (and any applicable conditions) would endanger, disrupt, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city, its residents or guests, and/or the general public, or would otherwise constitute a public nuisance.

    B.   Order of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation. Where the city manager, or designee, has determined that the conditions of an entertainment permit shall be modified or that an entertainment permit shall be suspended or revoked, the city manager, or designee, shall provide written notice of the decision to the permittee.

    1.   Order of Modification. The city manager, or designee, shall serve a written order of modification upon the permittee stating the grounds for the modification, the specific modifications being imposed upon the entertainment permit, the effective date of the modified conditions, and the permittee’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal).

    2.   Order of Suspension. The city manager, or designee, shall serve a written order of suspension upon the permittee stating the grounds for the suspension, the length of the suspension, the effective date of the suspension, and the permittee’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal). An entertainment permit may be suspended for a period not to exceed thirty calendar days per violation, and no more than ninety calendar days per suspension.

    3.   Order of Revocation. The city manager, or designee, shall serve a written order of revocation upon the permittee stating the grounds for the revocation, the effective date of the revocation, and the permittee’s appeal rights (including method and timeline for requesting an appeal).

    C.   Effective Date of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation.

    1.   General. Except as provided in subsection (C)(2), any order of modification, suspension, or revocation issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become effective, and the permittee shall adhere to such order, after the expiration of ten calendar days following service of the order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation. Every person to whom a permit has been issued under this chapter shall immediately surrender his or her permit to the city manager, or designee, upon the effective date of its revocation.

    2.   Summary Modification, Suspension, or Revocation. The city manager, or designee, may summarily and immediately modify, suspend, or revoke an entertainment permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if the city manager, or designee, determines that any ground for modification, suspension, or revocation set forth in subsection A exists to the extent or degree that it creates an imminent peril or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of the patrons, guests, or general public. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C)(1), any modification, suspension, or revocation pursuant to this section shall be effective immediately, however, a written order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation as set forth in subsection B shall be served upon the permittee within three business days of the summary action.

    a.   Where the city manager, or designee, has taken summary action pursuant to subsection (C)(2), the city manager, or designee, may also require the immediate closure of the entertainment establishment and dispersal of all patrons for the remainder of that day’s operations.

    b.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to comply with any directive issued by the city manager, or designee, under authority of subsection (C)(2).

    c.   Pursuant to subsection C, a summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to this section is not stayed pending an appeal. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.110 Appeals.
    A.  Request for Appeal. Any applicant for an entertainment permit that has received a notice of denial, any permittee that has received an entertainment permit subject to conditions of approval pursuant to Section 5.45.070, except those imposed by Section 5.45.070(B) and (C), and any permittee that has received an order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation of an entertainment permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal said notice or order by filing a request for an appeal with the city clerk, and tendering a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of service of the notice, order, or conditions of approval. The request for an appeal must be made in writing and must contain, at a minimum, the following information:

    1.   The name of all appellants and the address of the applicable entertainment establishment where the appellant was authorized (or was seeking to be authorized) to provide or allow entertainment pursuant to the entertainment permit (or entertainment permit application) subject to the notice or order;

    2.   The date of the imposition of conditions, or of denial, modification, suspension, or revocation by the city manager, or designee;

    3.   A statement as to all grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to enable a hearing officer to understand the nature of the controversy, however, a permittee may only appeal a summary modification, suspension, or revocation based upon the grounds for the modification, suspension, or revocation and not the determination that such grounds existed to the extent or degree that it creates an imminent peril or threat to the public health, safety, or welfare of the patrons, guests, or general public;

    4.   The signature of each appellant under penalty of perjury as to the contents of the request for appeal.

    B.   Timely Appeal. Failure of the city clerk to receive a timely appeal and payment of the appeal fee(s) constitutes a waiver of the right to contest the imposition of conditions, a notice of denial or order of modification, suspension, and/or revocation, and such conditions, notice and/or order shall be deemed final and binding.

    C.   Stay of Modification, Suspension, and/or Revocation. Where a request for an appeal has been timely filed (and all fees therefor timely tendered), any modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit imposed pursuant to Section 5.45.100(A) and (B) shall be stayed pending the resolution of the appeal by the hearing officer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. However, the filing of an appeal shall not stay any summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit imposed pursuant to Section 5.45.100(C)(2).

    D.  Timing of Hearing. Upon timely receipt of a request for an appeal and applicable fees, the city clerk shall set this matter for consideration before the hearing officer no later than thirty calendar days from receipt of the request and payment of applicable fees. The city clerk shall issue written notice to the appellant(s) of the date, time, and location of the appeal hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing.

    Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the request for an appeal seeks to challenge a summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit, the city clerk shall set the matter for consideration before the hearing officer no later than ten business days from receipt of the request and payment of applicable fees. The city clerk shall issue written notice to the appellant(s) of the date, time and location of the appeal hearing at least five calendar days prior to the hearing.

    E.   Continuing an Appeal. Any request by an appellant to continue an appeal hearing must be submitted to the city clerk in writing no later than two business days before the date scheduled for the hearing. The hearing officer may continue a hearing for good cause or on his or her own motion; however, in no event may the hearing be continued for more than thirty calendar days without stipulation by all parties.

    Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the appeal seeks to challenge a summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit, the hearing officer may not continue the hearing on his or her own motion for more than five business days without stipulation by all parties.

    F.   Appeal Hearing. Appeal hearings conducted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the following:

    1.   The appeal hearing shall proceed solely on those issues or defenses raised in the request for an appeal filed by the appellant(s), and all matters not contested in said request shall be deemed admitted into evidence;

    2.   The city manager, or designee, shall have the burden to establish the grounds for the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, or revocation that has been contested by the appellant by a preponderance of the evidence. The notice of denial and/or the orders of modification, suspension, and/or revocation (and all documents or reports relied upon and/or prepared in relation to the notice or order) shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the grounds for the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, or revocation. The city manager, or designee, will have the right to present additional written and/or oral evidence in support of the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, and/or revocation subject to the appeal;

    3.   The appellant(s) may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the office of the city clerk at least three business days prior to the hearing. If the appellant(s) elects to appear at the hearing by written declaration, the city manager, or designee, shall not be required to attend or participate at the hearing, and may instead submit a written response to the hearing officer to be considered at the time of the hearing;

    4.   The appellant, if present at the hearing, shall be given an opportunity to testify and to present written and/or oral evidence relating to the matters raised in the appellant’s request for an appeal, and shall have the right to examine and cross-examine any documents and witnesses presented by the city manager, or designee, in support of the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, and/or revocation subject to the appeal. The city manager, or designee, will also have the right to examine and cross-examine any documents and witnesses presented by the appellant(s). The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing;

    5.   The city, at its discretion, may record the hearing by stenographer or court reporter, audio recording, or video recording;

    6.   If the appellant(s) fails to appear, or to otherwise submit a written declaration or any admissible evidence contesting the existence of all grounds for the imposition of conditions, denial, modification, suspension, or revocation subject to the appeal, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and send a notice thereof to the appellant(s) by first class mail to the address(es) stated on the appeal form. A cancellation of a hearing due to non-appearance of the appellant shall constitute the appellant’s waiver of the right to appeal. In such instances, the initial conditions of approval, notice, or order are deemed final and binding;

    7.   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and the applicant or permittee may seek judicial review of the hearing officer’s decision in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 or as otherwise permitted by law. The applicant or permittee shall be so notified in the Hearing Officer’s notice of decision. If the applicant or permittee provides written notification to the city of his or her intent to seek judicial review under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8, the city attorney shall, in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8(d)(1), prepare, certify and make available the administrative record to the applicant or permittee within five working days of receipt of such written notification or as such term may be modified from time to time by the state. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.120 Effect of denial and revocation.
    If an application for an entertainment permit is denied or revoked by the city manager, or designee, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, no application for an entertainment permit at the same premises or submitted by the same applicant or any person for whom information was required to be provided for the denied or revoked entertainment permit pursuant to Section 5.45.050 shall be considered by the city manager, or designee, for a period of twenty-four months from the date of denial or revocation.

    Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city manager, or designee, may consider an application for an entertainment permit in less than the stated period (but not sooner than twelve months) if the application is accompanied by evidence that the ground or grounds for denial of the previous application no longer exist. This exception does not apply to permits that have been revoked. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.130 Renewal of entertainment permit.
    A.  Renewal. A permittee may apply to renew an entertainment permit by submitting to the city manager, or designee, at least sixty calendar days prior to the expiration of the permittee’s current and valid entertainment permit, a completed application to renew the permit on a city-approved form and a non-refundable renewal fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

    1.   If a timely and complete application for renewal is filed, the expiration of the current entertainment permit shall be stayed until a decision on the renewal application is issued.

    2.   Any permit application submitted less than sixty calendar days prior to the expiration of the permittee’s current and valid entertainment permit shall be deemed an application for a new permit and shall be subject to applicable fees for a new permit and shall not stay the expiration of the current entertainment permit.

    3.   The city manager, or designee, shall process the application to renew an entertainment permit in the same fashion as for a new entertainment permit as set forth in Section 5.45.060.

    4.   The city manager, or designee, may add, delete, or modify the permit conditions as a condition of permit renewal, using the criteria set forth in Section 5.45.070.

    B.   Appeal. The decision of the city manager, or designee, to deny the renewal of an entertainment permit or to add, delete, or modify the permit conditions may be appealed in the same manner and within the same limits as a decision upon an initial application for an entertainment permit.

    1.   If a timely appeal is filed (and all fees therefor timely tendered) and the permittee applied to renew an entertainment permit at least sixty calendar days prior to the expiration of the permittee’s current and valid entertainment permit, the expiration of the current entertainment permit shall be stayed pending the resolution of the appeal.

    2.   The filing of an appeal shall not stay any summary modification, suspension, or revocation of an entertainment permit imposed pursuant to Section 5.45.100(C)(2). (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.140 Service of notices and orders.
    Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice or order required by this chapter may be served upon any responsible person by personal delivery or by first class mail. The date of service shall be the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any order of suspension or order of revocation shall, in addition to being served upon a responsible party in accordance with Section 5.45.100, shall also be posted at or upon the main entry of the entertainment establishment subject to the order.

    Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any notice or order issued by mail to a responsible person shall be sent to the mailing address listed on the application for an entertainment permit or a request for an appeal (or any other address provided by the responsible person for purposes of receiving mail). Failure of any responsible person to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall not invalidate any action or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.150 Operating standards.
    All entertainment establishments shall strictly adhere to the following operating standards.

    A.  Hours of Operation. Except as otherwise provided in an approved entertainment permit, all entertainment establishments shall be closed and all patrons shall vacate the premises between two a.m. and six a.m.

    Except as otherwise provided in an approved entertainment permit, all live entertainment at an entertainment establishment shall cease at least thirty minutes prior to the scheduled closing time for the establishment.

    B.   Posting and Exhibition of Entertainment Permit. The permittee holding an entertainment permit shall keep a copy of the entertainment permit (along with all applicable conditions thereon) posted in a conspicuous location at the entertainment establishment named in the entertainment permit.

    Any entertainment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be kept in a readily accessible place and shown upon request to any city official responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code.

    C.   Security. Unless otherwise stated below, an entertainment establishment requiring either a Category 1 or Category 2 entertainment permit shall comply with the following security related operational standards:

    1.   Security Guards. Based upon the type and nature of the entertainment activities anticipated at the location, the city manager may require uniformed, state-licensed security guards, at owner’s expense, on the premises of an entertainment establishment until all activity at the entertainment establishment has ceased and all patrons have cleared the establishment and parking area.

    2.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no responsible person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any security personnel to, and no security personnel shall, be in possession of any firearm while on duty at the entertainment establishment.

    3.   Each responsible person (including security personnel) shall use reasonable efforts to cause the orderly dispersal of individuals in the vicinity of the entertainment establishment (including the parking area and rights-of-way adjacent to the establishment) at closing time, and shall not allow individuals to congregate within fifty feet of the establishment in a disorderly fashion.

    4.   If required by the city manager or designee, each entertainment establishment providing parking lot attendants shall require the parking lot attendant wear a reflective vest or other clothing/uniform approved by the city manager, or designee, to monitor activities commencing at least thirty minutes prior to scheduled entertainment and lasting until all activity at the entertainment establishment has ceased and all patrons have cleared the establishment and parking area.

    5.   No responsible person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer, and no security personnel shall, sit at the bar, consume alcoholic beverages or any controlled substance, be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or any controlled substance, or engage in any other violations of law while on duty at the entertainment establishment.

    6.   Each entertainment establishment shall install, use, and maintain in good working condition a video security system capable of viewing and recording events at the entertainment establishment as approved by the city manager, or designee. The video security system must be clearly identified and approved within the security plan submitted in accordance with Section 5.45.050. The video security system shall be on and operating at all times during business hours and until all activity at the entertainment establishment has ceased and all patrons have cleared the establishment and parking area. The video security system shall be of such to provide images of such a resolution as to clearly identify individuals for later identification.

    a.   The entertainment establishment shall ensure that at least one employee or other person is present on the premises during normal business hours with the necessary knowledge and skill to operate the video security system so that he or she is able to provide the sheriff’s department copies of video recordings immediately upon request.

    b.   Responsible persons shall preserve the video security system’s recorded information of each business day for a period of not less than ten business days thereafter for the sheriff’s department’s review in connection with a criminal or other investigation.

    D.  Queues. Queuing lines shall be managed in an orderly manner and all disruptive and intoxicated persons shall be denied entry. Any queue located on the exterior of a building shall not obstruct the entry or exit doors of adjacent businesses and residences, and shall be located in such a manner that the adjacent sidewalk has at least three feet of unobstructed clearance. All requisite city approvals and permits shall be obtained prior to placing or using any stanchions, rope, balusters, or similar barriers for queues.

    E.   Alcoholic Beverages on Premises. No person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any alcoholic beverage at an entertainment establishment unless otherwise authorized pursuant to and in compliance with a current and valid ABC license (unless otherwise exempt from such license). All responsible persons for the entertainment establishment shall be responsible for verifying the age of those persons desiring to purchase and/or consume alcoholic beverages at the establishment in order to ensure compliance with state law restricting the age of the sale and consumption of alcohol to those twenty-one years of age and older. This verification process may include such techniques as the manual checking of identification by a trained employee, the use of an identification scanner or similar device, or other method as approved in the security plan.

    F.   Nuisances. Responsible persons shall not cause, allow, permit, or suffer any nuisance condition at the entertainment establishment, parking area, or adjacent public right-of-way. Such nuisances include, but are not limited to, disorderly conduct, disturbances of the peace, public drunkenness, consumption of alcohol in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, loitering, public urination, lewd conduct, and possession, use, or sales of controlled substances.

    G.  Graffiti. Any graffiti painted or marked upon the premises of an entertainment establishment or any adjacent area under the ownership, possession, or control of the responsible person for the entertainment establishment shall be removed or painted over within twenty-four hours of its application.

    H.  The premises shall not be operated as an adult-oriented business as defined in Chapter 5.22 of this code.

    I.    There shall be no public telephones located on the exterior of the premises of an entertainment establishment. All interior pay phones shall be designed to allow outgoing calls only.

    J.    Maximum Occupancy. A sign indicating the maximum occupancy as approved by the city shall be posted as directed by the city building official. No responsible person shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any person to enter or remain in the entertainment establishment (or any area thereof) in excess of the approved maximum occupancy.

    K.  Reporting Requirement. Responsible persons shall notify the city manager, or designee, in writing, within five calendar days of:

    1.   Any enforcement action either proposed or actually taken by Alcohol Beverage Control against the entertainment establishment or any responsible person in connection with the entertainment establishment. As used herein, “enforcement action” includes, but is not limited to, the issuance of any “309 Letters,” the issuance of a criminal citation to an officer/member, employee, or agent of the responsible persons for alleged violations of law at the entertainment establishment, as well as the initiation of an administrative or civil action against the entertainment establishment or responsible persons for alleged violations of law at the entertainment establishment. “Violations of law” as used herein includes failures to comply with regulations that govern liquor licenses and the premises for which they are issued;

    2.   Any conditions at the entertainment establishment that substantially affect the public safety which the responsible persons (including any manager and security personnel) know or reasonably should know exist at the time of occurrence;

    3.   Any incidents of disorderly conduct, including any possession, use, or sale of controlled substances, that have been brought to the attention of responsible persons, or that otherwise the responsible persons know or reasonably should know to have occurred at the entertainment establishment.

    L.   Responsible persons shall provide consent for and access by any person responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter or any other provision of this code to enter any portion of the entertainment establishment, without charge, at any time during normal business hours or during which any operations are occurring at the entertainment establishment in order to verify compliance with any entertainment permit (including an approved security plan and ABC license), the provisions of this chapter or any other portion of this code, or any other applicable law or regulation.

    M.  A permittee and all responsible persons shall fully cooperate with any investigation conducted in order to verify compliance with any entertainment permit (including an approved security plan and ABC license), conditional use permit, the provisions of this chapter or any other portion of this code, or any other applicable law or regulation. Cooperation shall include, but shall not be limited to, allowing investigators the immediate opportunity upon request to review any video, writing, or other record required pursuant to the provisions of an entertainment permit or other applicable license or permit, this chapter, or any other provision of law, and providing a copy of said video, writing, or other record within seventy-two hours.

    N.  A permittee and responsible persons shall be responsible for all activities occurring on the premises of an entertainment establishment (including parking areas), including those conducted by employees, managers, event promoters, and other persons acting for the benefit of the entertainment establishment, as well as by the patrons. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.160 Indemnification.
    Permittees and all responsible persons shall indemnify and hold the city, its officers, employees, agents, and commissioners harmless from any and all losses, claims, actions or damages suffered by any person or persons by reason of or resulting from any negligence of the permittee or its agents, employees, or patrons or on account of any act or omission of the permittee in its exercise of its entertainment permit or use of any premises in connection with such permit. In the event any suit or action is brought against the city, the permittee and all responsible persons shall, upon notice of the commencement thereof, defend the same, at no cost or expense to the city, and promptly satisfy any final judgment adverse to the city or to the city and the permittee jointly; provided, that in the event the city determines that one or more principles of governmental or public law are involved, the city retains the right to participate in such action. The above liability shall not be diminished by the fact, if it be a fact, that any such death, injury, damage, loss, cost or expense may have been, or may be alleged to have been, contributed to by the negligence of the city or its officers, employees, or agents; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the permittee to indemnify the city against liability for damages arising out of bodily injury to persons or damage to property caused by or resulting from the sole negligence of the city, or its officers, employees, or agents. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.170 Permits issued prior to the effective date of this chapter.
    Unless an earlier expiration date is specified in the terms or conditions of the permit itself, any permit issued for entertainment in the city before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be valid for one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and shall terminate thereafter. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, all permits issued for entertainment in the city before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to suspension, modification, or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.45.100. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.180 Violations and penalties.
    A.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any order or notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.20.010 of Title 1 of this code.

    B.   Any person who defaces, alters, or removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.20.010 of Title 1 of this code.

    C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city attorney or city prosecutor from prosecuting a violation of this chapter as an infraction, at his or her discretion, as set forth in Chapter 1.20.010 of Title 1 of this code.

    D.  Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city attorney or city prosecutor from bringing a civil action, at his or her discretion, to seek the abatement of any violation of this code or any nuisance activity at an entertainment establishment.

    E.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any city enforcement officer from issuing an administrative citation for violations of the provisions of this chapter, as set forth in Chapter 8.16 of Title 8 of this code.

    F.   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.

    G.  Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, any condition or activity caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision, restriction, or requirement of this chapter or any notice, order, or permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city by any and all means (civil, administrative, and/or equitable) as provided by law or in equity. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

 

5.45.190 Cumulative remedies, procedures, and penalties.
    Unless otherwise expressly provided, the remedies, procedures, and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to each other and to any others available under city, state, or federal law. (Ord. 1104 § 13, 2017)

Chapter 5.46 FIREARMS—RETAIL SALE
5.46.010 Statutory provisions applicable.
    For the sale at retail of pistols, revolvers and other concealable firearms, the form of any license issued under this section shall be as prescribed by the Attorney General pursuant to California Penal Code Section 12071. (Prior code § 6411.5)

Chapter 5.48 FORTUNETELLING
5.48.010 Permit—Contents of application.
    The application for a fortunetelling permit shall include:

    A.  Name and address of the applicant;

    B.   Address of the proposed location for the conduct of the proposed profession, art or business;

    C.   Record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations;

    D.  Two copies of a photograph, one inch by one inch in size, taken within two years of the application for submission to the law enforcement agency;

    E.   The fingerprints of the applicant on a suitable form, to be provided by the law enforcement agency;

    F.   Address, city and state, and approximate dates when this applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others;

    G.  Such other and further information as the city clerk may find necessary to process the application. (Ord. 703 § 5, 1985; prior code § 6305(x)(part), (1))

 

5.48.020 Permit—Separate required when—Bond.
    Every natural person actively carrying on, conducting or engaging in the business of fortunetelling for which a license and/or permit is required shall file a separate application, separate photograph and fingerprints, and pay a separate license and permit fee, as required by the provisions of this title. Such person shall also post a separate bond, as required in this chapter, for each person conducting the business of fortune-telling. (Ord. 703 § 5, 1985; prior code § 6305(x)(part), (3))

 

5.48.030 Bond—Termination of liability.
    The liability on any bond deposited with the city may be terminated upon the filing with the city clerk by the surety on the bond of a written notice to the city that the surety intends to terminate the liability upon the bond, such termination to become effective thirty days from and after the day upon which the notice of intention to terminate liability is filed with the city clerk; provided, however, that in no case shall the termination of liability by the surety on any bond affect any liability incurred prior to the date of termination thereof. (Ord. 703 § 5, 1985; prior code § 6305(x)(part), (4))

 

5.48.040 Permit—Issuance conditions.
    If the application is approved by the permit and license hearing board, the city clerk shall issue the permit only when:

    A.  The required fee is paid; and

    B.   There shall have been posted with the city clerk a surety bond in the principal sum of ten thousand dollars, executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in this state and as a principal by the applicant, which shall have been approved by the city attorney as to form, which bond shall have been given to insure good faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, injury, theft or other unfair dealing suffered by any patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. (Ord. 703 § 5, 1985; prior code § 6305(x)(part), (2))

 

5.48.050 Permit—Suspension or revocation.
    In addition to the provisions of this title pertaining to the revocation or suspension of a license or permit, the license or permit of any person under this chapter may be revoked or suspended upon such person being convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction by a final judgment of an offense involving the performance of fortunetelling. (Ord. 703 § 5, 1985; prior code § 6305(x)(part), (5))

Chapter 5.50 GUARDS AND PATROLMEN
5.50.010 Guard defined.
    “Guard” means a person who guards property and who is not a member of a private patrol system or a patrol system and who is employed exclusively and regularly by one employer in connection with the affairs of such employer only, and where there exists an employer-employee relationship. (Prior code § 6305(j)(part))

 

5.50.020 Guards—Permit— Application fee.
    In lieu of the application fee required by Section 5.08.320, each applicant for a guard shall pay a five-dollar application fee in advance. (Prior code § 6305(j)(part), (2))

 

5.50.030 Guards—Processing of applications.
    All such applications shall be forwarded to the law enforcement agency for a report and recommendation. (Prior code § 6305(j)(part), (3))

 

5.50.040 Guards—Permit—Annual renewal—Fee.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, guard permits shall be renewed annually on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the permit. The permit may be renewed by the director of finance, provided he or she has received a favorable report therefor from the law enforcement agency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, the application fee for permits and for annual renewal thereof pertaining to a guard shall be five dollars each. (Prior code § 6305(j)(part), (1))

 

5.50.050 Guards—Business license not required when.
    No business license shall be required of a guard where employed by an employer who is licensed under Chapter 5.12 of this title. (Prior code § 6305(j)(part), (4))

 

5.50.060 Patrol system requirements.
    A.  Personnel. The operator of a patrol system shall neither employ nor utilize the services in any way of a patrolman whose name is not on the license of such operator, or who does not possess a valid subsisting license.

    B.   License Not To Be Sold. The holder of a patrol system license shall not sell or offer to sell any transfer or relinquishment of the privilege to operate a patrol system in territory assigned to him, or for any consideration whatever agree to advocate or not to oppose the granting of any other patrol system license.

    C.   Change in Personnel. The holder of a license to conduct a patrol system shall so inform the director of finance within five days after any patrolman no longer is an owner, member or employee of such licensee, and shall return the license and badge of such patrolman to the law enforcement agency. The director of finance shall remove such patrolman’s name from the license of such patrol system. (Prior code § 6410)

 

5.50.070 Patrolmen—Identification required.
    While engaged in his or her duties as such, a patrolman shall keep upon his or her person, at all times, his or her license, and shall wear the badge issued by the law enforcement agency, and shall wear no other badge of any kind, character or description except a badge issued to him or her by lawful governmental authority. (Prior code § 6411(g))

 

5.50.080 Patrolmen—Badge requirements.
    A.  Patrolmen shall wear such badge as shall be designated or issued by the law enforcement agency, and shall pay, in addition to all other fees under this title, such fees under such arrangements as shall be designated by the law enforcement agency. A patrolman shall wear no badge other than that issued or approved by the law enforcement agency.

    B.   A patrolman shall turn in his or her badge and license to his or her employer when his or her license has been revoked. A patrolman shall turn in his or her badge to his or her employer when he or she ceases to be employed as a patrolman. (Prior code § 6411(a))

 

5.50.090 Badges not transferable.
    A person shall not give, deliver to or sell any patrolman’s badge, or any badge of a design the same as, or so similar to the patrolman’s badge as to be mistaken therefor, to any private person. (Prior code § 6411(i))

 

5.50.100 Patrolmen—Equipment restrictions.
    The law enforcement agency shall specify the police equipment, including weapons, which a licensee may wear while on duty. A licensee shall not wear any equipment or weapon or carry any weapon not so specified. (Prior code § 6411(e))

 

5.50.110 Patrolmen—Duty to report.
    Licensees shall not perform official police or investigation activities, but shall immediately report every violation of law and every unusual occurrence to the nearest law enforcement agency or police substation. A licensee shall make a full report of such violation or other occurrence, without unnecessary delay, to such substation. (Prior code § 6411(k))

 

5.50.120 Patrolmen—Notice of change of employer.
    Upon written application by a licensed patrolman accompanied by the written application of the patrol system which proposes to employ such patrolman, and upon satisfying the director of finance by competent evidence that such patrolman is, or will be, no longer employed by the patrol system formerly employing such patrolman, the director of finance may modify the patrolman’s license or permit so as to designate the new employer, and may modify the license or permit of the patrol system by removing such patrolman’s name from the one permit and adding it to the other. (Prior code § 6411(b))

 

5.50.130 Patrolmen—Revocation of license when.
    Unless a patrolman applies to have his or her license modified as provided in Section 5.50.120, the director of finance shall revoke the license or permit of any patrolman when he or she is no longer employed by the patrol system named in his or her permit or license. (Prior code § 6411(c))

 

5.50.140 Patrolmen—Use of police rank or title prohibited.
    A patrolman shall not assume or use a rank or title the same as or similar to any rank or title used by the law enforcement agency, or by any police department within Los Angeles County. (Prior code § 6411(h))

 

5.50.150 Patrolmen—Uniform restrictions.
    A patrolman shall not wear any uniform which is in imitation of or can be mistaken for an official law enforcement agency uniform, or an official police uniform of the police force of any city within Los Angeles County, or an official uniform of any state officer. (Prior code § 6411(f))

 

5.50.160 Patrolmen—Unauthorized badges.
    A person shall not purchase or receive as a gift, pawn, or pledge any patrolman’s badge. (Prior code § 6411(j))

 

5.50.170 Patrolmen—Illegal activities.
    A patrolman shall not, either by himself or through the actions of another, harass, annoy or commit a nuisance against, or injure the property of, or unnecessarily enter or otherwise trespass upon the property of any person whose property the patrol system of such patrolman is not employed to protect. (Prior code § 6411(d))

Chapter 5.52 HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION
5.52.010 Identification—Required on handbills.
    No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill within the city unless the same bears conspicuously thereon the name, address and telephone number of the distributor or other person responsible for such distribution. (Prior code § 6420(a))

 

5.52.020 Identification—Persons distributing handbills.
    A.  Every person distributing or circulating, or causing to be distributed or circulated, commercial handbills within the city shall have on his or her person or with him or her an identification card showing the existence of a valid permit. It is unlawful for any such person to fail or refuse to display or show such identification card upon demand for the display of same by any law enforcement agent of the city, or by any person to whom distribution or circulation is being made by such person.

    B.   Every person so distributing, circulating or causing the same must, at all times while engaged in such activity, have in his or her possession a valid, unrevoked identification card issued by the director of finance, stating his or her name and address, the name and address of the permittee, and the date of expiration of the permit. (Prior code § 6420(g))

 

5.52.030 Hours of distribution.
    No person shall distribute or circulate, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill between the hours of six p.m. of any day and eight a.m. of the following day. (Prior code § 6420(f))

 

5.52.040 Consent to distribution required.
    No person shall circulate, distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill on any property within the city, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property. For the purpose of this chapter, the consent of such owner or occupant of such property shall be presumed unless such owner or occupant has conspicuously posted upon such property a sign or other device which contains language which prohibits handbill delivery in or upon such premises. (Prior code § 6420(b))

 

5.52.050 Private property restrictions.
    The delivery of commercial handbills on private property shall be accomplished by personally delivering such to the person occupying such residential property, or by placing the same upon such property securely, to insure that the same will not be blown from the property onto other lots or public places. (Prior code § 6420(e))

 

5.52.060 Motor vehicle restrictions.
    No person shall circulate or distribute, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill by placing the same in or upon any motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, which is parked upon any public street, alley or public parking area, or upon any such vehicle parked upon any private property. (Prior code § 6420(d))

 

5.52.070 Public property restrictions.
    No person shall distribute or circulate, or cause to be circulated or distributed, any commercial handbill in and along any public street, alley or other public place within the city. (Prior code § 6420(c))

Chapter 5.54 SIDEWALK VENDING REGULATIONS
5.54.010 Purpose and intent.
    The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted as an urgency measure pursuant to Government Code Section 36937 for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare, and is adopted and justified based on the following findings of the city council, in addition to the recitals referenced above which are true and correct and incorporated fully herein:

    A.  The city council hereby finds that, to promote the health, safety and welfare, restrictions on sidewalk vending are necessary to avoid negative impacts on the health, safety and welfare of the resident, including, but not limited to, the following:

    1.   Proliferation of illegal sales;

    2.   Potential public exposure to food-borne illnesses due to unlicensed vendors and unsanitary conditions;

    3.   Increase in trash and debris in public rights-of-way;

    4.   Overcrowded sidewalks impacting safe pedestrian movement;

    5.   Interference to the performance of police, firefighter, and emergency medical personnel;

    6.   Disruption to the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic including ingress or egress from, any residence, public building, place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;

    7.   Mitigate negative impacts to the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress into, or egress from, any residence, public building, or place of business, or from the street to the sidewalk, by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;

    8.   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, pathways, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, restrooms, trash receptacles, firefighting apparatus, mailboxes, as well as access to locations used for public transportation services;

    9.   Maximize public access to and along the right-of-way;

    10. Reduce exposure to legal liability to the city due to personal injury or claims for damage and litigation due to use of public property; and

    11. Protect adult and minor residents from vendors with certain criminal history and background.

    B.   The city council further finds that the unique characteristics of the city require certain area specific restrictions on sidewalk vending as follows:

    1.   Pico Rivera Sports Arena. The Pico Rivera Memorial Sports Arena is a multipurpose arena with an approximately six thousand seat capacity that is used for concerts, rodeos, wrestling, boxing, circus, and other similar events (“Sports Arena”). The Sports Arena is located at 11003 Rooks Road, Pico Rivera, California 90660, which is located adjacent to on or near arterial roadways and is adjacent to the Interstate 605 Freeway, a ten-lane freeway. On days of events, there is a heavy vehicular and pedestrian traffic on the adjacent public rights-of-way before, during, and after events. Based on the physical characteristics of the sidewalks adjacent to the Sports Arena, the presence of vendors on sidewalks and pedestrian paths within areas adjacent to the Sports Arena before, during, and after events would obstruct such sidewalks and cause potentially dangerous vehicular conditions causing risk to sidewalk vendors, pedestrians, and motorists who utilize the streets and sidewalks in areas adjacent to the Sports Arena. In order to protect and preserve the general public welfare and safety, the city council determines that it is necessary to prohibit sidewalk vending two hours before, during, and two hours after events at the Sports Arena;

    2.   The Civic Center contains the city’s emergency operation center, the Pico Rivera sheriff’s station, and other critical infrastructure and equipment. Vending restrictions are necessary to ensure that public safety apparatuses are readily accessible and critical infrastructure is maintained and accessible at all times;

    3.   Restrictions on sidewalk vending at, in or around parks is necessary to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of those persons engaged in active parks and sports activities as well as spectators of sporting events and park activities;

    4.   Many of the sidewalks and pathways in the city are under eight feet wide and sidewalk vending in these areas unreasonably interfere with the flow of pedestrians and disrupt the access for persons with disabilities or decrease safety for users of the city’s sidewalks; and

    5.   Due to the close interaction between sidewalk vendors and seniors, children, and residents generally, the restrictions placed on sidewalk vending are intended to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public, therefore criminal history investigations are necessary to protect the general public. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the words, terms, and phrases shall be defined as set forth herein, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning is intended. Words, terms, and phrases used in this chapter that are not specifically defined shall be construed according to their context and the customary usage of the language.

    “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agriculture Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.

    “Civic Center” or “City Hall” means the buildings, facilities, and parking areas located at 6615 Passons Blvd., Pico Rivera, CA 90660, including the Pico Rivera Station and the appurtenant parking lots.

    “Director” means the director of community and economic development department, or designated representative.

    “Fire station” means any facility where fire engines and other emergency-related equipment of the city of Pico Rivera or the Los Angeles County fire department are housed.

    “Food” means any item provided in Health and Safety Code Section 113781, as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Heating element” means any device used to create heat for food preparation.

    “Merchandise” means any item(s) that may be sold and immediately obtained from a sidewalk vendor, which is not considered food.

    “Park” means public parks owned and/or controlled by the city of Pico Rivera.

    “Parkway” means that portion of a street or highway, other than the roadway or the sidewalk, and is generally identified as the space between the street and the sidewalk, or street medians.

    “Pathway” means a paved path or walkway owned by the city or other public entity that is specifically designed for pedestrian travel, other than a sidewalk.

    “Public property” means all property owned or controlled by the city, including, but not limited to, buildings, parks, pathways, parkways, sidewalks, roadways, streets, and parking lots.

    “Residential” means any area zoned exclusively as residential in Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, or is designated exclusive for residential use as part of a conditional use permit, planned development permit, specific plan, residential overlay district, or equivalent.

    “Roadway” means that portion of the street which is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

    “Roaming sidewalk vendor” shall mean a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

    “Sheriff’s department” means the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department or applicable law enforcement agency.

    “Sheriff’s station” means any facility located in the city where county of Los Angeles sheriff’s vehicles and other equipment are housed.

    “Sidewalk” means that portion of the highway or street other than the roadway or parkway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings, or other delineation which is used principally for pedestrian travel.

    “Sidewalk vendor” shall mean a person who vends food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path, or such other meaning of such term as may be ascribed by Government Code Section 51036(a) from time to time.

    “Sidewalk vendor activities” or “sidewalk vending activity” means actions that qualify a person as a sidewalk vendor or actions done in or upon public rights-of-way in anticipation of becoming a sidewalk vendor such as, but not limited to, placement or maintenance of any sidewalk vendor facilities.

    “Sidewalk vending facilities” or “sidewalk vendor facilities” means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for sidewalk vending activities.

    “Sidewalk vendor permit” or “permit” means the permit issued by the director and required prior to any person engaging in sidewalk vending activities in the city.

    “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

    “Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.030 Sidewalk vending activities prohibited in designated areas.
    Notwithstanding this chapter and any provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, it is unlawful for any person to engage in sidewalk vending activities within the following locations or areas within the city:

    A.  Any public property that does not meet the definition of a sidewalk or pathway, including, but not limited to, any roadway, street, alley, or parking lot.

    B.   Within any area zoned for residential purposes, provided that roaming sidewalk vending activities operated in compliance with this ordinance shall not be prohibited.

    C.   Within one thousand feet of the Sports Arena three hours before, during, or three hours after an event.

    D.  Within five hundred feet of the following:

    1.   An area designated for a temporary special permit issued by the city, provided that any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights provided to affected businesses or property owners under the city’s temporary special permit are also provided to a sidewalk vendor permitted to operate in the area, if applicable. For purposes of this paragraph, a temporary special permit is a permit issued by the city for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes, including, but not limited to, filming, parades, festivals, or outdoor concerts. A prohibition on sidewalk vendor activities pursuant to this paragraph shall only be effective for the duration of the temporary special permit;

    2.   Civic Center, City Hall, a sheriff’s station, or a fire station;

    3.   Any public or private school, or a large or general child day-care facility, between the hours of six a.m. and six p.m.;

    4.   Any place of assembly or worship, between one hour before and one hour after scheduled event or presentation times;

    5.   An area designated for a permitted certified farmers’ market during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market; or

    6.   Any sheriff’s or police officer, firefighter, or emergency medical personnel who are actively performing their duties or providing services to the public.

    E.   Within fifty feet of any public picnic area, playground area or playground equipment; or any public community center, athletic field, softball/baseball diamond, basketball court, handball court, pickleball court, tennis court, soccer field, or volleyball court; public restroom; or another sidewalk vendor.

    F.   Within ten feet of a marked crosswalk; the curb return of an unmarked crosswalk; fire hydrant, fire call box, or other emergency facility; bus bench; transit or bus shelter; driveway or driveway apron; curb which has been designated as white, yellow, green, blue, or red zone; ATM or other vending machine; any driveway; or entrance or exit to a building, structure or facility; or bike rack.

    G.  Within ten feet ahead, and forty-five feet to the rear, of a sign designated a bus stop.

    H.  Within five feet of an area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees, or street tree wells; or an outdoor dining or patio dining area.

    I.    Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not engage in any sidewalk vending activities: (1) on any sidewalk or pathway that is not a minimum width of eight feet; or (2) at any park where the city has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire.

    J.    In or on the median of any street, road, or highway.

    K.  In or immediately adjacent to any area designed for parking, bus zones, stopping, or loading; or in any location where the sidewalk vending receptacle blocks manholes, utility access points, and/or vents.

    L.   In any location which the location of the sidewalk vending receptacle, or the operation of sidewalk vending activities, would result in or cause a violation of applicable law, including, but not limited to, the Americans with Disabilities Act.

    M.  Notwithstanding any specific prohibition in this ordinance, any location or area where the operation of sidewalk vending activities creates a reasonably foreseeable danger to the safety of persons or property. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.040 Permit required.
    A.  No person, either for themselves or any other person, shall engage in any sidewalk vendor activities within the city without first applying for and receiving a permit from the director under this chapter; and maintaining at all times in full force and effect, the sidewalk vending permit, a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.12 of this code, and any other permits, authorizations, or approvals required by law from the city or other governmental agency that is applicable to sidewalk vending activities.

    B.   Any person wishing to engage in sidewalk vendor activities as defined in this chapter shall file an application with the director on forms approved by the director. Such application shall contain the following information:

    1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying to become a sidewalk vendor;

    2.   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of any roaming sidewalk vendors, sidewalk vending activity and/or be responsible for the person(s) working at the sidewalk vending receptacle;

    3.   The name, address, and telephone number of all persons that will employed as roaming sidewalk vendors or at a sidewalk vending receptacle;

    4.   The number of sidewalk vending receptacles the sidewalk vendor will operate within the city under the permit;

    5.   The location(s) in the city where the sidewalk vendor intends to operate;

    6.   The day(s) and hours of operation the sidewalk vendor intends to operate at such location(s);

    7.   Whether the vendor intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor and, if roaming, the intended path of travel;

    8.   The dimensions of the sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle(s), including a picture of each sidewalk vending receptacle operating under the permit and any signs that will be affixed thereto;

    9.   Whether the sidewalk vendor will be selling food, merchandise, or both;

    10. If the sidewalk vendor is selling food, a description of the type of food to be sold, whether such foods are prepared on site, whether such foods will require a heating element inside or on the sidewalk vending receptacle for food preparation, and the type of heating element, if any;

    11. If the vendor is selling merchandise, a description of the merchandise to be sold;

    12. If the vendor is selling food, the name and address of the food commissary in which the sidewalk vending receptacle is stored and maintained;

    13. A copy of the public health permit required for any sidewalk vendors selling food, as required by Los Angeles County Code Title 11 Health and Safety;

    14. Proof the person possesses a valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit which notes the city as a location or sublocation, which shall be maintained for the duration of the sidewalk vendor’s permit;

    15. An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor will comply with all other generally applicable local, state, and federal laws;

    16. A certification that, to their knowledge and belief, the information contained within the application is true;

    17. An agreement by the sidewalk vendor to defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the city, its city council, commissions, officers, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, costs, and expenses (including, without limitation, attorney’s fees, disbursements, and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permit or the vendor’s sidewalk vending activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the city, if any, costs of suit, attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action, or proceeding whether incurred by the permittee, city, and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding;

    18. An acknowledgement that use of public property is at the sidewalk vendor’s own risk and that the city does not take any steps to ensure public property is safe or conducive to the sidewalk vending activities, and that the sidewalk vendor uses the public property at the vendor’s own risk and assumes such risks;

    19. An acknowledgement that the sidewalk vendor will obtain and maintain throughout the duration of any permit issued under this chapter, any insurance required by the city’s risk manager;

    20. Vendor shall cooperate with the director and submit to a local and state summary criminal history information investigation, and certify whether disqualifying criminal history has been discovered. Accordingly, pursuant to Penal Code Sections 11105 and 13300, the city council explicitly authorizes the director to obtain such information as it relates to disqualifying convictions or conduct related to the crimes and offenses described in this chapter; and

    21. Any other relevant information required by the director, or designee. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.050 Issuance of permit.
    A.  Within thirty calendar days of receiving a completed application, the director shall issue a sidewalk vendor permit, with appropriate conditions, as provided for herein, if the director finds all of the following:

    1.   The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement, or tend to interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of nearby tenants to the quiet enjoyment and peaceable enjoyment of their property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare;

    2.   The conduct of the sidewalk vendor will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the vendor;

    3.   The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not constitute a fire hazard, and all proper safety precautions will be taken;

    4.   The conduct of such sidewalk vending activity will not require the diversion of law enforcement officers to properly police the area of such activity as to interfere with normal law enforcement protection for other areas of the city;

    5.   The sidewalk vendor has paid all previous administrative fines, completed all community service, and completed any other alternative disposition associated in any way with a previous violation of this chapter;

    6.   The sidewalk vendor has not had a permit revoked within the past twelve months;

    7.   The sidewalk vendor’s application contains all required information;

    8.   The sidewalk vendor has not made a materially false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the application process;

    9.   The sidewalk vendor has satisfied all the requirements of this chapter;

    10. The sidewalk vendor has paid all applicable fees as set by city council resolution;

    11. The sidewalk vendor’s sidewalk vending receptacle and proposed activities conform to the requirements of this chapter;

    12. The sidewalk vendor has adequate insurance to protect the city from liability associated with the sidewalk vendor’s activities, as determined by the city’s risk manager, or designee;

    13. The sidewalk vendor, or any other person for whom information is required to be provided pursuant to this chapter, has not within the past three years, been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to any felony or of any misdemeanor crime involving moral turpitude or such crime that is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of a sidewalk vendor, including, but not limited to, the crimes listed under of the California Penal Code, Part 1, Title 9 Of Crimes Against the Person Involving Sexual Assault, and Crimes Against Public Decency and Good Morals.

    B.   The director, in granting any permit under this chapter, may also impose such reasonable conditions with respect to the use and scope of such permit as is determined to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and/or welfare, and to implement the intent and purpose of this ordinance.

    C.   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire twelve months from the date of issuance. A sidewalk vendor permit is non-transferable. Any change in ownership or operation of a sidewalk vendor or sidewalk vending receptacle requires a new permit under this chapter. Only one sidewalk vendor permit may be issued to any single person, company, or entity and the permit shall specify whether the permit is for roaming sidewalk vending or stationary sidewalk vending. No person, company, or entity shall conduct both roaming and stationary sidewalk vending under a permit.

    D.  The director shall consider and review applications for permit renewals pursuant to the criteria set forth in this section. Failure of a permittee to file an application to renew a permit at least thirty calendar days before the expiration thereof shall require the filing of a new application and the payment of the associated fee. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.060 Permit application fee.
    Each application for a sidewalk vendor permit, and each application for an annual renewal of a sidewalk vendor permit, shall be accompanied by a non-refundable applicable fee, or non-refundable application renewal fee, as applicable, each in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.070 Regulation of sidewalk vendors, receptacle, and activities.
    A.  All persons engaging in sidewalk vending activities within the city of Pico Rivera shall, in addition to any conditions imposed as a condition of permit issuance, comply with the following conditions:

    1.   The sidewalk vendor permit issued by the city shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle or the vendor’s person.

    2.   If applicable, a public health permit issued by the county of Los Angeles shall be displayed conspicuously at all times on the sidewalk vending receptacle or the vendor’s person and offer food in a manner approved by the county of Los Angeles.

    3.   Sidewalk vendors must operate in compliance with all applicable federal, state, county, and local laws.

    4.   Sidewalk vendors shall not store or leave their sidewalk vending receptacle unattended on public property for any reason, including, but not limited to, for the purpose of soliciting business.

    5.   The sidewalk vending receptacle shall not be chained, fastened, tethered, or otherwise attached to any pole, sign, tree or other object in the public right-of-way.

    6.   Sidewalk vending activities are prohibited between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., daily.

    7.   Sidewalk vending receptacle shall not be located on any public property when the receptacle is not being actively utilized for sidewalk vending activities.

    8.   A sidewalk vending receptacle from which food is sold shall operate out of a commissary, mobile support unit, or other approved facility.

    9.   Sidewalk vendors shall allow a law enforcement officer, firefighter, life safety services officer, code enforcement officer, health inspector, or other government official charged with enforcing laws related to sidewalk vendor activities, at any time during the operation of such activities, to inspect the sidewalk vending receptacle for compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the sidewalk vending permit, and to ensure the safe operation thereof.

    10. If a sidewalk vending receptacle requires more than one person to conduct the sidewalk vending activity, all such persons associated with the sidewalk vending receptacle shall be within five feet thereof when conducting sidewalk vending activities.

    11. Sidewalk vendors shall ensure that all customer queuing, waiting areas, or lines do not block, hinder, or interfere with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic along, over, or across public property, and otherwise comply at all times with the location-related restrictions set forth in this ordinance relative to sidewalk vending activities.

    12. Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the noise standards provided in of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, and shall not utilize any amplifying or sound-generating equipment or devices in connection with sidewalk vendor activities, with the exception of one bell with maximum diameter of two inches.

    13. Sidewalk vendors shall maintain a trash container in or on the sidewalk vending receptacle, and immediately clean up any food, waste, grease or other fluid or item related to sidewalk vending activities from public property. The trash receptacle must be large enough to accommodate customer trash without utilizing existing trash receptacles located on any block for use by the general public. A sidewalk vendor may not dispose of customer trash in existing trash receptacles on public property.

    14. Sidewalk vendors shall not discharge or allow to discharge any fluids, liquids, grease, or hazardous materials on private or public property.

    15. Sidewalk vendors shall ensure, at all times, that a ten-foot area immediately surrounding the sidewalk vending receptacle is free and clear from trash, litter, and debris at all times.

    16. Sidewalk vendors shall, at all times, maintain a minimum four-foot-wide area over and across any pathway, sidewalk, or public property that is free from and clear from all obstructions associated with sidewalk vendor activities, including, but not limited to, sidewalk vending receptacle and customer queuing areas. Notwithstanding the specifics of this subsection, the area to be kept free and clear shall be at least as large as necessary to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

    B.   All sidewalk vending receptacles utilized for sidewalk vending activities shall, in addition to any conditions imposed as a condition of permit issuance, comply with the following conditions:

    1.   Except as may otherwise be approved in a sidewalk vending permit, sidewalk vending receptacles and any attachments thereto, including, but not limited to, food, merchandise, or signage, shall not exceed a total height of four feet, a total width of four feet, and a total length of four feet. In approving sidewalk vending receptacles of greater size, the director shall evaluate such requests by balancing: (a) the sidewalk vendor’s reasonable need for a larger sidewalk vending receptacle given the nature of the sidewalk vending activities to be operated, the merchandise or food to be sold, and the location where the sidewalk vending activities are proposed to be operated, against; (b) the risk to the public health, welfare, and safety created by the larger sidewalk vending receptacle.

    2.   All signage and advertising related in any way to the sidewalk vendor shall comply with the terms and conditions of the permit, and shall be attached to the sidewalk vending receptacle, if any, or the sidewalk vendor’s person.

    3.   Sidewalk vendors shall not utilize any electrical, flashing, wind powered, or animated signs.

    4.   Sidewalk vending receptacles shall not touch, lean against or be affixed at any time to any other building or structure including, but not limited to, lampposts, parking meters, mailboxes, traffic signals, fire hydrants, benches, bus shelters, newsracks, trashcans, trees, or traffic barriers.

    C.   No person engaging in sidewalk vending activities shall engage in any of the following:

    1.   Renting of merchandise to customers.

    2.   Displaying of merchandise or food that is not available for immediate sale.

    3.   Selling of alcohol, cannabis, adult oriented material, tobacco products, products that contain nicotine, or any product used to smoke/vape nicotine or cannabis, or any other business or occupation that is not permitted or is prohibited by the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    4.   Using or containing propane, natural gas, batteries, or other explosive or hazardous materials within a vending receptacle.

    5.   Using an electrical outlet or power source that is owned by the city or another person other than the sidewalk vendor.

    6.   Utilizing a portable generator in connection with sidewalk vending activities.

    7.   Conducting sidewalk vending activities under shaded structures, awnings, gazebos, and bandshell in parks, except as authorized by an agreement with the city.

    8.   Continuing to offer food or merchandise for sale to any person who has been offered food or merchandise by the sidewalk vendor and has declined the offer, or following or otherwise harassing any such person, or otherwise making any statements, gesture, or other communication that would be perceived as threatening by a reasonable person.

    9.   Knowingly making false statements or misrepresentations during the course of offering food or merchandise for sale.

    10. Blocking or impeding the free flow of any pedestrian or vehicle traversing public property. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.080 Penalties and violations.
    Violators of this chapter shall not be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors and shall only be punished by the following administrative citations and revocation structure:

    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to administrative fines in the following amounts:

    1.   An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

    2.   An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

    3.   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

    B.   If any person violates any portion of this chapter and cannot present proof of a valid permit, the sidewalk vendor shall be assessed administrative fines in the following amounts:

    1.   An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation;

    2.   An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and

    3.   An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

    C.   Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the city, the administrative fines set forth in subsection B shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in subsection A.

    D.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director, or hearing officer on appeal, may allow a person to complete community service in lieu of paying the total administrative fine, may waive the administrative fine, or may offer an alternative disposition for violations of this subsection. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.090 Permit revocation.
    A.  Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the director, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:

    1.   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit;

    2.   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner, or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;

    3.   Upon a sidewalk vendor being issued a fourth or subsequent citation for violations of this chapter within one calendar year of the first violation.

    B.   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee, at the last known address of the licensee, at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

 

5.54.100 Appeals.
    A.  Administrative citations shall be appealed in the following manner:

    1.   Any recipient of an administrative citation may request an ability-to­pay determination by the city, or contest the violation, by requesting an administrative hearing in accordance with Sections 8.16.270 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, subject to the time frames set forth in Government Code Section 51039(f)(1), or any successor section;

    2.   Any recipient of an administrative citation may file for a hardship waiver in accordance with Section 8.16.270 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code;

    3.   All appeals of administrative citations shall be heard and conducted by a hearing officer pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    B.   Any person aggrieved by the action of the director in the denial or revocation of a permit shall have the right of appeal to the city council in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.08.420 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 5.56 HOUSE-NUMBER PAINTERS
5.56.010 Permit required—Specifications for numbers.
    No person shall place or cause to be placed or painted upon any public curb any house number unless a permit to do so has been first obtained from the director of finance, and the house numbers so placed on the curb are in black paint in figures of the size of four inches in height and impressed upon a white background of the size of five by fifteen inches. (Prior code 6407.1(a))

 

5.56.020 Identification card requirements.
    Every person painting or placing numbers on curbs, as allowed under this title, must at all times while engaged in such activity have in his or her possession a valid, unrevoked identification card issued by the director of finance, stating his or her name and address, the name and address of the permittee or licensee, and the date of expiration of the license. (Prior code 6407.1(b))

Chapter 5.58 LOCKSMITHS
5.58.010 Recordkeeping and identification requirements.
    A.  Every locksmith must keep a book, which shall be open to inspection of the law enforcement agency at all times, in which the following must be entered:

    1.   Name and address of every person for whom a key is made by code or number;

    2.   Name and address of every person for whom a locked automobile, building, structure, house or store, whether vacant or occupied, is opened, and a key provided therefor.

    B.   In addition, it is unlawful for any locksmith to fail to stamp the serial number of his or her permit upon any key made, repaired, sold or given away by him or her or her. (Prior code § 6408)

Chapter 5.60 MASSAGE
5.60.010 Massage of persons of opposite sex.
    An individual shall not, for hire or reward, administer to any individual of the opposite sex any massage, alcohol rub or similar treatment, fomentation, bath or electric or magnetic treatment. A person shall neither cause nor permit in or about his or her place of business any agent, employee, servant or other individual to administer any such treatment to any individual of the opposite sex. (Prior code § 6409)

Chapter 5.61 MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, STILL PHOTOGRAPHY FILMING AND PRODUCTION
5.61.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as ascribed to them by this section:

    “Charitable films” means commercials, motion pictures, television, video tapes, digital recording or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes or photos.

    “Motion picture, television, still photography” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials, and student films produced to satisfy a post-secondary school course requirement at an educational institution in any medium including film, tape or digital format.

    “News media” means the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcasts or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or camerapersons.

    “Studio” means a fixed place of business certified as such by the local fire authority having jurisdiction where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted upon the premises. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013; Ord. 769 § 2, 1990)

 

5.61.020 Permit required.
    A.  No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of taking motion pictures or television, or commercial still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit from the director of finance.

    B.   The following activities and persons shall be exempt from the requirement for a permit:

    1.   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or camerapersons in the employ of a newspaper, news service or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print media, publishing or broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest;

    2.   The recording of visual images (motion or still photography) solely for private personal use, and not for commercial use;

    3.   Projects which qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as charitable organizations and activities and student film productions to satisfy a post-secondary school course requirement at an educational institution. A temporary use permit is required pursuant to the procedures prescribed in Chapter 18.61, Temporary Uses, of Title 18, Zoning;

    4.   Filming activities (motion or still photography) conducted at a studio;

    5.   Still Photography for Business Advertisements. Still photography for the production of advertisements completed at the business being advertised, provided all filming activities take place on private property and result in no impairment of the public use of the public right-of-way or other public facilities. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013; Ord. 769 § 2, 1990)

 

5.61.030 Rules and regulations.
    The director of finance is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the council, governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the city. He or she shall also provide for the issuance of permits. The rules and regulations shall be based upon the following criteria:

    A.  The health and safety of all persons;

    B.   Mitigation of disruption of all persons within the affected area;

    C.   The safety of property within the city; and

    D.  Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013; Ord. 769 § 2, 1990)

 

5.61.040 General permit conditions.
    Any applicant granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all of the following conditions:

    A.  Notification. All residents and businesses within a two-hundred-foot radius of filming activity and vehicle parking associated with filming activity must receive written notice of filming dates, times, locations address and production company contact information at least seventy-two hours prior to commencing any filming activities.

    B.   Survey. Filming activities occurring before seven a.m. and/or after ten p.m. and/or involving activities that may cause public alarm require signature approval of at least eighty percent of residents and businesses within a two-hundred-foot radius of the filming activity and associated parking. A survey is not required if city staff determines filming activities will have no impact to the surrounding uses. In cases of large scale special effects, as determined by the finance director, the city may require surveys of residents and businesses beyond the two-hundred-foot radius.

    C.   Clean-Up. The permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the clean-up of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the original condition before leaving the site.

    D.  Filming on Private Property. An applicant is required to obtain the property owner’s and occupant’s permission, consent, and/or lease for use of property not owned or controlled by the city.

    E.   Flood Control. Applicant must obtain appropriate permits from the Los Angeles County Flood Control District when filming in a flood control channel.

    F.   If other agencies have jurisdiction, the applicant must obtain written consent and any required permits from those agencies and shall list those agencies in writing on the city application.

    G.  No pyrotechnics, no hazardous materials, no open flame, or no vehicles inside a structure shall be used without a permit from the Los Angeles County fire department. The permit holder shall comply with all requirements of the Los Angeles County fire department, including having fire personnel present to ensure safety as required by the department.

    H.  Public Works Department (Road and Streets). If the applicant must park equipment, trucks, and/or cars in zones that will not permit it, temporary “No Parking” signs must be posted with approval of the city. Applicant must repost parking signs if they are removed and remove all posted signs upon completion of filming activity. The applicant must also obtain permission to lay and safely mat cable across sidewalks, or from generator to service point.

    I.    No film permits will be issued without the approval of a parking plan.

    J.    Traffic Control. For filming that would impair traffic flow, an applicant must use local law enforcement personnel to comply with all traffic control requirements deemed necessary.

    1.   An applicant shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the most recent edition of the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. All appropriate safety precautions must be taken.

    2.   A street closure, lane closure, blocking of major intersection during peak rush hours, which are from six-thirty a.m. to eight-thirty a.m. and from four p.m. to seven p.m., stopping of traffic or detouring of traffic across a double line are not permitted on any street unless approved by the city.

    3.   Proposed filming will not unduly impede, obstruct or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles or equipment in or through the permitted area or any emergency roadwork or construction by the city or county crews and/or private contractors, under permit or contract to the appropriate department.

    4.   Unless authorized by the city, the camera cars must be driven in the direction of traffic and must observe all traffic laws.

    K.  Production company is not permitted to block, delay or interrupt normal activity on public or private property. This includes, but is not limited to: refuse collection, recycling procedures, street sweeping, gardening, postal or overnight deliveries, ingress or egress to property, city public works construction/projects and/or private construction work.

    L.   Public Facilities. When parking in public facilities, an applicant may be billed according to the current rate schedule established by the city. In order to assure safety of citizens in the surrounding community, access roads must never be blocked. No relocation, alteration, or moving of structures will be permitted without prior approval. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013)

 

5.61.050 Application and issuance of permit.
    A.  The issuing authority shall be the director of finance or designee.

    B.   The following information shall be included in the application:

    1.   The name of the owner, occupant and the representative of the property and the address and telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted;

    2.   The specific location at such address or place;

    3.   The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;

    4.   A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed filming activity;

    5.   The name, address, e-mail address, and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such filming activity;

    6.   The exact number of personnel to be involved;

    7.   Activity which may cause public alarm such as the use of any animals, gunfire or pyrotechnics and low flying aircraft;

    8.   The exact amount/type of vehicles/
equipment to be involved along with a parking plan; and

    9.   Services of city employees such as building, police, fire, traffic personnel, etc., desired or required on location during filming.

    C.   The application fee, processing fee and use fee for use of public facilities other than streets and sidewalks shall be as defined in the fee schedule set forth in resolution adopted by the city council.

    D.  Permit fees and deposit for charitable films and filming produced to satisfy a post-secondary school course requirement at an educational institution shall be waived. Reimbursements for city personnel shall not be waived pursuant to this subsection. The property owner of the subject film location shall be responsible for ensuring the area used is cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of filming activities.

    E.   The applicant shall reimburse the city for all actual costs of any personnel provided by the city such as building, police, fire, traffic personnel, etc., for the purpose of assisting or regulating the applicant’s activities. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013; Ord. 769 § 2, 1990)

 

5.61.060 Liability and insurance.
    A.  Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall provide a certificate of insurance in an amount of at least one million dollars naming the city as a co-insured for protection against all claims or actions of any nature, including personal injuries, wrongful death and property damage. The city officers, agent, and employees shall be named as additional insured. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty days’ written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate shall remain on file with the city.

    B.   Worker’s Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

    C.   Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter.

    D.  Faithful Performance Bond or Deposit. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, and the payment of any fees or charges for services provided by the city, the applicant shall be required to post a refundable faithful performance bond or submit a deposit in an amount reasonably related to anticipated costs, at the time the application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the city, the bond or deposit shall be returned to the applicant. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013; Ord. 769 § 2, 1990)

 

5.61.070 Violation.
    If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or a permit issued pursuant thereto, the city may provide the applicant with verbal or written notice of such violation. If the applicant fails to correct the violation, the city may revoke the permit and all activity must cease, in addition to any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 1076 § 4, 2013)

Chapter 5.62 MOTION PICTURE THEATERS
5.62.010 Compliance with building and zoning regulations.
    No person shall carry on, maintain or conduct any theater or place displaying moving, motion or still film, as defined in Section 5.04.500, and not excepted from the definition thereof, unless such place at all times complies with the terms and provisions of the building code pertaining to the construction and maintenance of theaters, and meets the requirements of the zoning code pertaining to the off-street parking requirements of theaters. (Prior code § 6419)

Chapter 5.64 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Article I. Pawnbrokers
5.64.010 Hours of operation.
    A pawnbroker shall not, and an agent or employee of a pawnbroker shall not accept any pledge or loan any money or personal property, or purchase or receive any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or thing whatsoever, or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct the business of pawnbroker between seven p.m. of any day and seven a.m. of the following day. (Prior code § 6413(a))

 

5.64.020 Recordkeeping requirements.
    Every pawnbroker shall keep a record, upon forms prescribed by the law enforcement agency and in the manner as prescribed by the law enforcement agency, of all purchases and sales, for the purpose of recording and furnishing the law enforcement agency with the required information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments. These records or forms shall be delivered to the law enforcement agency in the manner and at the time required by the law enforcement agency. Such forms shall contain a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares and merchandise or other things received on deposit, pledge or purchase during that day. (Prior code § 6413(b))

 

Article II. Secondhand Dealers, Auctioneers, Junk Dealers, Pawnbrokers, Swap Meets
5.64.030 Regulations applicable.
    In addition to other provisions of this title, secondhand dealers, auctioneers, junk dealers, pawnbrokers and operations of every swap meet shall be subject to the provisions set out in Article II of this chapter, and none of the foregoing shall violate the same. (Prior code § 6413.5)

 

5.64.040 “Buy-form” reports.
    A.  Each of the persons mentioned in Section 5.64.030 shall, at the close of each day, mail to the law enforcement agency of the city the “buy-form” or other form as required by the law enforcement agency, for the purpose of recording and furnishing by such person to the law enforcement agency required information relative to purchases, pledges or consignments.

 

    B.   Such forms shall contain a full, true and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise or other things received on deposit, pledged or purchased during that day, except household furniture, used tires and used batteries, where the foregoing excepted items were taken in part payment for new items thereof, and except merchandise originally sold new by such person and subsequently taken as a trade-in on other merchandise sold by the same person, and shall also contain other information which the law enforcement agency may reasonably require where the same will assist the agency in the detection of stolen property.

    C.   Every such person shall enter upon the “buy-form” positive identification furnished by the seller, pledgemaker or consignee, such as a driver’s license number, work badge number, auto or truck license number, or junk collector’s business license number, in addition to the individual’s true name and address. In lieu of such positive identification, the licensee shall require the seller, pledgemaker or consignee to furnish a plain impression print of his or her right index finger, or next finger in the event of amputation, upon the face side of the original sheet of the “buy-form.”

    D.  Every person who sells, pledges or consigns any property to a secondhand dealer, auctioneer, junk dealer, pawnbroker or owner or operator of a swap meet, in the course of such business, except household furniture, used tires or used batteries taken in part payment for new tires or new batteries, and except merchandise originally sold new by the aforementioned business licensees and subsequently taken as a trade-in on other merchandise sold by the same business licensees, shall furnish true, positive identification to the business licensee by which such person can be located by the sheriff.

    E.   Every such business licensee as aforementioned shall preserve for a period of at least two years a copy of the form, which shall be a carbon-copy record of the original writing furnished to the law enforcement agency. (Prior code § 6413.5 (a)—(d))

 

5.64.050 Holding time for before sale of goods.
    Secondhand dealers, auctioneers, junk dealers, pawnbrokers and owners and operators of swap meets shall not melt, destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of any article, goods, wares, merchandise or thing obtained or used in the business, where a report of the acquisition of the same has been required, until fourteen days after making a report to the law enforcement agency as hereinbefore required, and until such time has so elapsed, the business licensee shall not clean, alter, repair, paint or otherwise change the appearance of such articles. (Prior code § 6413.5(e))

 

5.64.060 Release of goods.
    The law enforcement agency may release any property held during such period if satisfied that such property is in the lawful possession of the business licensee. In addition, the law enforcement agency may place a “hold order” upon any such property so held during such period by such a business licensee where the law enforcement agency has reasonably determined that the property may be stolen, which hold order shall not exceed a period of ninety days, and upon release of such hold order, the business licensee shall keep a true record of such property and include therewith the true name and address of the person to whom such property was sold, or any other method of disposition. No person shall sell, destroy or otherwise dispose of any property while subject to such a hold order. (Prior code § 6413.5(f))

5.64.070 Exemptions to Section 5.64.060.
    The aforementioned provisions in respect to the destruction, sale or disposal of property shall not apply to the following:

    A.  Property purchased from a business licensee holding a similar city license if in the sale of such property the business licensee had complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, except in the case of purchases made by junk dealers from junk collectors;

    B.   Property purchased on a bill of sale or invoice from a regularly established place of business which has been dealing in that type of article for not less than two years;

    C.   Purchases or sales by junk dealers or junk collectors of rags, bottles (other than milk or cream bottles), secondhand sacks (other than cement sacks), barrels, cans, shoes, lamps, stoves or household furniture (with the exception of sewing machines and musical instruments), or the purchase or sale by secondhand dealers of household furniture, with the exception of sewing machines, all musical instruments and typewriters. This exemption shall also exempt the foregoing from the provisions of subsection E of Section 5.64.040. (Prior code § 6413.5(g))

 

5.64.080 Antique dealers, stamp dealers and coin dealers.
    All of the provisions of Sections 5.64.030 through 5.64.070, and the exemptions of Sections 5.64.030 through 5.64.070, shall also apply to antique dealers, stamp dealers and coin dealers. (Prior code § 6413.5(h))

Chapter 5.66 (RESERVED)

Chapter 5.68 SOUND TRUCKS
5.68.010 Permit—Required when.
    Any person operating, driving or parking, or causing to be operated, driven or parked upon any street, alley, parkway, sidewalk or public property within the city any advertising vehicle, sound truck or commercial vehicle with sound-amplifying equipment in operation, or with any sound or signaling device in operation for the purpose of attracting or calling the attention to such vehicle, and where the same is not used for noncommercial purposes, as determined by the director of finance in his or her discretion, shall be required to obtain a permit in accordance with the terms and provisions of this title and this chapter. Such permit shall specify the date, time and places of operation. (Prior code § 6305(a)(part))

 

5.68.020 Permit—Period of validity.
    No permit for the operation of a sound truck shall exceed thirty days, unless a longer time has been specified by the permit hearing board upon receiving competent evidence justifying the same, or unless the thirty-day permit has been extended by the permit board upon hearing competent evidence justifying such extension. (Prior code § 6415(a)(5))

 

5.68.030 Operation restrictions.
    The use of sound trucks in the city, with sound-amplifying equipment in operation, shall be subject to the regulations set out in Sections 5.68.040 through 5.68.060. (Prior code § 6415(a)(part))

 

5.68.040 Streets designated—Hours of operation.
    The sound truck shall be operated only on those streets or boulevards designated by the director of finance in the permit to operate the same, and shall be operated for four and one-half hours each day between the hours of eleven a.m. and one-thirty p.m. and the hours of four-thirty p.m. and six-thirty p.m.; except, on Sundays and legal holidays no operation shall be authorized unless the permit hearing board has determined upon competent evidence that in the individual case different hours of operation would be justified, then such permit shall set forth the different hours of operation. (Prior code § 6415(a)(4))

 

5.68.050 Speed limit—Operation while stopped.
    Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour, except when the truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop. (Prior code § 6415(a)(1))

 

5.68.060 Permitted sounds— Prohibited locations.
    A.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.

    B.   Sound shall not be issued within one hundred yards of hospitals, schools, churches, courthouses or courtrooms, or county buildings, or the City Hall. (Prior code § 6415(a)(2), (3))

Chapter 5.70 TAXICABS
5.70.010 Purpose.
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the city’s police powers for the purpose of modernizing the regulation of taxicab transportation services within the city. The requirements set forth in this chapter are also intended to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare by ensuring that taxicabs charge reasonable rates, are adequately insured, provide a safe vehicle for transport of the general public, and employ persons that do not pose a threat to passengers, pedestrians, or other drivers. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.020 Definitions.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this Section.

    A.  “City” means the city of Pico Rivera.

    B.   “City council” means the city council of the city of Pico Rivera.

    C.   “City manager” means the city Manager of the city or designee.

    D.  “Certificate of inspection” means a city-provided form signed by an authorized agent of an automotive repair establishment that is certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence or a facility registered with the Bureau of Automotive Repair, dated no more than thirty days before the date the application is submitted to the chief of police and which shall indicate whether a certain vehicle has met the criteria set forth on the form. Items to be inspected may include condition of exterior, interior, and mechanical functions.

    E.   “Code” means the city of Pico Rivera municipal code.

    F.   “Controlled substance and alcohol certificate” means a city-provided form signed by the employing taxicab operator as defined in Chapter 5.04, General Provisions of the code, that shall attest that each taxicab driver has tested negative for each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 of Title 49 of the code of Federal Regulations, before employment and as a condition of permit renewal; in the case of self-employed independent drivers, it means test results directly reported to the license and permit hearing board or designee.

    G.  “County” means the county of Los Angeles.

    H.  “Director of finance” means the director of finance of the city of Pico Rivera or designee.

    I.    “Drive a taxicab” means to drive a taxicab that picks up passengers within the city but does not include driving a taxicab that only discharges passengers picked up outside the city or that travels through the city without picking up or discharging passengers, provided the taxicab company’s principal place of business is not within the city.

    J.    “Employment” includes self-employment as an independent driver. Government Code Section 53075.5(k).

    K.  “Prearranged trip” means a trip using an online enabled application, dispatch, or internet website. A company may provide prearranged trips anywhere within the county in which it has obtained a permit. Government Code Section 53075.5(k).

    L.   “Substantially located” means either the jurisdiction where a company maintains its primary business address, or the jurisdiction where the largest share of prearranged and non-prearranged trips originates, as defined in Government Code Section 53075.5. “Substantially located” also means, for companies establishing a new operation after January 1, 2019, the jurisdiction where a company has its primary business address for the first twelve months of operation. A company or driver may be substantially located in more than one jurisdiction.

    M.  “Taxicab” means a motor vehicle, as the term is defined in the Vehicle Code, used for the transportation of passengers for hire, when driven by the owner or by an agent of the owner at rate per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month, or per other period of time, which vehicle is routed under the direction of the passengers or other persons hiring such vehicle.

    N.  “Taxicab driver” means an individual who drives a taxicab in which passengers are solicited or accepted for hire either at a taxicab stand or elsewhere in the city.

    O.  “Taxicab operator” means a person engaged in the business of running, driving or operating one or more taxicabs and soliciting or accepting passengers in such taxicabs for hire, either at a taxicab stand or elsewhere in the city. The term taxicab operator as defined here may be used interchangeably with the term “taxicab company.” (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.030 General provisions
    The provisions, rules, requirements, definitions and regulations set forth in Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations, continue to apply with full force and effect. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.040 Substantially located—Permits required—Penalties.
    A.  Beginning January 1, 2018, all taxicab drivers and taxicab operators shall collect data to determine in what jurisdiction each taxicab driver and each taxicab operator are substantially located. Beginning January 1, 2019, data for prearranged and non-prearranged trips collected in the previous twelve months shall be provided upon date of renewal to the city for any taxicab driver and taxicab operator that is substantially located in the city.

    B.   A taxicab driver that is substantially located in the city shall obtain a valid taxicab driver permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 5.08, Business License and Permit Requirements.

    C.   A taxicab operator that is substantially located in the city shall obtain a valid taxicab company permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 5.08, Business License and Permit Requirements.

    D.  A taxicab operator is required to obtain a permit pursuant to subsection B of this section who is also a taxicab driver substantially located in the city, shall obtain both a valid taxicab operator permit and a taxicab driver permit pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 5.08, Business License and Permit Requirements.

    E.   A taxicab driver that is not substantially located in the city shall possess a permit from the county or at least one city within the county.

    F.   A taxicab operator that is not substantially located in the city shall possess a permit from the county or at least one city within the county.

    G.  A taxicab operator who is also a taxicab driver that is not substantially located in the city shall possess applicable permits from the county or at least one city within the county.

    H.  Any taxicab driver or taxicab operator who changes from being substantially located in another jurisdiction to being substantially located in the city shall provide the city with six-months’ notice prior to making that change.

    I.    Any taxicab driver or taxicab operator who establishes a new taxi operation after January 1, 2019, shall be considered substantially located in the city if the taxicab operator maintains its primary business address in the city. After the first year of operation, the taxicab operator shall submit and the city shall review, all data collected in the previous twelve months to determine where the taxicab company is substantially located.

    J.    It is unlawful to drive a taxicab that is determined as substantially located in the city without a valid, city-issued permit. The city may impose a penalty for violation pursuant to Section 1.20, General Penalty, of this code.

    K.  Consistent with Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations, fees for such permits shall be established by resolution of the city council.

    L.   Persons other than the city-permitted taxicab operator(s) or taxicab driver(s) shall not drive or operate any taxicab.

    M.  Penalties. It shall be unlawful to drive a taxicab that is determined as substantially located in the city without a valid, city-issued permit. Violators are subject to the provisions of Chapter 1.20, General Penalty, and this chapter:

    1.   Misdemeanors. Any person who willfully violates any provision of this chapter and is convicted of a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine of no more than one thousand dollars or be imprisoned for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    2.   Infractions. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter and is convicted of an infraction shall be punishable by: (a) first violation, a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars; (b) second violation, a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars; (c) third violation, a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.

    3.   Administrative Enforcement. In addition to the penalty provisions of subsections (M)(1) and (M)(2) of this section, the city may impose an administrative fine of five thousand dollars. Government Code Section 53075.5(h)(9)(a)(i)(2).

    4.   Remedies not Exclusive. To the maximum extent permitted by law, administrative remedies specified in this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.050 Application for taxicab driver permit.
    A.  The applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall submit to the director of finance, or designee, a completed application form together with fees for the permit and such license, certificates, documents, and such other materials as prescribed in this chapter, Chapter 5.08, Business License and Permit Requirements, and as deemed necessary by the director of finance, or designee.

    B.   Nothing in Government Code Section 53075.5 or Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations, prohibits the city from adopting additional requirements for a taxicab to operate in its jurisdiction.

    C.   In addition to the requirements set forth in Chapter 5.08, Business License and Permit Requirements, an applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall also require the following:

    1.   Employment Verification.

    a.   A letter from a prospective employer offering employment to the applicant as a taxicab driver substantially located in the city, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; or

    b.   A letter from an employer stating that the applicant is employed as a taxicab driver substantially located in the city, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; or

    c.   A written statement from the applicant that he or she seeks to be a self-employed taxicab driver substantially located in the city, and is not employed by another person, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; and

    2.   Proof of compliance with the city’s mandatory controlled substance and alcohol certification program as outlined in this chapter; and

    3.   Proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age; and

    4.   State the full and true name and any other names used by the applicant; and

    5.   State the full and true name of the employer, taxicab operator/company, if applicable; and

    6.   The present address and telephone number of the applicant; and

    7.   Driver’s license number and social security number; and

    8.   List of each residence and business address of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive dates for such address(es); and

    9.   Applicant’s height, weight, and color of eyes and hair; and

    10. One photograph of the applicant. The dimensions of the photograph must be at least two inches by two inches and taken within four months preceding the date of the application; and

    11. Statement of the business tax certificate or permit history of the applicant, including whether such applicant has ever had any tax certificate, license or permit issued by any agency or board, city, county or state; has had any professional or vocational licenses or permits issued by any agency or board, city, county or state; and state any revocations and/or suspensions and reasons for any revocations and/or suspensions; and

    12. All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and disposition of any convictions from said arrests; and

    13. Completed, city-provided LiveScan request form signed by LiveScan operator(s). (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.060 Application for taxicab operator permit.
    A.  The applicant for a taxicab operator permit shall submit to the director of finance, or designee, a completed application form together with fees for the permit and such licenses, certificates, documents and other such material as prescribed in this chapter, Chapter 5.08, Business License and Permit Requirements, and as deemed necessary by the director of finance, or designee.

    B.   Nothing in Government Code Section 53075.5 or Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations, prohibits the city from adopting additional requirements for a taxicab company to operate in its jurisdiction.

    C.   The application form for a taxicab operator permit shall require the following:

    1.   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; and

    2.   The present address and telephone number of the applicant; and

    3.   Driver’s license number and social security number; and

    4.   List of residence and business address of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application, and the inclusive dates for such address(es); and

    5.   One photograph of the applicant. The dimensions of the photograph must be at least two inches by two inches taken within four months preceding the date of the application; and

    6.   Statement of the business license, business tax certificate or permit history of the applicant, including whether such applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency or board, city, county or state; has had any professional or vocational licenses or permits issued by any agency or board, city, county or state; and state any revocations and/or suspensions and reasons for any revocations and/or suspensions; and

    7.   All criminal arrests and statement of the dates, places, and disposition of any convictions from said arrests; and

    8.   Completed, city-provided LiveScan request form signed by LiveScan operator; and

    9.   The name and address of the taxicab company; and

    10. The name of each owner of the taxicab company, including the owners, partners, or officers of a firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity; and

    11. Trip Data Documentation. For a new taxicab operator, a primary business address in the city shall satisfy the trip data documentation requirement. A taxicab operator shall begin collection of trip data during its first year of operation; and

    12. The make, type, vehicle identification number, and license number of each taxicab owned or leased by the taxicab operator; and

 

    13. A certificate of inspection for each taxicab owned or leased by the taxicab operator; and

    14. A valid Department of Motor Vehicles registration for each vehicle showing that each vehicle is registered as a commercial vehicle; and

    15. The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia by which each taxicab will be marked; and

    16. Registration of rates of fare to be charged; and

    17. The name of each taxicab driver employed by the taxicab operator, whether as an independent contractor or as an employee; and

    18. A Controlled Substance and Alcohol Certificate for Each Taxicab Driver. In the case of a self-employed, independent driver, the test results shall be reported directly to the city; and

    19. The address from which the taxicabs will be operated; and

    20. Proof of insurance as required by Section 5.70.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.070 Controlled substance and alcohol testing program.
    A.  Every applicant for a taxicab driver permit shall first take, and pass with negative results, a controlled substance and alcohol test in accordance with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3) (as it may be amended from time to time). The results from a controlled substance and alcohol test for an applicant who is a self-employed independent driver shall be reported directly to the city and shall be made part of the application. The city shall notify the taxicab operator of record of any positive results. In all other cases, the results shall be reported directly to the employing taxicab operator, who shall be required to immediately notify the city of positive results. As used in this section, a negative test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent.

    B.   Testing procedures shall be substantially as in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, except that the driver shall show a valid California driver’s license at the time and place of testing, and except as provided otherwise in Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3).

    C.   The controlled substance and alcohol test shall be taken no more than thirty days before the date the application is filed for a new permit. As long as any taxicab driver permit is used or in effect, such tests shall be retaken on a periodic basis of at least once a year.

    D.  A test in one jurisdiction shall be accepted as meeting the same requirement in any other jurisdiction in accordance with Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3).

    E.   Self-employed independent taxicab drivers shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with regard to themselves. Employing taxicab operators shall be responsible for compliance with, and shall pay all costs of, this program with respect to their employees and potential employees, except that a taxicab company may require employees who test positive to pay the costs of rehabilitation and of return-to-duty and follow-up testing.

    F.   Upon the request of a taxicab driver applying for a permit, the city shall give the taxicab driver a list of proximate consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the

Code of Federal Regulations that the city knows offer tests in or near the city.

    G.  Confidential. The test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the tested driver, except as authorized or required by law.

    H.  Limited Use of Results. No evidence derived from a positive test result pursuant to this section shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution concerning unlawful possession, sale, or distribution of controlled substances. Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(3)(B). (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.080 Substitution of vehicles.
    A.  If a taxicab operator desires to substitute one vehicle in place of another, and if such vehicle to be substituted complies with the taxicab operator’s license and the taxicab operator brings both the vehicle under the license and the vehicle to be substituted to a place designated by the law enforcement agency, the law enforcement agency may remove the license plate or decal from the licensed vehicle and place it on the vehicle to be substituted.

    B.   If the law enforcement agency finds that it is impracticable to bring the licensed vehicle to the place designated, the agency may permit the licensee to detach the license plate or decal therefrom, by breaking the seal and removing the screws, and may waive the requirement that such vehicle be brought to such designated place. Under no circumstances may this seal or decal be broken or removed by anyone but the law enforcement agency or other designated agency or officer of the city. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.090 Insurance and bond requirements.
    A.  Mandatory Requirements. The director of finance shall not issue any taxicab operator’s license until the applicant first files with the director of finance an undertaking or a policy of insurance, or a financial statement, and excess policy of insurance, which undertaking, policy or undertaking and policy shall comply with the provisions of this code, and shall first be approved by the city attorney.

    B.   Amount. The policy of insurance required before a taxicab operator’s license can be issued shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of any taxicab used by the taxicab operator in his or her business as such. The maximum amount of recovery in such policy shall not be less than the following sums:

    1.   For the injury to any one person, or the death of any one person in any one accident, fifty thousand dollars.

    2.   For the injury to two or more persons, or the death of two or more persons, or the injury to one person or more, and the death of one person or more, in any one accident, one hundred thousand dollars.

    3.   For the injury or destruction of property in any one accident, ten thousand dollars.

    C.   Undertaking or Bond—Amount.

    1.   The undertaking required before a taxicab operator’s license can be issued shall be conditioned that the taxicab operator shall pay all damages to person or property for the amount of which he or she may become liable arising out of the conduct of the business of taxicab operator, and that any person having such a cause of action against the principal may join the surety as a party de-

fendant, or in his or her own name sue separately the surety on such undertaking.

    2.   The undertaking shall provide that it is not void upon the first recovery, but may be sued and recovered upon from time to time by the person aggrieved until the whole penalty is exhausted.

    3.   Either a corporation complying with each and every provision of Section 1056 of the Code of Civil Procedure, or not less than two good and sufficient sureties, each of whom complies with each and every provision of Section 1057 of the Code of Civil Procedure, shall become surety or sureties on such undertaking.

    4.   The amount of the undertaking shall be calculated as follows:

    a.   Ten thousand dollars for the first taxicab.

    b.   An additional four thousand dollars for each additional taxicab, up to and including a total of five taxicabs.

    c.   An additional two thousand dollars each for the sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth and tenth  taxicabs.

    d.   An additional one thousand dollars for each additional taxicab over ten.

    D.  Insurance—Two Policy Procedure. In place of one insurance policy, the applicant may file not more than two insurance policies, one a policy of primary insurance and the second a policy of excess insurance, if the total insurance resulting from such policies is equal to or greater than that required by this section.

    E.   Insurance—Excess Authorized When. If any taxicab company has net assets of at least twenty-five thousand dollars, if operating one and not more than one hundred twenty-five vehicles, and in addition thereto two hundred fifty dollars net assets for each and every vehicle in excess of one hundred twenty-five operated, that company may, in lieu of the aforesaid policy of liability insurance or bond, file semiannually with the director of finance, subject to the approval of the city attorney, a current balance sheet certified to by a certified public accountant showing such assets and liabilities, together with a policy of excess insurance, agreeing to indemnify the company for any and all such sums which it shall by law become liable to pay, or by financial judgment to be adjudged to pay to any person as compensation for the injury to, or death of, or damage to a vehicle operated by such company. Such excess policy shall cover twenty-five thousand dollars for any one person, or ten thousand dollars up to fifty thousand dollars for any one accident involving more than one person.

    F.   Insurance—Notice of Cancellation. If any taxicab operator or driver has any notice or information of a change or cancellation of any insurance policy, which policy is required under this chapter, he or she shall give immediate notice to the director of finance or the law enforcement agency of such change or cancellation. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.100 Conditions of taxicab driver permit.
    Every person to whom a taxicab driver permit is issued shall:

    A.  Display the driver’s photo permit in the taxicab in a place that is visible to a passenger; and

    B.   Take the most direct route possible which will carry the passenger safely and expeditiously to his or her destination; and

    C.   Grant the person engaging the taxicab exclusive right to the full and complete use of the passenger compartment; and

    D.  Not allow any person to use or duplicate their permit. If a permit is found to be used by another individual, it shall be considered of a violation of this code, unless previously reported as lost or stolen; and

    E.   Immediately report a lost or stolen permit to law enforcement; and

    F.   If the taxicab driver is self-employed, comply with all the conditions of a taxicab operator permit set forth in Section 5.70.060; and

    G.  Return the permit to the director of finance, or designee, immediately upon termination of employment or self-employment. A taxicab driver permit shall become void upon termination of employment or self-employment; and

    H.  Comply with the requirements pursuant to paragraph 3 of Section 53075.5 of the Government Code as they relate to the mandatory controlled substances and alcohol testing certification program; and

    I.    Comply with any other reasonable condition imposed by the director of finance, or designee. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.110 Conditions of taxicab operator permit.
    Every person or entity issued a taxicab operator permit shall:

    A.  Display on the exterior of each taxicab the name or trademark of the person under whose authority the taxicab is being operated or the name of the lessor or lessee thereof; and

    B.   Display on the left hand, bottom corner of the rear window, the city-issued decal for the current calendar year; and

    C.   Display on both exterior sides, exterior front, and exterior rear of each vehicle the company-assigned taxicab number; and

    D.  Display on both exterior sides and exterior rear of each taxicab the dispatch phone number of the taxicab operator; and

    E.   Permanently affix to each vehicle a top light to easily identify the vehicle as a taxicab; and

    F.   Display in the interior of each taxicab the sign required by California Vehicle Code Section 27908; and

    G.  Adhere to the conditions set forth below in regard to registration of taxicab service fares, fees, and rates:

    1.   The taxicab operator may set fares or charge a flat rate. However, the city council may set a maximum rate by resolution. Government Code Section 53075.5(b)(2); and

    2.   The taxicab operator may use any type of device or technology approved by the division of measurement standards to calculate fares, including the use of global positioning system metering, provided that the device or technology complies with Section 12500.5 of the Business and Professions Code and with all regulations established pursuant to Section 12107 of the Business and Professions Code. If fares are calculated by meter, the meter must be sealed, visible to passengers at all times, and currently registered and inspected by a county of Los Angeles weights and measures official; and

    3.   The taxicab operator shall disclose fares, fees, or rates to the customer. A taxicab operator may satisfy this requirement by disclosing fares, fees, or rates on its Internet website, mobile telephone application, or telephone orders upon request by the customer; and

    4.   The taxicab operator shall notify the passenger of the applicable rate prior to the passenger accepting the ride for walkup rides and street hails. The rate may be provided on the exterior of the vehicle, within an application of a mobile telephone, device, or other Internet-connected device, or be clearly visible in either print or electronic form inside the taxicab; and

    5.   A taxicab operator shall not prejudice, disadvantage, or require different rates or provide different service to a person because of race, national origin, religion, color, ancestry, physical disability, medical condition, occupation, marital status or change in marital status, sex, or any characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code; and

    6.   Collect from taxicab passengers only the amounts disclosed to the customer, plus any tip that the passenger offers; and

    7.   Notify the director of finance, or designee, of any changes in rates or fares prior to such change taking effect; and

    H.  Possess a valid city business tax certificate;

    I.    Provide and maintain documentation as required under Government Code 53075.5(h)(9), this chapter, and as deemed reasonable by the director of finance, or designee; and

    J.    Maintain each taxicab in safe operating condition, good repair, clean and sanitary condition, and in compliance with the Vehicle Code; and

    K.  The taxicab operator shall participate in the pull-notice program pursuant to Section 1808.1 of the Vehicle Code to regularly check the driving records of all taxicab drivers; and

    L.   The taxicab operator shall maintain a safety education and training program in effect for all taxicab drivers, whether employees or independent contractors; and

    M.  The taxicab company shall maintain a disabled access education and training program to instruct its taxicab drivers on compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and amendments thereto, and state disability rights laws, including making clear that it is illegal to decline to serve a person with a disability or who has a service animal; and

    N.  The taxicab operator shall obtain a report no less than every twelve months from the Department of Motor Vehicles for each employed taxicab driver. The employer shall verify that each employee’s driver’s license has not been suspended or revoked, the employee’s traffic violation point count, and whether the employee has been convicted of a violation of California Vehicle Code Section 23152 or 23153; and

    O.  A prospective employer of a taxicab driver shall obtain a report showing the taxicab driver’s current public record as recorded by the Department of Motor Vehicles. For purposes of this subdivision, a report is current if it was issued less than thirty days prior to the date the employer employs the taxicab driver; and

    P.   Notify the director of finance, or designee, immediately when any vehicle not described in the application for the permit is placed in service as a taxicab and submit the information about the vehicle and the certificate of inspection required by the application form; and

    Q.  Notify the director of finance, or designee, immediately upon termination of a taxicab driver’s employment. taxicab operators permit shall become void upon termination of employment; and

    R.   Maintain reasonable financial responsibility to conduct taxicab transportation services; and

    S.   Provide for a taxicab driver fingerprint-based criminal history check and a drug and alcohol testing program pursuant to Section 53075.5(b)(3); and

    T.   Require that each taxicab driver have a valid California driver’s license and a valid city taxicab driver permit; and

    U.  Comply with any other reasonable conditions imposed by the director of finance, or designee. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.120 Annual permit renewal.
    A.  Taxicab driver and taxicab operator permits shall continue in effect for the remainder of the calendar year in which they are issued, unless revoked or modified, however, that taxicab driver permits shall automatically become void on termination of employment or self-employment as a taxicab driver. A taxicab driver or taxicab operator permit issued in the last quarter of a calendar year shall continue in effect for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued, and for the next calendar year, subject to the foregoing provisions regarding revocation, modification, and automatically becoming void.

    B.   Permittees shall submit to the director of finance, or designee, applications to renew taxicab driver and taxicab operator permits for following calendar years, together with fees for the renewal and any changes in the information provided in the initial application or a previous renewal application. In addition, an applicant for renewal of a taxicab operator permit shall submit a new photograph, evidence that required insurance will be in effect for the new calendar year, a new certificate of inspection for each taxicab, and new trip data documentation. In addition, an applicant for renewal of a taxicab driver permit shall submit proof of a negative test for controlled substances and alcohol as required by the city’s controlled substance and alcohol certification program outlined in this chapter, a new photograph, and provide a document issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles, dated no more than ten  days before the application is submitted, showing that the applicant holds a valid, current California driver’s license.

    C.   Upon review of completed applications for renewal of taxicab driver and taxicab operator permits, the director of finance shall process and grant or deny the applications for renewal as provided by this chapter.

    D.  Applications for renewal of taxicab driver and taxicab operator permits shall be submitted each year to allow sufficient time for processing before their current permit expires. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.130 Revocation, suspension or modification of a taxicab permit.
    A.  A taxicab operator or taxicab driver permit may be revoked or suspended or additional conditions imposed thereon for failure of the permittee to comply with applicable laws, regulations, and conditions, based on matters occurring after the permit is issued or on matters not considered at the time of issuance of the permit that would have authorized denial of the permit or the imposition of conditions on the permit.

    B.   The director of finance, or designee, may file a written request for revocation, suspension or modification of a taxicab operator or taxicab driver permit, stating facts showing that the permittee has not complied with applicable laws, regulations or permit conditions, has had a subsequent arrest, or poses a danger to public safety, and recommending that the permit be revoked or suspended or in what respect the permit should be conditioned.

    C.   On filing the request, the director of finance, or designee, shall mail to the permittee a notice that the permit is recommended for revocation, suspension, or conditioning in a specific manner and stating the reasons for that recommendation. The notice shall inform the permittee that the recommendation will be adopted, and the permittee will be deemed to concur with the recommendation if the permittee does not make a written request for a hearing in the manner provided in Chapter 5.72.020, Appeal Procedure. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.140 Color scheme and insignia.
    The permit hearing board shall approve the color scheme and insignia of each taxicab operator. No taxicab operator shall use the color scheme or insignia so similar to that of any other existing taxicab operator so as to deceive or confuse, or tend to deceive or confuse the public. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.150 License or decal—Attachment.
    Upon obtaining a taxicab operator’s license, the licensee shall submit such license to the law enforcement agency, and bring all of the vehicles licensed thereby to a place designated by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall attach and seal a license plate or decal to the rear of the body of each vehicle covered by the license, if such vehicle meets all requirements as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.160 Taxi stands.
    Taxi stands shall be at only those locations approved by the permit hearing board. The permit hearing board may require the consent of the owner of any property adjacent to such taxi stand before approving the taxi stand. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.170 Acceptance of passengers required—Exceptions.
    Every taxicab driver and every taxicab operator shall accept any passenger, unless:

    A.  He or she has no facilities available; or

    B.   The transportation requested is such that the driver or operator may not legally accept such passenger; or

    C.   The proposed passenger refuses or says that he or she will refuse or cannot pay the fare; or

    D.  The proposed passenger is drunk, disorderly, or for other reasons is not deemed a fit passenger. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.180 Location for passenger pickups.
    A taxicab driver shall not stop for or accept any passenger except where:

    A.  It is picking up a passenger(s) as part of a prearranged trip; or

    B.   It is within the area specified in the license for the taxicab which he or she is driving; or

    C.   It was the taxicab driver who has driven a passenger to any place and is waiting for and accepts the same passenger.

    1.   If the taxicab driver for any reason moves the taxicab from the location where he or she has left the passenger, this section does not apply. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.190 Direct route required.
    Every taxicab driver shall carry his or her passengers to their point of destination by the most direct practical route unless specifically directed otherwise by such passengers. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.200 Exclusive right of passengers.
    When a taxicab is engaged, the occupants shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment. No taxicab operator or taxicab driver may solicit or carry additional passengers unless the taxicab operator’s license expressly permits the carrying of additional passengers, and then only to the extent expressly permitted. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

 

5.70.210 Failure to pay rates.
    A person shall not:

    A.  Fail or refuse to pay the fare authorized by the taxicab operator’s license for which he or she has become liable;

    B.   Accept a ride in any taxicab without having on his or her person sufficient funds to pay the authorized fare unless, prior to such ride, he or she informs the driver of the taxicab that he or she does not have such funds; or

    C.   Accept a ride in any taxicab with the intent to defraud the operator or driver thereof, or not to pay the full fare authorized. (Ord. 1135 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 5.72 BUSINESSES REQUIRING FIRE INSPECTION
5.72.010 Inspection requirements for specific businesses.
    No business license or permit shall be issued for the conducting of the following businesses, and no person, firm or corporation shall use, maintain or operate any of the following businesses or structures, or maintain or operate any of the following activities for the hereinafter enumerated purposes, unless such business or structure has been inspected by the fire prevention bureau and approval of the use reported in writing to the director of finance, such businesses or structures or activities being as follows:

    1.   Apartment house (defined as any structure housing five or more families under one roof);

    2.   Auto paint shop;

    3.   Auto repair shop;

    4.   Auto wrecking yard or business;

    5.   Boardinghouse (defined as a place maintained or operated for the care or occupancy of more than six unrelated persons);

    6.   Body and fender repair shop;

    7.   Bowling alley;

    8.   Carnivals and circuses;

    9.   Day care nurseries;

    10. Dumps;

    11. Entertainment;

    12. Exhibitions;

    13. Fertilizer plants;

    14. Foundries;

    15. Gasoline and liquefied petroleum gas service stations;

    16. Hay, grain and feed dealers;

    17. Hospitals and sanitariums;

    18. Hotels and motels;

    19. Junk dealers;

    20. Lumberyards;

    21. Public eating places;

    22. Racetrack, auto, bicycle or motorcycle;

    23. Rendering plant;

    24. Resort;

    25. Riding academy;

    26. Rifle range;

    27. Rodeo;

    28. Secondhand dealer;

    29. Skating rink;

    30. Tank truck (gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil, chemical);

    31. Theater;

    32. Trailer parks. (Ord. 1104 § 14, 2017; prior code § 3120)

 

5.72.020 Appeal procedure.
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the fire prevention bureau or the director of finance may appeal the decision to the city council, whose decision shall be final. (Prior code § 3120)

Chapter 5.74 PLASTIC BAGS
5.74.010 Definitions.
    The following definitions apply to this chapter:

    A.  “Customer” means any person purchasing goods from a store.

    B.   “Operator” means the person in control of, or having the responsibility for, the operation of a store, which may include, but is not limited to, the owner of the store.

    C.   “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other organization or group however organized.

    D.  “Plastic carryout bag” means any bag made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically-based source, such as corn or other plant sources, which is provided to a customer at the point of sale. “Plastic carryout bag” includes compostable and biodegradable bags but does not include reusable bags, produce bags, or product bags.

    E.   “Postconsumer recycled material” means a material that would otherwise be destined for solid waste disposal, having completed its intended end use and product life cycle. “Postconsumer recycled material” does not include materials and by-products generated from, and commonly reused within, an original manufacturing and fabrication process.

    F.   “Produce bag” or “product bag” means any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce, meats, or other food items to the point of sale inside a store or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other purchased items.

    G.  “Recyclable” means material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of a new product. “Recycling” does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid waste.

    H.  “Recyclable paper carryout bag” means a paper bag that meets all of the following requirements: (1) contains no old growth fiber; (2) is one hundred percent recyclable overall and contains a minimum of forty percent postconsumer recycled material; (3) is capable of composting, consistent with the timeline and specifications of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard D6400; (4) is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in the county; (5) has printed on the bag the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used; and (6) displays the word “Recyclable” in a highly visible manner on the outside of the bag.

 

    I.    “Reusable bag” means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and meets all of the following requirements: (1) has a minimum lifetime of one hundred twenty-five uses, which for purposes of this subsection, means the capability of carrying a minimum of twenty-two pounds one hundred twenty-five times over a distance of at least one hundred seventy-five feet; (2) has a minimum volume of fifteen liters; (3) is machine washable or is made from a material that can be cleaned or disinfected; (4) does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts; (5) has printed on the bag, or on a tag that is permanently affixed to the bag, the name of the manufacturer, the location (country) where the bag was manufactured, a statement that the bag does not contain lead, cadmium, or any other heavy metal in toxic amounts, and the percentage of postconsumer recycled material used, if any; and (6) if made of plastic, is a minimum of at least 2.25 mils thick.

    J.    “Store” means any of the following retail establishments located within the unincorporated area of the county:

    1.   A full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of two million dollars, or more, that sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or nonfood items and some perishable items;

    2.   A store of at least ten thousand square feet of retail space that generates sales or use tax pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law (Part 1.5 (commencing with Section 7200) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code) and that has a pharmacy licensed pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code; or

    3.   A drug store, pharmacy, supermarket, grocery store, convenience food store, foodmart, or other entity engaged in the retail sale of a limited line of goods that includes milk, bread, soda, and snack foods, including those stores with a Type 20 or 21 license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.020 Plastic carryout bags prohibited.
    A.  No store shall provide to any customer a plastic carryout bag.

    B.   This prohibition applies to bags provided for the purpose of carrying away goods from the point of sale and does not apply to produce bags or product bags. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.030 Permitted bags.
    All stores shall provide or make available to a customer only recyclable paper carryout bags or reusable bags for the purpose of carrying away goods or other materials from the point of sale, subject to the terms of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter prohibits customers from using bags of any type that they bring to the store themselves or from carrying away goods that are not placed in a bag, in lieu of using bags provided by the store. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.040 Regulation of recyclable paper carryout bags.
    A.  Any store that provides a recyclable paper carryout bag to a customer must charge the customer ten cents for each bag provided, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

 

    B.   No store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of the ten-cent charge required in subsection A, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

    C.   All stores must indicate on the customer receipt the number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided and the total amount charged for the bags.

    D.  All monies collected by a store under this chapter will be retained by the store and may be used only for any of the following purposes: (1) costs associated with complying with the requirements of this chapter; (2) actual costs of providing recyclable paper carryout bags; or (3) costs associated with a store’s educational materials or education campaign encouraging the use of reusable bags, if any.

    E.   All stores must report to the business license division, on an annual basis, the total number of recyclable paper carryout bags provided, the total amount of monies collected for providing recyclable paper carryout bags, and a summary of any efforts a store has undertaken to promote the use of reusable bags by customers in the prior quarter. Such reporting must be done on a form prescribed by the business license division, and must be signed by a responsible agent or officer of the store confirming that the information provided on the form is accurate and complete.

    F.   If the reporting required in subsection E is not timely submitted by a store, such store shall be subject to the fines set forth in Section 5.74.080. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.050 Use of reusable bags.
    A.  All stores must provide reusable bags to customers, either for sale or at no charge.

    B.   Each store is strongly encouraged to educate its staff to promote reusable bags and to post signs encouraging customers to use reusable bags. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.060 Exempt customers.
    All stores must provide at the point of sale, free of charge, either reusable bags or recyclable paper carryout bags or both, at the store’s option, to any customer participating either in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Health and Safety Code or in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.070 Operative date.
    This chapter shall become operative on July 1, 2016, for stores defined in subsections (J)(1) and (J)(2) of Section 5.74.010. For stores defined in subsection (J)(3) of Section 5.74.010, this chapter shall become operative on July 1, 2017. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.080 Enforcement and violation—Penalty.
    A.  The code enforcement division has primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The code enforcement division is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not limited to, investigating violations, issuing fines and entering the premises of any store during business hours.

    B.   If the code enforcement division determines that a violation of this chapter has occurred, a written notice shall be sent to the operator of a store warning that a violation has occurred and the potential penalties that will apply for future violations.

    C.   Any store that violates or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter after a written warning notice has been issued for that violation shall be guilty of an infraction.

    D.  If a store has subsequent violations of this chapter that are similar in kind to the violation addressed in a written warning notice, the following penalties will be imposed and shall be payable by the operator of the store:

    1.   A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation after the written warning notice is given;

    2.   A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for the second violation after the written warning notice is given; or

    3.   A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the third and any subsequent violations after the written warning notice is given.

    E.   A fine shall be imposed for each day a violation occurs or is allowed to continue.

    F.   All fines collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a plastic bag management fund to assist with costs of implementing and enforcing the requirements of this chapter.

    G.  Any store operator who receives a written warning notice or fine may request an administrative review of the accuracy of the determination or the propriety of any fine issued, by filing a written notice of appeal with the community and economic development director no later than thirty days after receipt of a written warning notice or fine, as applicable. The notice of appeal must include all facts supporting the appeal and any statements and evidence, including copies of all written documentation and a list of any witnesses, that the appellant wishes to be considered in connection with the appeal. The appeal will be heard by a hearing officer designated by the community and economic development director. The hearing officer will conduct a hearing concerning the appeal within forty-five days from the date that the notice of appeal is filed, or on a later date if agreed upon by the appellant and the city, and will give the appellant ten days’ prior written notice of the date of the hearing. The hearing officer may sustain, rescind, or modify the written warning notice or fine, as applicable, by written decision. The hearing officer will have the power to waive any portion of the fine in a manner consistent with the decision. The decision of the hearing officer is final and effective on the date of service of the written decision, is not subject to further administrative review, and constitutes the final administrative decision. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.090 Severability.
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, that decision will not affect the validity of the remaining portions of the chapter. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance codified in this chapter and each and every section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any portion of this chapter would be subsequently declared invalid. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

 

5.74.100 No conflict with federal or state law.
    Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or duty that is in conflict with any federal or state law. (Ord. 1088 § 3, 2014)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 6.08 DOGS
Chapter 6.12 CATS
Chapter 6.16 FOWL AND RABBITS
Chapter 6.20 KENNELS
Chapter 6.24 HORSES
Chapter 6.32 WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS
Chapter 6.36 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
Chapter 6.40 IMPOUNDMENT
Chapter 6.44 VECTOR CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL CONTROL
Article I General Provisions
6.04.010 Title for citation.
    The ordinance codified in this title may be cited and referred to as “The Animal Control Ordinance.” (Prior code § 4100)

 

6.04.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:

    1.   “Animal” means and includes any beast, poultry, bird, reptile, fish, or any other dumb animal.

    2.   “Animal menagerie” means a place where wild animals are kept or maintained for any commercial purpose, including places where wild animals are boarded, trained, or kept for hire.

    3.   “Animal shelter” means a place where all animals impounded by the department of animal care and control are placed for their humane care and keeping.

    4.   “Approved canine rabies vaccine” means a canine rabies vaccine which is approved for use by the State Department of Public Health.

    5.   “At large” means an animal off the premises of its owner, unless such animal is securely confined by a strong leash securely and continuously held by the owner of such animal, or confined within an automobile.

    6.   “Cat” means any cat of any age, female as well as male.

    7.   “Cat kennel” means any lot, building, structure or premises wherein four or more cats over the age of four months are kept or maintained for any purpose.

    8.   “City official” means the city manager or his or her authorized assistant.

    9.   “Director” means the director of the department of animal care and control.

    10. “Dog” means any dog of any age, female as well as male.

    11. “Dog kennel” means any lot, building, structure or premises wherein four or more canine animals over the age of four months are kept or maintained for any purpose.

    12. “Horse” means and includes mule, burro, pony, jack, hinny or jenny.

    13. “Impounded.” If any animal, pursuant to this title or any state statute, has been received into the custody of any animal shelter, such animal will have been “impounded,” as that word is used in this title.

    14. “Owner” means any person, firm or corporation having an interest in, or having control or custody or possession of any animal.

    15. “Person” means any firm, partnership, corporation, trust, association or person.

    16. “Pet shop” means any place of business where dogs under four months of age, or cats, monkeys, birds, reptiles, fish, or any other animals to be used as pets, are kept for sale.

    17. “Unlicensed dog” means any dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid, or to which the tag for the current year, as provided in this title, is not attached.

    18. “Wild animal” means any wild, dangerous or nondomestic animal, including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles. (Prior code § 4107, (A), (C)—(S))

 

6.04.030 Interpretation of language.
    As used in this title:

    A.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future the present.

    B.   Each gender includes the other gender.

    C.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

    D.  “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. (Prior code §§ 4102, 4103 and 4107(B))

 

6.04.040 References include amendments.
    Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this title, such reference applies to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. (Prior code § 4101)

 

6.04.050 Delegation of powers.
    Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon the director of animal care and control or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer, or by a person authorized, pursuant to law, by the officer, unless this title expressly provides otherwise. (Prior code § 4104)

 

6.04.060 Fee payments.
    Whenever provision is made in this title for the payment of fees, such fees shall be those which the city council from time to time approved, by resolution or minute order. (Prior code § 4106)

 

6.04.070 Violation—Penalty.
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished therefor as § 4105)

 

Article II Department of Animal Care and Control
6.04.080 Established.
    The department of animal care and control, under the administrative management of the director, and the office of the director, are hereby established. (Prior code § 4108)

 

6.04.090 Director—Police powers.
    The director of animal care and control shall be vested with the necessary police powers and duties of a police officer for the exclusive purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title, and it shall be his or her duty to make arrests and issue citations for violations of any of the provisions of this title. The director of animal care and control shall enforce all of the laws of the city, county and state relating to the care, treatment and impounding of dumb animals, and to the prevention of cruelty to dumb animals. (Prior code § 4109)

 

6.04.100 Enforcement powers.
    It is made the duty of the director of animal care and control to enforce any other sections of this title, whether enumerated as a duty or not. (Prior code § 4110)

 

6.04.110 Cruelty prevention statutes.
    It shall be the duty of the director of animal care and control to enforce those sections of the Penal Code of the state pertaining to the inhumane treatment of dumb animals, and to take possession of animals so abandoned or neglected, and care for or dispose of same as provided for in the Penal Code or this title. (Prior code § 4113)

 

6.04.120 Entering premises authorized when.
    The director of animal care and control, or his or her deputy animal care and control officers, or any police officer, are authorized to enter upon any premises upon which any animal is kept, for the purpose of taking up, seizing or impounding any animal found running at large, or staked, herded or grazing thereon, contrary to the provisions of this title, for the purpose of ascertaining whether such animal is licensed, as provided in this title, or determining whether any regulation or law of the state relating to the care, treatment or impounding of dumb animals, or to the prevention of cruelty to dumb animals, is being violated, provided there is probable cause to believe there is such violation, and provided that, except in cases of emergency or where necessary to complete a pursuit initiated outside the premises, such entry shall be performed pursuant to a valid inspection warrant issued pursuant to the California Code of Civil Procedure, Sections 1822.50 et seq. (Prior code § 4112)

 

6.04.130 Interfering with official duties prohibited.
    No person shall rescue or attempt to rescue any animal mentioned in this title from the possession of the director, nor interfere with the director or any of his or her deputies, in the performance of their official duties. (Ord. 809 § 1, 1992; prior code § 4111)

 

Article III Care of Animals
6.04.140 Clinic for spaying or neutering.
    A.  The director of animal care and control may establish a clinic, at which members of the public may have dogs and cats spayed or neutered in a humane manner upon payment of the fees established by the director.

    B.   A person submitting a dog or cat for the above service shall sign a consent form certifying thereon under penalty of perjury that he or she is the owner of such animal, or setting forth facts showing that he or she is otherwise authorized to present the animal for the above operation, and such person may be required to furnish proof of such ownership or authority. Such consent shall contain a waiver of any and all liability of the city, the department of animal care and control, and any employees thereof for any injury or death to an animal arising out of the aforementioned operation or any services provided incidental thereto.

    C.   The department of animal care and control shall establish a return date by which a person submitting an animal for the above operation shall pick up such animal or be subject to a reasonable board and care fee to commence the day after such return date. Failure to pick up an animal within fifteen days of such return date shall be deemed abandonment of such animal, and the director may dispose of it by sale or destruction. (Prior code § 4114)

 

6.04.150 Keeping of animals—Sanitary premises.
    Every person owning or occupying premises where any animal, fowl or bird is kept shall keep the stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, building or place in which such animal is kept in a clean and sanitary condition. (Prior code § 4157)

 

6.04.160 Diseased animals—Restrictions.
    No person shall keep any animal which is known or believed by him or her to be infected with any dangerous or communicable disease, or which is afflicted with any painful disease believed by him or her to be incurable, without a permit to do so from the health officer of the city, or other person(s) designated by the city. (Prior code § 4162)

 

6.04.170 Animals in stores or delivery vehicles.
    No person shall bring any dog, cat or other live animal, or permit any dog, cat or other live animal, or permit any dog, cat or other live animal to be brought into or remain in any room or place, other than a private home where food is not handled for commercial purposes, in which meat, fish, game, poultry, fruit, vegetables, bakery goods or any other food or food product is stored, kept, held, prepared, exposed or offered for sale, or sold for human consumption, or permit any dog, cat or other live animal to ride upon or get into or upon any wagon or other vehicle in which any such articles offered or to be offered for sale for human consumption are being kept or transported; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a dog trained to guide the blind. (Prior code § 4160)

 

6.04.180 Baby chickens, ducks or rabbits.
    A.  Artificial Treatment. No person shall dye, color or otherwise artificially treat any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other fowl.

    B.   Sale of Young. No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbit, baby chick, duckling or other fowl which has been dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated. (Prior code §§ 4155, 4156)

 

6.04.190 Animals in motor vehicles.
    No person shall transport any animal on the running board of any motor vehicle, or outside the passenger compartment, tonneau or body thereof, unless such animal is protected by a framework or other device which will prevent such animal from falling off, jumping or being thrown from such motor vehicle, whether in motion or not. (Prior code § 4161)

 

6.04.200 Noisy animals.
    It is declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall keep, maintain or permit upon any lot or parcel of land within the city under his or her control, any animal or animals, including any fowl or fowls, which by any sound or cry shall interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an individual. (Prior code § 4163)

 

6.04.210 Death of animals—Veterinarian’s notice.
    Every person owning or operating any veterinary hospital or other establishment for the treatment of animals, shall give written notice to the owner of any such animal left in the hospital or institution for treatment, of the death of such animal, provided the name and address of the owner has been filed in the office of the veterinary hospital or other institution. (Prior code § 4158)

 

6.04.220 Traps prohibited.
    No person shall set or use any spring steel trap, No. 1 or larger, in the city. This section shall not prohibit the use of gopher traps. (Prior code § 4164)

 

6.04.230 Slaughter of animals.
    No person shall, within the city, wilfully slaughter or cause to be slaughtered any cattle, calf, horse, mule, sheep, swine or goat, or any other animal. This section shall not apply to the slaughter of such animals within an educational institution, physician’s office or laboratory for medical research or other scientific purposes, to the slaughter of such animals by a person licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine, or by any commercial establishment duly licensed by the city and the United States Department of Agriculture as a slaughterhouse. (Prior code § 4165)

 

6.04.240 Removal of animal carcasses.
    It is declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall cause, suffer or permit the carcass of any animal to remain upon any lot, premises or place owned, controlled or occupied by him or her or it for a period of more than twenty-four hours, or to bury the carcass of any animal upon any premises owned, controlled or occupied by him or her or it in the city. (Prior code § 4159)

Chapter 6.08 DOGS
6.08.010 License and registration required.
    No person owning, having an interest in or having control, custody or possession of any dog shall fail, neglect or refuse to license and register such dog, if over four months of age, in compliance with the terms of this chapter. (Prior code § 4115)

 

6.08.020 License fee—Exemptions.
    No license fee shall be required for the following:

    A.  Service animals with documentation of individualized training to assist persons with disabilities;

    B.   Animals honorably discharged from the armed forces of the United States;

    C.   Animals in the care, custody and control of nonresidents who are traveling through the city or temporarily staying in the city for a period not exceeding thirty days, or animals temporarily brought into the city for the exclusive purpose of being entered in a bench show or exhibition, provided that such animals are so entered and not kept elsewhere in the city;

    D.  Animals which are owned by any governmental agency. (Ord. 1005 § 1, 2004; prior code § 4120)

 

6.08.030 Rabies vaccination required.
    A.  Every person applying for a dog license must exhibit a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state, or by any state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall show that the dog for which the license shall be issued either (1) has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of Sections 6.08.140 and 6.08.150 of this chapter; or (2) should not be so vaccinated by reason of age, infirmity or other disability. Such exemption shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year.

    B.   A license for any dog shall not be issued unless and until either such certificate is exhibited. The certificate of vaccination must be valid throughout the entire licensing period.

    C.   Every person keeping, harboring or having in the city any dog required by this title to be vaccinated shall, at all times while such dog is thus kept, harbored or had, have in his or her possession a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state of California, or any other state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall specify that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of Sections 6.08.140 and 6.08.150. (Prior code §§ 4125, 4129)

 

6.08.040 License fee—Payment time.
    A.  Any owner, with the exception provided in this chapter, of a dog four months of age or younger in the city shall obtain a dog license and pay an original or renewal license fee (as established by resolution) each year thereafter.

    B.   License fees shall be due and payable within thirty days after any dog is acquired and comes into the care, custody and control of any person in the city. (Ord. 707 § 1, 1985; prior code § 4118)

 

6.08.050 License fee—Debt to city.
    The amount of any license fees imposed by this title shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person keeping any animal without having obtained a license and registration certificate from the city shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license fees and penalties imposed and required by this title to be paid for the privilege of keeping such animal, and it shall be the duty of the director to cause a complaint to be filed against any person violating any of the provisions of this title. Such action shall be cumulative, and shall not be deemed a bar to or a waiver of the right of the city to prosecute any person for a violation of this part or any other applicable provision of this title. (Prior code § 4126)

 

6.08.060 License fee—Late payment penalty.
    A.  Any person who fails to pay the required dog license fee, as set forth in Section 6.08.040, each year thereafter shall pay, in addition to the original license fee, a penalty of fifty percent of the original license fee.

    B.   Any person who fails to obtain an original license within thirty days after his or her owning any dog, or any dog coming into his or her care, custody and control in this city, shall pay, in addition to the original license fee, a penalty fee of fifty percent of the original license fee. (Prior code § 4119)

 

6.08.070 Tag and certificate issuance.
    A.  A metallic tag and license certificate with corresponding numbers shall be furnished by the city official, or one of his or her authorized agents, to any person required by this title to obtain a license, upon payment of the appropriate fee prescribed in this chapter.

    B.   The city official shall keep a record of the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the dog or person making payment of the license fee, and to whom a certificate and tag is issued, and the number and date of such certificate. Such metal tag issued for the current license year shall be securely fastened to the collar or harness of the dog, and shall be worn by the dog at all times other than those periods when confined to the owner’s house, enclosed yard or pen.

    C.   A duplicate of a lost license tag may be procured from the city official upon proof of loss and payment of the required fee. (Prior code § 4117)

 

6.08.080 Exhibition of license.
    No person shall fail or refuse to exhibit the registration of any animal required to be licensed by this code when required to do so by the director or any police officer. (Prior code § 4116)

 

6.08.090 Tag—Must be shown when.
    No person shall fail or refuse to show to the director or any police officer the license certificate and the tag for any duly registered dog kept or remaining within any home or upon any enclosed premises under his or her immediate control. (Prior code § 4121)

 

6.08.100 Tag—Counterfeiting prohibited.
    No person shall imitate or counterfeit the tags required by this chapter, or shall use any imitation or counterfeit of such tag. (Prior code § 4123)

 

6.08.110 Tag—Removal prohibited.
    No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog any collar, harness or other device to which is attached a registration tag for the current year, or remove such tag therefrom. (Prior code § 4122)

 

6.08.120 License not transferable.
    No dog license is transferable. (Prior code § 4124)

 

6.08.130 Removal of dog feces.
    No owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog shall permit, either wilfully or through failure to exercise due care to control, any such dog to defecate and to allow such feces thereafter to remain on any public sidewalk or park, or any other public property, or on any improved private property other than that of the owner or person who has custody or control of such dog; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not apply to public or private street gutters. (Prior code § 4154)

 

6.08.140 Rabies—Vaccination requirements.
    A.  Every person keeping, harboring or having a dog over the age of four months in the city shall cause such dog to be vaccinated with a type of rabies vaccine approved by the Los Angeles County health officer within a period of thirty days from the date such dog was harbored, kept or had within the city, or within thirty days from the date the dog attains the age of four months; provided, however, that the aforesaid provision shall not apply so as to require the vaccination of any dog which has been vaccinated with an approved vaccine by a person licensed by the state, or by any other state or nation, to practice veterinary medicine, where such vaccination has been completed within the period of time as hereinafter prescribed in this section.

    B.   If the dog’s vaccination was performed at an age of under twelve months, it must have been completed within one year prior to the date such dog was first kept, harbored or brought into the city. If the dog was last vaccinated at an age over twelve months, it must have been completed within thirty-six months prior to the date such dog was first kept, harbored or brought into the city. (Ord. 729 § 1, 1987; prior code § 4127)

 

6.08.150 Rabies—Revaccination when.
    Every person keeping, harboring or having in the city a dog which has received its initial rabies vaccination shall cause such dog to be revaccinated twelve months after the initial vaccination with an approved type of rabies vaccine. Such dog who has received vaccination after the initial vaccination, or such dog who has received its initial vaccination over twelve months of age, shall be revaccinated no sooner than twenty-four months with an approved type rabies vaccine. (Ord. 729 § 2, 1987; prior code § 4128)

 

6.08.160 Bites and suspected rabid animals.
    Whenever it is suspected that any animal shall have been bitten by another animal having, or suspected of having rabies, all rules and regulations under Section 6.08.190 shall apply, where applicable substituting the word “animal” or “dog.” (Prior code § 4152)

 

6.08.170 Rabid dogs—Notice to city.
    It is unlawful for any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies, or which has shown symptoms of rabies, to fail, refuse or neglect to immediately notify the director, or to fail, refuse or neglect to allow the director to make an inspection to the satisfaction of such official that such animal has or has not rabies. The director shall likewise be notified of any person bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies, whether or not the animal is suspected of having rabies. (Prior code § 4147)

 

6.08.180 Rabid dogs—Report of bites.
    Whenever any person having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog has knowledge that such dog has bitten any person, the persons having charge, care, control, custody or possession of such dog shall report such fact in writing forthwith to the director. The report shall state the name and address of the person bitten and the time and place such person was bitten. (Prior code § 4148)

 

6.08.190 Quarantine—Required when.
    Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, no owner or person having the custody or possession thereof, upon order of the director, any police officer or the health officer, shall fail, refuse or neglect to quarantine such animal and keep it securely confined on a chain or in a closed cage or paddock for a period of ten days, or shall fail, refuse or neglect to allow the director to make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during such period. No such dog or animal shall be removed without written permission of the director, any police officer, or the health officer or his or her deputies. (Prior code § 4149)

 

6.08.200 Quarantine—Law enforcement animals.
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this title, a dog used by any state, county, city or city and county law enforcement agency shall not be quarantined after biting any person if such bite occurred while the dog was being used for any law enforcement purpose. The law enforcement agency shall make the dog available for examination at any reasonable time. The law enforcement agency shall notify the health officer if the dog exhibits any abnormal behavior. (Prior code § 4150)

 

6.08.210 Quarantine—Service animals.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a service animal shall not be quarantined, in the absence of evidence that he or she has been exposed to rabies, unless his or her master fails:

    A.  To keep him or her safely confined to the premises of the master;

    B.   To keep him or her available for examination at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1005 § 2, 2004; prior code § 4151)

Chapter 6.12 CATS
6.12.010 Optional identification license.
    In order to provide a method for identifying cats, a license may be obtained as prescribed in Chapter 6.08 of this title. This section shall not require the licensing of cats, but merely provides for their optional licensing. (Prior code § 4170)

 

6.12.020 Spaying or altering required.
    The animal shelter shall not sell or give away any female cat more than six months of age that has not been spayed, or any male cat of more than six months of age that has not been altered. The animal shelter shall not sell or give away any cat less than six months of age unless the cost of spaying or altering such cat has been deposited in trust with the director for payment to a veterinarian or spaying or altering clinic designated by the person purchasing or receiving the cat. The deposit shall be refunded to the owner upon proof of sterilization. (Prior code § 4153)

Chapter 6.16 FOWL AND RABBITS
6.16.010 Fowl and rabbits defined.
    “Fowl and rabbits,” as used in this chapter, means and pertains to live fowl and rabbits, and includes chickens, turkeys, ducks and geese. (Prior code § 4511(a))

 

6.16.020 Sale or gift prohibited when.
    No person shall offer for sale or sell, or give away as a premium or inducement to bringing customers onto the premises of a business establishment, any fowl or rabbit to which color, dye, stain or other pigment or substance has been added or applied, which has changed the natural color of such fowl or rabbit and has imparted an artificial color thereto, or where under the age of three weeks for fowl or two months for rabbits, whether colored or uncolored. (Prior code § 4511(b))

 

6.16.030 Poultry shops, farmers and breeders.
    This chapter shall not apply to poultry shops, farmers or breeders. (Prior code § 4511(c))

Chapter 6.20 KENNELS
6.20.010 Breeding permit requirements.
    Any person owning or having control, custody, charge or possession of any cat or dog for breeding purposes shall secure a cat or dog breeding permit from the director. The fee for such cat or dog breeding permit shall be established by the director. Any kitten or puppy sold from a litter for profit over and above the cost of advertising, if any, shall be prima facie evidence of cat or dog breeding. (Prior code § 4168)

 

6.20.020 Breeding of dogs—Location restrictions.
    No person shall keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned or controlled by him or her or it, any dog, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, except within properly zoned property, and then only in an approved kennel. (Ord. 707 § 2, 1985; prior code § 4166)

 

6.20.030 Breeding of cats—Location restrictions.
    No person shall keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises owned or controlled by him, any cat, male or female, kept mainly for breeding purposes, except within industrially zoned property, and then only in an approved kennel. (Prior code § 4167)

 

6.20.040 Cat kennel location restriction.
    In any portion of the city, no person shall establish, keep or maintain, or suffer or permit to be established, kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him or her in the city, any cat kennel, except within industrially zoned property, and then only in an approved kennel. (Prior code § 4169)

Chapter 6.24 HORSES
6.24.010 Riding and driving restrictions.
    No person shall drive or ride any horse or other animal upon any public highway or thoroughfare, within the corporate limits of the city, immoderately or beyond a moderate gait, or in such a manner as to endanger the safety of persons on such highway or thoroughfare. (Prior code § 4212)

Chapter 6.32 WILD OR VICIOUS ANIMALS
6.32.010 Permit and other requirements.
    A.  No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any animal, reptile or serpent described in Section 6.36.060 of this title shall allow such animal, reptile or serpent within the enclosed premises of such person unless and until he or she has first secured a permit to do so and complies with all terms and conditions of such permit and, in addition thereto, such animal, reptile or serpent shall at all times be so confined, controlled and restrained in such manner so the life, limb or property of any person lawfully entering such premises shall not be endangered.

    B.   Except as hereinafter provided in this chapter, no person shall have, keep, maintain or have in his or her possession or under his or her control within the city any animal or reptile described in Section 6.36.060 without first applying to and receiving a permit from the director to do so. (Prior code §§ 4171, 4172)

 

6.32.020 Exemptions—Animals transported through city.
    The permit requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any person so keeping or maintaining or having in his or her possession or control any animal or reptile defined in Section 6.36.060 when such person is transporting such animal or reptile through the city, has taken adequate safeguards to protect the public and has notified the local law enforcement agency of the proposed route of transportation and the time thereof. (Prior code § 4183)

 

6.32.030 Exemptions—Zoo or circus animals.
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to animals which are kept confined in any public zoo, museum, circus, carnival, exhibition or show. (Prior code § 4184)

 

6.32.040 Permit—Application.
    An application for any permit required pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the director in writing and upon a form furnished by the director, if so required. Such application shall be verified by the person who desires to have, keep, maintain or have in his or her possession or under his or her control, in the city, the animal or reptile for which a permit is required, and shall set forth the following:

    A.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

    B.   The applicant’s interest in such animal or reptile;

    C.   The proposed location, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of such location, and of the lessee, if any;

    D.  The number and general description of all animals or reptiles for which the permit is sought;

    E.   Any information known to the applicant concerning vicious or dangerous propensities of all such animals or reptiles;

    F.   The housing arrangements for all such animals or reptiles, with particular details as to safety of structure, locks, fencing, etc.;

    G.  Safety precautions proposed to be taken;

    H.  Noises or odors anticipated in the keeping of such animals or reptiles;

    I.    Prior history of incidents involving the public health or safety involving any of such animals or reptiles;

    J.    Any additional information required by the director at the time of filing such application or thereafter. (Prior code § 4173)

 

6.32.050 Permit—Fee.
    The fee for a permit application for wild or dangerous animals shall be established by resolution of the city council. Such fee shall be payable to the director at the time of filing the permit application. Accretions by natural birth shall not require additional permits during the period of a valid permit. Such fees are not refundable regardless of whether or not any permit is issued. (Ord. 843 § 6, 1993; prior code § 4174)

 

6.32.060 Review of application.
    Copies of any application for permit under this chapter shall be sent by the director to the law enforcement agency, planning department, and to any other department or agency from which information is sought, and no permit shall be granted without receipt of a report from the departments or agencies to which copies of the application have been sent, unless waived by the city manager/administrator for good cause. (Prior code § 4175)

 

6.32.070 Permit—Denial— Conditions.
    No permit shall be granted except with the conditions attached as shall, in the opinion of the person or agency approving such permit, reasonably ensure the public health, safety and general welfare, and no permit shall be granted in any event for any animal, reptile or serpent at any particular location except upon an explicit finding by the person or agency approving such permit that the issuance thereof will not be contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare. (Prior code § 4177)

 

6.32.080 Permit—Denial—Appeal procedure.
    A.  Any person dissatisfied with the ruling of the director may, within ten days thereafter, appeal from such decision to the city council; such appeal shall be a simple statement in writing setting forth in common terms the basis of the appeal.

    B.   An appeal fee, as established by the director, shall be required for each appeal to the city council. No appeal shall be placed on the agenda of any meeting of the city council until such fee has been paid. (Prior code § 4176)

 

6.32.090 Temporary permits.
    The director may, following application for a permit and pending final disposition of the same, grant a temporary permit for the maintenance within the city of any such animal or reptile upon such conditions as he or she shall in his or her sole discretion require when, in his or her opinion, there is no reasonable doubt as to the consistency thereof with the public health, safety and general welfare, but no animal or reptile shall be otherwise kept or maintained within the city or permitted to occupy any premises within the city, except while such a regular or temporary permit is in full force and effect. (Prior code § 4178)

 

6.32.100 Failure to obtain permit.
    The director shall take possession of any animal or reptile described under Section 6.36.060 of this title for which a permit has not been issued, or, if previously issued, has been revoked, and keep the same until the proper permit has been secured by the owner thereof, and shall release the same to the owner when all fees and costs have been paid and all laws and permit conditions complied with. (Prior code § 4179)

 

6.32.110 Permit—Term and renewal.
    No permit required by this chapter shall be granted for a period in excess of one year. An application for renewal of any permit shall be made not less than forty-five days prior to the expiration thereof, and shall be accompanied by the same fee as required upon making the original application, or the payment of a lesser fee when, in the opinion of the director, the public health, safety and general welfare do not require further investigation prior to such renewal. (Prior code § 4180)

 

6.32.120 Permit—Revocation conditions.
    The director may, for good cause, revoke any permit or modify any terms or provisions thereof, except permits which have been approved by the planning commission or city council, after informal public hearing, and may, in the event it is reasonably necessary to protect against an immediate threat or danger to the public health or safety, suspend any permit or portion thereof without hearing for a period not to exceed thirty days. (Prior code § 4181)

 

6.32.130 Revocation—Appeal procedure.
    Any person aggrieved by such action may, upon payment of an appeal fee, have such action reviewed by the city council, but the filing of an appeal shall not stay any order of suspension. (Prior code § 4182)

Chapter 6.36 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
6.36.010 Dogs running at large prohibited when.
    A.  No person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of any dog shall cause or permit such dog to be off the premises of its owner, unless such dog is securely confined by a strong leash of not exceeding six feet, securely and continuously held by a competent person owning, having an interest in, harboring or having charge, care, control, custody or possession of such dog, or unless such dog is confined within an enclosed vehicle.

    B.   Subsection A of this section shall not apply to any dog being used for law enforcement purposes by any state, county, city or city and county law enforcement agency. (Prior code § 4130)

 

6.36.020 Captured dogs—Notice to city.
    Any person who captures an animal at large, as defined in Section 6.04.020, shall within twenty-four hours give notice to the director. Such notice shall include the following:

    A.  The fact that he or she has such animal in his or her possession;

    B.   The complete description of such animal;

    C.   The license number of such animal, if any, and by what county or municipal corporation issued. If such animal has no license, such person shall so state;

    D.  The place where such animal is confined; and shall thereafter surrender such animal to the director upon request. (Prior code § 4131)

 

6.36.030 Fowl and rabbits.
    It is declared to be a nuisance, and no person shall suffer or permit any rabbits and/or permitted birds and/or fowl, owned or controlled by him or her or it, to run or fly at large, or to go upon the premises of any other person in the city. (Prior code § 4133)

 

6.36.040 Livestock and other animals.
    No person owning or having control of any ox, steer, bull, cow, horse, colt, calf, sheep, goat, or any animal commonly referred to as a “wild specie” shall:

    A.  Permit such animal to run at large in the city;

    B.   Cause or permit any such animal to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, lane, alley, park or other public area;

    C.   Tie, stake, pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any such animal upon any private property within the limits of the city, without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a way as to permit any such animal to trespass upon any street or public place or upon any such private property; or

    D.  Permit any such animal to be or remain, during the nighttime, secured by a stake, or secured in any manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to restrain such animal, or by securely fastening such animal by means of a rope or chain of sufficient size, strength and weight to effectively restrain such animal; or

    E.   Fail to provide the necessary sustenance, drink, shelter or protection from the weather, or otherwise. (Prior code § 4132)

 

6.36.050 Monkeys and similar animals.
    A.  No person owning or having control of any monkey, ape, chimpanzee or other animal of the monkey type shall permit, allow or suffer such animal to run at large within the city, or permit, allow or suffer such animal to be or go upon any street or public place within the city without having such animal securely fastened by an adequate chain or rope, firmly held by or attached to a competent person.

    B.   Such animal shall be deemed and considered as running at large, within the meaning of the expression as herein used, when not confined within an enclosure or when not securely tied or chained. (Prior code § 4134)

 

6.36.060 Wild or vicious animals and dogs.
    A.  No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any animal or reptile known by such person to be vicious or dangerous, or commonly so known, or owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, monkey, ape, chimpanzee, bobcat, lynx, wildcat, puma, cheetah, or any animal commonly referred to as a “wild specie,” or any poisonous reptile, shall permit or allow the same to be at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court or other public place, or upon any private property other than within the enclosed premises of such person.

    B.   Any dog having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation is hereby defined as a “wild or vicious animal.” The director shall notify the owner or harborer in writing to keep such animal within a substantial enclosure or securely attached to a chain or any other type of control which is reasonably adequate under the circumstances. If such restraint is impossible or impracticable, such animal shall be impounded until the owner or harborer is able to comply with the director’s order. If, upon receiving such written notification, the owner or harborer fails to provide adequate restraint or control of such animal, as ordered by the director, within a reasonable time, the animal shall be subject to summary destruction.

    C.   Where the official records of the director indicate a dog has bitten any person or persons or animal on two or more separate occasions, it shall be prima facie evidence that such dog is a wild or vicious animal. (Prior code § 4135)

Chapter 6.40 IMPOUNDMENT
6.40.010 Animal shelter—Provided by city.
    There shall be provided by the city or by the director, upon such terms and conditions as shall be named in a contract executed by and between the director and the legislative body of the city, a suitable building or enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals herein enumerated in this title which are subject to be impounded, which shall be known and designated as the “Animal Shelter.” (Prior code § 4136)

 

6.40.020 Impoundment— Authorized when.
    It shall be the duty of the director to take up, impound and safely keep any of the animals enumerated in this title found running at large, staked, tied, or being herded or pastured in any street, lane, alley, court, square, park or other place belonging to or under the control of the city, or upon any private property in the city, contrary to the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 4137)

 

6.40.030 Impoundment—Animals at large.
    It shall be the duty of the director to take up all dogs found in violation of Section 6.36.010 of this title. When such dog is taken up, it shall be delivered to the director. (Prior code § 4141)

 

6.40.040 Care of impounded animals.
    When any animal is to be impounded, it shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the director for a period of at least five working days, or such longer period as may be provided hereinafter. (Prior code § 4138)

 

6.40.050 Dogs—Minimum holding period.
    All licensed dogs impounded at the animal shelter shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the director for a period of at least ten calendar days after written notice is given to the owner, and all unlicensed dogs for a period of at least five working days. Deposit of a letter of impoundment with the United States Postal Service shall constitute written notice. (Prior code § 4144)

 

6.40.060 Cats—Minimum holding period.
    All cats impounded at the animal shelter shall be provided with proper and sufficient food and water by the director for a period of at least ten days after written notice is given to the owner for cats displaying some type of identification. Cats without identification shall be held for at least five working days, after which time these cats may be destroyed, except that cats determined by the director to be wild may be disposed of by the director upon impoundment. (Prior code § 4145)

 

6.40.070 Return to owner— Payment of costs.
    The owner of any animal impounded shall have the right to reclaim the same at any time prior to the sale thereof upon payment to the director of the costs and charges for impounding and keeping such animals. (Prior code § 4139)

 

6.40.080 Return to owner—Proof of ownership.
    Subject to the other provisions of this title, any person may make application to the director for the return of any dog or cat, and upon presentation of proof satisfactory to the director that such person is the owner or is rightfully entitled to the possession of such dog or cat, may recover such dog or cat upon the payment of the required fee. (Prior code § 4142)

 

6.40.090 Release—Rabies vaccination required.
    Prior to the release of any dog from the animal shelter to its owner, proof of rabies vaccination shall be required. If the owner fails to show proof, the veterinarian on duty shall administer such vaccination for such fee as shall be established by the director. (Prior code § 4143)

 

6.40.100 Unclaimed animals—Sale or other disposition.
    A.  Dogs and cats not redeemed may be sold by the director to the person offering to pay the highest cash amount therefor, provided that the purchaser shall not be given possession of any such dog or cat until he or she shall have paid to the director the charges prescribed for such dog or cat. If any dog or cat, impounded by the director, shall not have been redeemed within such periods, and cannot be sold within a reasonable time thereafter, it may be summarily disposed of, for which the director is responsible, in some humane way as prescribed by the policy making board.

    B.   The director shall file at the animal shelter a full description of each dog and cat impounded therein, for the period beginning on the day any such dog or cat is taken or delivered into the possession of the director. (Prior code § 4146)

 

6.40.110 Destruction of certain animals.
    It shall be the duty of the director to issue and sign a death warrant for and to order the destruction of any animal lawfully taken into custody which, in the opinion of the director, is infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, or which is in an incurable, crippled condition, or which is adjudged by a written report of a licensed veterinarian to be afflicted with any painful, incurable disease. (Prior code § 4140)

Chapter 6.44 VECTOR CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT
6.44.010 Purpose and authority.
    This Chapter 6.44 enables certain authorized city representatives and the Greater Los Angeles County Vector Control District to abate or require abatement of feral bees and other vector infestations from public and private property and structures when necessary for the public health and safety. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.020 Definitions.
    For purposes of this Chapter 6.44, the following words and phrases are defined and shall be construed to have the following meaning:

    A.  “Authorized city representative” means an officer, director, employee, or agent of the city of Pico Rivera or an officer, director, employee, or agent of a licensed private pest control company which the city has previously entered into a contractual agreement with for the control and abatement of vectors.

    B.   “Beehive” (managed bees) or “nest” (feral bees) means a colony of bees.

    C.   “District” means the Greater Los Angeles County Vector Control District.

    D.  “Feral bee” means any wild honey bee, including but not limited to, the Africanized honey bee, also known as the “killer bee.”

    E.   “Infestation” means a colony or an established swarm of bees forming a colony.

    F.   “Public nuisance” means any condition which endangers public health, safety and/or welfare.

    G.  “Swarm” means a number of bees, including a queen and leaving a hive to start a new colony.

    H.  “Vector” means any insect that poses a nuisance or danger to the public health and safety, and that potentially may transmit a disease-producing organism from one host to another, including but not limited to, the following: Africanized and European honey bees, mosquitos, midges (chironomids), and black flies (simulids). (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.030 Infested building or structure declared a public nuisance.
    All buildings, structures, premises or any parts thereof within the city that are found or reported to be infested with feral bees and other vectors are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by either (A) the property owner; or (B) the district or authorized city representatives, as set forth in Section 6.44.050, at the expense of the property owner. The district and/or city are authorized to determine whether to abate the nuisance in the manner provided in this Chapter 6.44. In emergency situations involving the public health and safety, the district and/or city are authorized to determine how and whether to abate the nuisance immediately. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.040 Vector control measures.
    A.  All premises shall be cleaned, and effective pesticides applied, as often as necessary to prevent the infestation of feral bees or other vectors that may be a danger to the public health and safety. The district and/or city may prescribe the type of pesticides, their manner and frequency of application, and the manner and frequency of cleaning for such purposes.

    B.   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to maintain or permit an established beehive, nest or swarm to exist. This includes a commercially managed European bee hive that has become Africanized.

    C.   The prohibitions regarding maintenance of beehives, nest or swarms shall not restrict the activities of a professional beekeeper if otherwise not prohibited under the county’s zoning code. For purposes of this subsection, the term “professional beekeeper” means a person who holds a current registration as a beekeeper with the county of Los Angeles department of agriculture commissioner. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.050 Abatement of vectors.
    A.  The district is authorized (pursuant to Section 2270(f), California State Health and Safety Code) to enter upon any property in the city without hindrance or notice, for any of the following purposes:

    1.   To inspect to ascertain the presence of vectors or their breeding places;

    2.   To abate public nuisances either directly or by giving notice to the property owner to abate a nuisance;

    3.   To ascertain if a notice to abate vectors has been complied with;

    4.   To treat property with appropriate physical, chemical, or biological control measures.

    The district is authorized to abate and remove feral bees and other vectors on private property except in the event vectors are located within or attached to a private structure. Abatement of feral bees and other vectors within or attached to a private structure shall be referred to authorized city representatives.

    B.   Upon a written declaration by the district of a public nuisance within or attached to a private structure, a copy of which shall be provided to the property owner, authorized city representatives may enter upon said private property in the city without hindrance or notice, for any of the following purposes:

    1.   To inspect to ascertain the presence of vectors or their breeding places;

    2.   To abate public nuisances located within or attached to a private structure that pose an immediate threat to the public safety and health, either directly or by giving notice to the property owner to abate a nuisance;

    3.   To ascertain if a notice to abate vectors has been complied with;

    4.   To treat property with appropriate physical, chemical or biological control measures. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.060 Repayment by property owner of abatement costs.
    Provisions for repayment by property owner of all or part of abatement costs to the district, and collection thereof, are set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 2283, 2283.5, 2284, 2285, 2285.5, 2286, 2287, 2288, 2289 and 2290.

    This and subsequent sections of this chapter pertain solely to the repayment by property owner of all or part of the abatement costs to the city, and collection thereof, incurred pursuant to enforcement of Section 6.44.050(B) above.

    All or part of the cost of abating a nuisance pursuant to Section 6.44.050(B) shall be repaid to the city by the owner of the property. However, the owner shall not be required to pay the cost unless, either prior or subsequent to the abatement by the city, a hearing is held by the city, the property owner is afforded an opportunity to be heard, and it is determined that a nuisance actually exists, or existed prior to abatement. The city may use a civil penalty assessment in lieu of charging for actual costs to abate the nuisance, or may include reasonable costs for abatement as a part of a civil penalty assessment. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.070 Expenditures as lien on property.
    Upon the failure of the property owner or person in possession to pay the abatement costs to the city for all sums expended in abating a nuisance or preventing its recurrence and all civil penalties, the costs shall become a lien upon the property on which the nuisance is abated, or its recurrence prevented, when notice of the lien is filed and recorded as provided in Section 6.44.080. However, if the property has been conveyed prior to the recordation of the lien, the lien shall not attach to the real property, but shall remain the debt of the person who owned the land at the time the costs were incurred, and the debt may be recovered in a civil action by the city against the debtor. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.080 Recording of notice of lien.
    Notice of the lien, particularly identifying the property on which the nuisance was abated and the amount of such lien, and naming the owner of record of such property, shall be recorded by the city in the office of the Los Angeles county recorder within one year after the first item of expenditure by the city or within ninety days after the completion of the work, whichever first occurs. Upon such recordation, such lien shall have the same force, effect and priority as if it had been a judgment lien imposed upon real property which was not exempt from execution except that it shall attach only to the property described in such notice, and shall continue for ten years from the time of the recording of such notice unless sooner released or otherwise discharged. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.090 Release of property from lien—Subordination.
    The city may at any time release all or any portion of the property subject to a lien imposed pursuant to Sections 6.44.070 and 6.44.080 from the lien or subordinate such a lien to other liens and encumbrances if it determines that the amount owed is sufficiently secured by a lien on other property or that the release or subordination of such lien will not jeopardize the collection of such amount owed. A certificate by the city to the effect that any property has been released from such lien or that such lien has been subordinated to other liens and encumbrances shall be conclusive evidence that the property has been released or that the lien has been subordinated as provided in such certificate. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.100 Time to commence foreclosure action.
    An action to foreclose the lien shall be commenced by the city within six months after the filing and recording of the notice of lien. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.110 Action to be brought in name of city.
    The action shall be brought by the city in the name of the city. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

 

6.44.120 Disposition of proceeds of sale.
    When the property is sold, enough of the proceeds to satisfy the lien and the costs of foreclosure shall be paid to the city, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the property if known, and if not known, shall be paid into the court in which the lien was foreclosed for the use of the owner when ascertained. (Ord. 943 § 1, 2000)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.08 HEALTH CODE
Chapter 8.12 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
Chapter 8.16 NUISANCE ABATEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 8.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Chapter 8.24 ABANDONED WELLS AND REFRIGERATORS
Chapter 8.28 ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.32 EXCAVATIONS
Chapter 8.36 FIREWORKS
Chapter 8.40 NOISE
Chapter 8.44 PARKS
Chapter 8.48 SMOKING
Chapter 8.52 FLOOD CONTROL CHANNELS
Chapter 8.56 DISPOSAL OF USED MEDICAL SUPPLIES
Chapter 8.60 DEMOLITION AND RECYCLING
Chapter 8.65 REGISTRATION, MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY OF PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE

Chapter 8.04 GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
8.04.010 Definitions.
    For the purpose of this chapter and Chapters 8.08, 8.12 and 8.56, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

    A.  “Food” means any substance eaten or drunk for nourishment or refreshment of the body, whether it is in storage, in process or preparation, or ready to serve.

    B.   “Food establishment” means and includes any public or private market, shop, store, factory, bakery, storehouse, warehouse, cold storage plant, or other place, not a public eating place, in or about which any food, foodstuffs or provisions are kept, held, sold, stored, prepared or compounded, or offered for sale for human consumption.

    C.   “Hawker” means any person who vends edible food or food products on the street, the food or food products being on a vehicle or carried by a person, including wholesale distribution of food, except:

    1.   Distributors of milk, bottled water or ice, rendering the service of delivering their products to regular customers;

    2.   A person who sells edibles from a wayside stand located on property owned or controlled by him, all of which edibles are grown or raised on such property by such person or by members of his or her immediate family;

    3.   The operator of a public eating place.

    D.  “Health officer” means the health officer of Los Angeles County, or his or her duly authorized representative.

    E.   “Public eating place” means and includes every restaurant, lunchroom, tearoom, coffee shop, soda fountain, public boardinghouse, hotel, club, beer parlor, cocktail lounge, and every other public place where food or drinks are prepared or served to be consumed by the public on the premises, and all kitchens, commissaries and other rooms appurtenant thereto or connected therewith, and including all kitchens in which food or drinks are prepared on the premises for sale or distribution elsewhere. (Prior code §§ 5101—5105)

 

8.04.020 Health permit fees.
    A.  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, no health permits or inspection fees shall be collected under this chapter where such fee duplicates in whole or part any fee imposed by or collected by the county of Los Angeles for inspection or enforcement arising out of a state statute, order, quarantine, rule or regulation pertaining to public health.

    B.   Except where otherwise provided in the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, or this chapter, no health inspection or permit fees shall be collected by the health officer other than those fees specified in the Public Health Code. (Prior code § 5106)

Chapter 8.08 HEALTH CODE
8.08.010 County Public Health Code adopted.
    A.  There is adopted by reference, except as hereinafter provided, the Los Angeles County Code, Title 11, Health and Safety, as currently in effect and as amended through Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 97-0071, and portions of Title 8, Consumer Protection, as contained in Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 97-0071. These ordinances and codes shall become the health and safety ordinance of the city of Pico Rivera, protecting and preserving the public health, safety and welfare by the enactment, inspection and enforcement of the health regulations therein contained and providing penalties for the violations of the Health Code.

    B.   At least one copy of the Health Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk or chief enforcement officer and shall be maintained by the city clerk or chief enforcement officer for use and examination by the public.

    C.   In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between the provisions contained in the Health Code and any amendment thereto or additions thereto contained in this chapter, the amendments or additions thereto shall control.

    D.  In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between any provision contained in the Health Code and any other provision of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, the provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall have control. (Ord. 913 § 2, 1998)

 

8.08.020 Definitions.
    Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Health Code, such names or terms shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, as follows:

    A.  “Unincorporated territory” means the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 913 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 8.12 GARBAGE AND RUBBISH
8.12.010 Title for citation.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Collection and Disposal of Refuse Ordinance.” (Prior code § 5180)

 

8.12.020 Definitions.
    The definitions in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

    A.  “Collection” means the operation of gathering together garbage, rubbish and waste material, and transporting the same to the point of disposal.

    B.   “Commercial premises” means any property located within the boundaries of the city, occupied or used for any purpose other than residential uses with less than four dwelling units, authorized or permitted in the PA, C-N, C-C, C-G, CPD and C-M zones, under the provisions of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, and those mobile home parks, rental housing projects, apartment houses and other multiple dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, where one contract for the collection of refuse for all units within such park, project, house or multiple dwelling is made by the management thereof on behalf of all units thereof.

    C.   “Container” means a receptacle constructed of metal or other materials set forth hereinafter.

    D.  “Contractor” means the person entering into a contract with the city for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and waste material.

    E.   “Disposal” means the complete operation of treating and disposing of the accumulations of rubbish, waste material and the products or residue arising from such treatment.

    F.   1. “Exceptional materials” means those wastes and other materials not included in the definition of rubbish, garbage or waste material, including:

    a.   Any object not easily moved by one person, such as discarded automobile bodies, refrigerators, stoves or other bulky or heavy objects; or

    b.   Waste material resulting from any manufacturing, building or construction operation;

    c.   Manure, offal, waste from any poultry yard or stable;

    d.   Logs, stumps or limbs from trees exceeding four inches in diameter or three feet in length; and

    e.   Sod, dirt or similar material.

    2.   “Waste material,” as used in this subsection, shall be exclusive of that waste material defined in subsection M of this section.

    G.  “Garbage” means waste animal and vegetable matter of every kind and character, including such waste food, animal and vegetable matter as accumulates in hotels, restaurants, eating houses and private homes, in the kitchens and on the tables of such places; and also including such waste animal and vegetable matter as accumulates in meat markets, grocery stores and fruit and vegetable markets. The particular designations herein shall not be deemed to exclude the general.

    H.  “Householder” means the owner or occupant of any residential dwelling.

    I.    “Industrial premises” means those premises upon which the primary and principal activities are of an industrial nature and which activities and uses fall within I-L and I-G zones, including those requiring conditional use permits.

    J.    “Person” means an individual, group of individuals, and/or any legal entity recognized by the laws of the state.

    K.  “Refuse,” when used in this chapter without qualification, means any and all garbage, rubbish or waste material located upon or originating in or upon any residential or commercial property in the city, except materials expressly excluded from the terms of this chapter.

    L.   “Residential property” means any property occupied or used for any purpose authorized or permitted in the RE, SF, PUD and R-M zones under the provisions of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, as may be amended from time to time, and located within the boundaries of the city, except as provided in the definition of commercial premises in subsection B of this section.

    M.  “Rubbish or waste material” means all solid waste consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as shrubbery and yard trimmings and clippings, grass, weeds, leaves, wood, chips, paper, pasteboard, cardboard, magazines, books, rubber, rags, carpets, bedding, clothing, boots, shoes, hats, straw, packing materials, glass, crockery, bottles, shelves, tin cans, metals, ashes, cinders, and other similar waste materials which ordinarily accumulated from the operation of a household or business. (Ord. 747 § 1, 1988; prior code §§ 5181 — 5181.13)

 

8.12.030 Administrative and operating authority.
    The city council is authorized and empowered to operate, maintain, repair and manage a system and facilities for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish, offal, trimmings and other refuse matter within the city. (Prior code § 5182.1)

 

8.12.040 Enforcement—City manager authority.
    Until the further order of the city council, city manager is designated and appointed as the official of the city in charge of the immediate administration of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5183.1)

 

8.12.050 Enforcement—Powers and duties.
    In all cases and under all circumstances not otherwise provided for in this chapter, the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative shall be, and he or she is hereby empowered and authorized to promulgate and issue such orders, directions and instructions with respect to the collection, transportation and removal of refuse as may be necessary, convenient or desirable for the safe, proper and essential functioning of the collection and disposal services referred to herein, whether the same are performed by contract or otherwise, and as may be in the best interest of the city. All such instructions, directions and orders, when so made, shall be obeyed to insure the collection and removal of refuse in a prompt, thorough and lawful manner. (Prior code § 5183.2)

 

8.12.060 Contracts—For collection and disposal.
    The city council is authorized to contract with any person for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, waste, refuse, rubbish, offal, trimmings and other refuse matter within the city, under such terms and conditions as are contained in this chapter, and as may be prescribed by the city council. (Prior code § 5182.2)

 

8.12.070 Contracts—Termination conditions.
    A.  In the event a contract exists between the city and any contractor, such contract, in addition to any other remedy provided within the contract or otherwise available to the city, may be terminated as provided in this section.

    B.   In the event of a substantial failure of performance on the part of the contractor, affecting the public health, safety and welfare, or the wilful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter or the contract or resolution hereunder, following a report concerning the foregoing from the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative, the city council shall hold a public hearing on whether the contract and all rights and privileges of the contractor thereunder shall be revoked and the bond of the contractor forfeited.

    C.   A public hearing shall be held after at least ten days’ written notice to the contractor setting forth the charges of the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative, and setting forth the time and place of the hearing and the reason for the hearing. If the city council, at the hearing, after hearing and receiving all evidence and testimony relevant and material on the issue offered at the hearing, finds that there has been substantial failure of service affecting the public health, safety and welfare, or a wilful violation of this chapter or of any provision of any contract or resolution made pursuant hereto, it may revoke the contract, and forfeit the bond. The decision of the city council in this matter shall be final. (Prior code § 5182.3)

 

8.12.080 Permit—Required when.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person not having a valid, unrevoked permit from the city to do so, to remove, or cause or permit to be removed, any refuse from any premises or from any street, alleyway or other place in the city, or to transport the same in, upon or across any street, alleyway or place in the city.

    B.   Upon enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is the intention of the city council that a moratorium shall be in effect upon the granting of any permits for the collection, transporting or disposal of refuse, garbage and rubbish beyond those valid permits in effect upon enactment. It is further the intention of the council to allow a reduction in number of permits over the years until a more limited number of permits shall have been granted, it having been found that the public health, safety and welfare are best served by a number of permits consistent with the needs of the citizens of the city. From the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no additional permits shall be issued for the collection of refuse, garbage or rubbish in the city. Only those currently and lawfully performing such business in the city for three years may continue to do so, subject to the provisions of this chapter; nor shall any firm, person or corporation pick up or collect refuse, garbage and rubbish from any properties within the city without a valid city license and permit. (Prior code § 5184)

 

8.12.090 Franchise agreements.
    A.  The city and its duly authorized agents, servants and employees, or any contractor with whom the city may at any time enter into an exclusive franchise agreement therefor, and the agents, servants and employees of such contractor, while any such agreement shall be in force, shall have the exclusive right to gather, collect and remove refuse from any premises which may be the subject of such exclusive agreement.

    B.   No person other than those above specified shall:

    1.   Gather, collect or remove any refuse;

    2.   Convey or transport any refuse in, along or over any public street, alley or highway;

    3.   Take any refuse from any receptacle in which the same may be placed for collection or removal;

    4.   Interfere with or disturb any such receptacle, or remove any such receptacle from any location where the same is placed by the owner thereof.

    C.   Permit requirements as set forth above shall apply to all haulers, this section notwithstanding. (Prior code § 5184.1)

 

8.12.100 Exceptions—Gardening refuse.
    A.  Householders hauling occasional loads of waste, refuse or manure from their own premises to a legal point of disposal shall be excepted from the provisions of Sections 8.12.080 through 8.12.120.

    B.   Sections 8.12.080 through 8.12.120 do not prohibit the hauling or disposal of grass cuttings, pruning, manure or other rubbish not containing garbage, to or at a legal point of disposal as part of gardening or horticulture. (Prior code § 5184.4)

 

8.12.110 Exceptions— Governmental disposal.
    The provisions of Sections 8.12.080 through 8.12.120 shall not prohibit any of the officers or employees of the city, or any employees of a contractor, or any employees of any governmental subdivision of the state, from collecting, removing and disposing of such garbage and rubbish in the regular course of their respective duties as such officers or employees. (Prior code § 5184.2)

 

8.12.120 Exceptions—Lawful disposal.
    The provisions of Sections 8.12.080 through 8.12.120 shall not prohibit the lawful accumulation and placement of garbage and rubbish in the first instance. (Prior code § 5184.5)

 

8.12.130 Exceptions—Occupant contracts.
    Except as authorized in Sections 8.12.080 through 8.12.120, any occupant who removes or disposes of, or contracts for the removal and disposal of his or her own refuse as otherwise provided by law shall not be released from any obligation imposed by this chapter to pay the contractor the refuse collection fees as herein provided. (Prior code § 5184.3)

 

8.12.140 Permit—Application.
    Any person eligible and desiring to obtain a permit to remove or convey any garbage upon or along any public street, alley, highway or other public place shall sign and file an application with the permit hearing board, which application shall set forth the name and address of the applicant and such other information as may be required by the board. The license and permit hearing board shall consider the application in the manner set forth in Chapter 5.08 of this code. (Prior code § 5184.6)

 

8.12.150 Commercial permits.
    A.  No more than the current commercial permits shall be issued and outstanding at any given time.

    B.   The fee for each such commercial permit shall be the sum of three hundred dollars per year, payable at the time of application. The penalty for late payment of such fee shall be fifty percent of the amount payable; provided, however, that the city clerk may excuse the payment of any such penalty upon good cause shown to him or her for such late payment.

    C.   In the event an exclusive franchise(s) is awarded by the city, the provisions of Section 8.12.180 of this chapter shall apply to all permits. (Prior code § 5184.8)

 

8.12.160 Contractor—Bond required.
    A.  All rights and privileges of the contractor set forth are granted pursuant to this chapter and conditioned on the contractor’s having on deposit with the city clerk at all times during city service a valid, unexpired bond or bonds, or other security acceptable to the city and approved by the city attorney in favor of the city, as follows: In the amount of ten thousand dollars, conditioned that the contractor will faithfully perform and carry out the provisions of this chapter, the terms of any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, the terms of any individual contract entered into for the collection of refuse, and conditioned upon the con-tractor’s complying with all laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations relating to the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse.

    B.   The bond, or bonds, shall be in favor of the city of Pico Rivera, and shall not extend the right of recovery against the sureties by third persons. The said bond shall not be void upon the first recovery, but may be sued and recovered upon from time to time by the city until the whole principal sum is exhausted.

    C.   The bond may contain a provision giving the sureties the option to cancel the bond upon first giving notice in writing not less than thirty days before the effective date of the cancellation to the city clerk, providing that such cancellation shall not impair the right of the city to reimbursement for correction of conditions resulting from violation of such laws, statutes, ordinances or regulations, or the contract or resolution made pursuant to this chapter, which violations occurred before the effective date of the cancellation of the bond whether the work of correction was performed before or after such effective date. (Ord. 854 § 1, 1994; prior code § 5189)

 

8.12.170 Contractor—Insurance required.
    No person shall operate a refuse or garbage truck within the city, unless at the time such truck is being operated within the city there is on file with the city clerk a valid, unexpired public liability and property damage insurance policy, in the amounts of one hundred thousand dollars for death or injury to any one person arising out of any one accident, and three hundred thousand dollars for injury to or death of more than one person, arising out of any one accident, and one hundred thousand dollars for property damage, arising out of any one accident. Such policy shall be in a form and with a copy approved by the city. (Prior code § 5190)

 

8.12.180 Permit—Period of validity.
    In the event an exclusive franchise(s) is granted by the city, all valid permits issued for the three consecutive previous years hereof to collect garbage and rubbish in the city at the effective date of the award of the franchise(s), may remain in full force and effect for a period of five years from the date of the award of such franchise(s). (Prior code § 5184.7)

 

8.12.190 Permit—Transferability.
    No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be assigned, subcontracted, leased or otherwise transferred or assigned without the written consent of the city council. (Prior code § 5184.9)

 

8.12.200 Permit—Revocation conditions.
    Procedures for revocation are those set forth in Chapter 5.08 and Sections 5.08.390 through 5.08.420 of this code. (Prior code § 5184.10)

 

8.12.210 Rates, hours and schedules.
    The rates, hours of collection and schedules of collection of rubbish and garbage shall be those which the city council may determine and establish from time to time by resolution. (Prior code § 5185)

 

8.12.220 Trucks—Design and operation.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or cause or permit to be operated within the city, a truck used or intended to be used for the collection, hauling or disposing of garbage or rubbish unless the operation and each such truck complies with all of the requirements set out in Sections 8.12.220 through 8.12.280. (Prior code § 5186)

 

8.12.230 Trucks—Construction and inspection.
    Such trucks shall be constructed of metal and be watertight. They shall be completely inspected and certified twice each year by the California Highway Patrol as to maintenance and driver’s record. The inspection shall include, but is not limited to brakes, steering mechanism, suspension and linkage systems, tires, wheels, air leakage, valves, emergency stop mechanism, lights, and overall truck appearance. In addition thereto, such trucks shall also be thoroughly inspected and certified by the Los Angeles County health department, and such inspection shall include but is not limited to leakage of fluids or rubbish from trucks, state of paint and letters on the truck, as well as overall truck appearance. Notice of such certification shall be filed with the city manager each June and December and as trucks are placed into service. Failure to submit required notice of such certification shall be grounds for suspending of rubbish hauling permits and/or contracts, where applicable, until a notice evidencing passage of such inspections, as required, is received by the city manager. (Prior code § 5186.1)

 

8.12.240 Trucks—Lettering for identification.
    Such trucks shall contain, in neat and legible three-inch painted letters, the name of the owner or operator of the truck, and the true business telephone number of such person. (Prior code § 5186.4)

 

8.12.250 Trucks—Maintenance and painting.
    Such trucks shall be maintained at all times in good mechanical condition, and shall be maintained clean and well-painted to the satisfaction of the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative. (Prior code § 5186.3)

 

8.12.260 Trucks—Hours and manner of operation.
    Such trucks shall be operated so as to offer the least possible obstruction to the public peace and quiet. Collection of rubbish or garbage shall not be made between the hours of six p.m. and five a.m. (Ord. 718 § 1, 1986; Ord. 700 § 1, 1985; prior code § 5186.6)

 

8.12.270 Trucks—Covering of contents.
    The body of each truck shall have a metal cover over at least fifty percent of the area at all times, and further, over the remaining fifty percent, there shall be carried an airtight waterproof tarpaulin which shall be tied down securely to cover refuse when the vehicle is being used to transport its contents to the place of disposal. (Prior code § 5186.2)

 

8.12.280 Trucks—Cleaning and storage.
    All trucks shall be cleaned thoroughly by flushing with water at least once after each day’s use, and shall be disinfected by the use of live steam or an approved disinfectant at least once a week. All vehicles and equipment used in the collection of rubbish and garbage in the city, if kept within the boundaries of the city, shall under no condition be stored on public streets. (Prior code § 5186.5)

 

8.12.290 Containers—Required— Specifications.
    A.  It shall be the duty of every householder within the city to provide or cause to be provided, and at all times to keep or cause to be kept, portable containers for holding garbage and rubbish.

    B.   Each such container shall be constructed of metal or other material of equal quality, and shall be watertight and shall be so constructed so as to contain not less than three gallons’ capacity or more than forty gallons capacity, and not more than eighty pounds in weight when full. All such containers shall be kept in good repair by the occupant. The occupant may also use plastic-bag containers for the disposal of refuse; however, such bags shall be no less than three mil in thickness, and shall be known as the type specifically designed for the disposal of refuse.

    C.   Each such container shall be equipped with a bail or handles on both sides thereof, and each such container shall have a suitable close-fitting cover, the design and type of which shall have been approved by the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative. (Prior code § 5187)

 

8.12.300 Containers—Safety features.
    Receptacles used at residential premises shall be of such a size, shape and weight, when filled, that they may be readily lifted for emptying into the trucks of the container, and free of all rough or jagged surfaces which shall be likely to cause injury to persons lifting the same. (Prior code § 5187.4)

 

8.12.310 Containers—Placement for collection.
    A.  Each container provided as prescribed in this chapter shall be kept or placed in the following manner. Each such container shall be kept on the premises of the person providing the same, except that on the day designated for collection, and before the time collection starts in the district in which such premises are located, it shall be placed for collection as follows:

    1.   On any premises adjacent to a dedicated, paved alley in a block with access to such alley at each end of the block, such containers shall be placed on or within two feet of the rear property line of such premises, and shall be readily accessible for collection from the alley.

    a.   Each such premises shall be identified by the street address of such premises, painted and maintained legibly in numbers not less than two inches in height, placed on each container or on a fence or other structure at the rear of such premises and abutting on such alley.

    b.   It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of such premises to comply with the requirements hereof, and should he or she fail to do so, the city may paint such numbers and charge the cost thereof to such owner or occupant.

    2.   Where such premises are not adjacent to an alley which is paved and dedicated, with access to such alley from each end of the block, each such container shall be placed on the curb in front of the premises occupied by the person placing the same, or on the curb at the side of the premises where such premises are adjacent to more than one street.

    B.   The occupants shall place such containers near the curb in front of such properties not more than twelve hours before the scheduled time for pickup by the operator, and shall remove the same not more than twelve hours after the time scheduled for pickup by the operator.

    C.   It is unlawful for any person to place any garbage or rubbish accumulating on any premises within the city in a garbage or rubbish container containing garbage or rubbish which has accumulated in, upon or from any other premises within the city, or to place any such container for collection of garbage or rubbish therefrom in, upon, in front of or in the rear of any other premises. (Prior code § 5188)

 

8.12.320 Containers—Deposit of garbage.
    All garbage deposited in such containers shall be thoroughly drained and thoroughly wrapped prior to placement in such containers. (Prior code § 5187.1)

 

8.12.330 Papers and magazines.
    Papers, newspapers and magazines may be placed in garbage and rubbish containers hereinbefore described, or in other substantial containers. If not placed in such containers, the same shall be tied in bundles. Whether placed in such containers or bundles, the same shall not exceed fifty pounds in weight per container or bundle. (Prior code § 5187.3)

 

8.12.340 Tree or garden trimmings.
    Tree or garden trimmings may be placed in the garbage and rubbish containers hereinbefore described, or in other substantial containers. If not placed in such containers, such tree and garden trimmings shall be tied in bundles not exceeding two feet in diameter and five feet in length. Whether placed in such containers or bundled, such tree or garden trimmings shall not exceed fifty pounds in weight per container or bundle. No such container or bundle shall contain any materials other than tree or garden trimmings. Single items such as furniture and appliances weighing less than eighty pounds, or which can be lifted by one man, will be allowed on a weekly basis. (Prior code § 5187.2)

 

8.12.350 Charges—Determined by council—Payment.
    A.  There are imposed by the city fees and charges for the collection, removal and disposal of refuse within the city. Such fees and charges for such collection, removal and disposal services shall be those which the city council may from time to time hereafter determine, fix and establish by resolution; and the same shall be applicable for the respective periods designated in or covered by such respective resolutions.

    B.   The occupants of all premises and property where refuse is produced or generated, regardless of whether the occupant places such refuse collection in a manner prescribed in this chapter or not, and regardless of whether the occupant has any refuse for collection, shall be liable for the payment of all such fees and charges.

    C.   Should any premises or property be unoccupied, or should the occupant thereof fail to pay all such fees and charges before the same become delinquent, then and in either such event the owner of such premises or property shall be liable for the payment of all such fees and charges, including any delinquency. (Prior code § 5191.1)

 

8.12.360 Charges—Billing and collection.
    A.  Every occupant or owner of residential property or premises in the city shall be billed periodically in advance, either bimonthly or quarterly, by the contractors, for the charges incurred by the collection of refuse.

    1.   Should any owner or occupant fail, refuse or neglect to pay any such bill within thirty days after the date that the same is rendered, then in that event a penalty equal to not more than twenty-five percent of the amount of the bill shall be added to the bill, and the sum, together with any cost incurred by the contractor, may be recovered as provided by law; or, in the event there are costs incurred by the city, all sums and costs may be recovered as hereinafter provided.

    2.   Should the occupant or owner of any residential property or premises in the city fail or refuse to pay, in accordance with the provisions hereinabove, the fee assessed for the collection of refuse, then and in that event, the city contractor shall advise the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative of such refusal. The failure to pay may, except for the provisions hereof, result in the noncollection of refuse. In the event that there is nonpayment, the contractor shall cause collection of such nonpayment to be made, and the expenses and charges of collection, including penalties, to be assessed against the property as provided herein. The city contractor shall continue to collect refuse when directed to do so by the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative, even though there be nonpayment, and in such event all sums and costs incurred thereby shall be recovered as hereinafter provided.

    B.   The city contractor shall make all reasonable efforts to diligently pursue and collect all fees and charges due the city contractor for rendering such services to the satisfaction of the city manager; in event of delinquency, the contractor shall also notify the owner of the property or premises.

    C.   All costs incurred by the city and payable by the city to the city contractor, as hereinafter set forth, shall be recoverable by the city and charged against the real property from which the refuse was collected. It shall be the duty of the city contractor to provide to the city individual letters which contain the name of the owner and/or occupant, the address as of the latest tax roll, including the legal description of such properties, and the amount delinquent and unpaid, the amount of the penalty, collection costs, and costs of abatement. The only responsibility of the city pertaining to notice of and public hearing shall be as follows:

    1.   The city manager or his or her duly authorized representative shall notify concerned parties of such amount. Such notice shall further declare that the city council shall, at its next regular meeting, review and approve as an assessment against the property the amount delinquent and unpaid, the amount of the penalty, collection costs, including administrative costs incurred hereby, and costs of abatement.

    2.   If the total assessment determined and approved by the city council is not paid within ten days after such determination, then and in that event, there shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder a statement of the total balance due together with the legal description of the property affected.

    3.   From and after the date of such recordation, the balance due shall be a special assessment against the real property. This assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as are county taxes, and shall be subject to the same penalties and to the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary county taxes.

    4.   All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.

    D.  The city controller shall be fully reimbursed in the amount due him or her on an unpaid account less ten percent when the assessed amount is recovered.

    E.   Any occupant or owner of any residential property or premises in the city who has been billed for refuse collection service, and who desires to contest the extent, degree or reasonableness of the charges, shall make payment of such charges under protest and, at the same time, file a written statement of such protest with the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative. Within thirty days after the date of filing, the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative shall notify the protestant of his or her findings and adjudication and adjustment in the matter. Within fifteen days after such notice of the decision of the city manager or his or her duly authorized representative, the protestant may appeal in writing to the city council, whose determination, in regular meeting, shall be final. (Prior code § 5191.2)

 

8.12.370 Billing and collection— Alternate method.
    A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8.12.360 of this chapter, residential refuse collection fees, as established by resolution of the city council, may be billed and collected on behalf of the city by the office of the county auditor-tax collector and other appropriate county offices.

    B.   The city manager may order the refund of any fee, or portion thereof, paid pursuant to the provisions of this section, provided that the fee is found and determined by the city manager to have been entered, charged or paid illegally, or more than once, or through clerical error or through the error or mistake of the city. In any event, no refund shall be for a period greater than three years prior to the date of the claim for refund.

    C.   No order for a refund shall be made except on a claim verified by the person who paid the fee, or the legal representative of that person, and filed with the city clerk within thirty days after the payment sought to be refunded became due.

    D.  Upon receipt of a verified claim, the city manager shall cause a review of the claim. If the city manager determines that the claim should be allowed, he or she shall arrange for payment. If it is determined that the claimant has failed to truthfully set forth such facts as to justify the refund, or that the facts as set forth shall not justify the refund, the claim shall be denied by the city manager, who shall give notice to the claimant. The claimant shall thereafter have the right to appeal the decision to the city council within a ten-day period after the date of mailing of the rejection. In the event no claim is filed within the time prescribed, all rights to claim such refund shall be considered to be void and extinguished permanently.

    E.   Failure to pay any and all charges established by resolution of the city council shall be grounds for the stoppage of refuse collection service, in addition to the right of the city to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in a manner provided by law. (Ord. 929 § 1, 1999; prior code § 5191.3)

 

8.12.380 Accumulations unlawful when—Nuisance.
    A.  Every person occupying or having charge of or control of any place, land or premises within the city wherein garbage, waste, refuse or trash is accumulated, shall cause the same to be disposed of in the manner set forth in this chapter. No person shall cause or permit or allow or authorize the depositing, dumping or accumulation of any such garbage, waste, refuse or trash, except as provided herein. Garbage, waste, refuse and trash accumulated or stored for the purpose of disposal shall be kept and placed in a receptacle of the type and kind prescribed in this chapter.

    B.   No person shall cause or permit the following:

    1.   The depositing, accumulation or collection of refuse, unless placed in a receptacle as provided in this chapter for the disposal thereof through either automatic disposal units or by a collector, as hereinbefore provided, within seven days;

    2.   The collection, depositing or accumulation of combustible refuse for a period in excess of seven days, excluding, however, combustible refuse of a salvageable value where stored and maintained in a manner approved by the health and fire departments;

    3.   The depositing, collection or accumulation of refuse, other than combustible refuse, for a period of time in excess of fifteen days.

    C.   Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 38771, 38773 and 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state, the city council finds and declares that the depositing of, or the accumulation of, or the maintenance of garbage or waste or refuse or trash or rubbish on any parcel of land by any person in a manner other than authorized by this chapter, or the deposit of or the maintenance of or the accumulation of garbage, waste, rubbish, refuse or trash on any parcel of this land by any person in any manner or for a period of time in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or the depositing of or the accumulation of garbage, waste, refuse, trash or rubbish by any person on or within any public right-of-way adjacent to the premises owned or occupied by such person, in any manner or for a period of time other than specified in this chapter, is a nuisance, and shall be abated as hereinafter provided in this chapter. The council does not intend, however, by providing for the following procedure of nuisance abatement, to make such a remedy exclusive, and it is hereby declared that the violation of any of the aforementioned provisions by any person is a misdemeanor which shall be punishable as provided in the code and by law. (Prior code § 5192)

 

8.12.390 Abatement of nuisance— By city when.
    A.  Upon report of or discovery of the existence of any such nuisance, the director of public works shall thereafter, within five days, in writing, notify the person committing such nuisance of the existence of the nuisance, and requiring such person within five days to abate or cause the nuisance to be abated in the manner provided by law.

    B.   If the person shall fail to abate the nuisance within the five-day period, the director of public works is authorized and directed to cause the nuisance to be abated through city employees or contractual agents, and such employees or agents shall have the authority to enter the premises of any such person for the purpose of removing and abating the nuisance. (Prior code § 5193)

 

8.12.400 Abatement of nuisance— Costs.
    The director of public works shall keep an itemized account of the expense or cost of abatement, and upon completion of the abatement shall prepare a written report of the cost thereof for confirmation and lien. Upon the filing of such a report, the city clerk shall cause the report, with a copy of the notice of hearing before the city council, to be served in the manner required by law for service of summons, to be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, on every person whose address can be ascertained and who is:

    A.  Shown by the public record to be an owner of the premises upon which or adjacent to which such nuisance was abated;

    B.   Shown by the public record to be the holder of any mortgage, deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance thereon;

    C.   Shown by the public record to have any interest or right of possession thereto by virtue of any lease;

    D.  The possessor of or in apparent or real charge or in control of such land or premises. (Prior code § 5193.1)

 

8.12.410 Abatement costs— Hearing.
    At the time fixed for hearing, the city council shall consider such report, together with any objections or protests which may be raised by anyone liable to be assessed for such work, or any other interested person, and thereupon the city council may make such revision, correction or modification of the report or statement of cost as it deems just, after which it may, by motion or resolution, confirm the report as submitted or as corrected or modified. (Prior code § 5193.2)

 

8.12.420 Abatement costs—Lien on property.
    A.  The cost of such work and the expense of abatement of the nuisance, as well as the incidental and administrative cost thereof, and as confirmed by the city council, plus the cost of any title report necessary to ascertain persons having an interest in the property upon which the nuisance was abated, shall be a lien against the property upon which or against which the nuisance was abated and a personal obligation against the property owner pursuant to Section 38773 of the Government Code.

    B.   In the event such cost is not paid within five days following the confirmation by the city council, such shall constitute a lien upon the real property upon which the nuisance was abated, and shall continue until the amount thereof and interest thereon, at the rate of eight percent per year computed from the date of confirmation, has been paid, or until it is discharged otherwise.

    C.   In the event of nonpayment, the director of public works shall at any time within sixty days after confirmation of the report, cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of Los Angeles County a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

  Pursuant to the authority vested in the undersigned by Section 8.12.380, et seq., of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, and Section 38771, 38773 and 38773.5 of the Government Code of the State of California, the undersigned did, on the _____ day of _____, 19_____, cause a nuisance to be abated on the real property hereinafter described within the City of Pico Rivera and the City Council of the City of Pico Rivera did on the _____ day of _____, 19_____, by action duly recorded in its official minutes as of said date, assess the cost of such abatement upon the real property hereinafter described and the same has not been paid and the undersigned does hereby claim a lien on said real property for the cost of said abatement in the sum of $_____ _____, and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until said sum, with interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the _____ day of _____, 19_____, (insert date of confirmation of report), has been paid in full and discharged, as well as a personal obligation against (insert name of property owner).

 

  The real property hereinbefore mentioned, upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain parcel or place of land lying and being in the City of Pico Rivera, County of Los Angeles, State of California, and more particularly described as follows:

 

  Dated this _____ day of _____, 19_____.

 

  CITY OF PICO RIVERA

 

  By _____

  Director of Public Works

 

(Prior code § 5193.3)

 

8.12.430 Abatement costs— Assessment.
    A.  The cost of the abatement shall constitute a special assessment against the parcel, which may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected in accordance with and subject to the terms and provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state. Confirmation of the statement or report of the director of public works shall be in confirmation of the assessment and shall be a lien on the property or parcel where the abatement was performed. Failure to record a notice of lien under the unforementioned section shall not bar collection hereunder or otherwise.

    B.   After confirmation of the report, the director of public works, in lieu of recording the notice of lien, or in a proper case in addition to recording the notice of lien, shall deliver a certified copy of said notice of lien or report, or both, to the county auditor on or before August 10th. The description of the parcel or parcels reported shall be those used in the county assessor’s map book for the current fiscal year. The amount of the assessment shall thereafter be collected in accordance with and subject to the terms and provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state.

    C.   The city treasurer may receive the amount due on the abatement cost and issue receipts at any time after confirmation of the statement and prior to delivery of a certified copy of the report or notice of lien to the county auditor. The city council may order refund of all or part of a tax paid pursuant to the provisions of this section if it finds that all or part of the taxes have been erroneously levied. A tax or part shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the city council on or before March 1st, after taxes become due and payable. The claim shall be verified by the person who pays the tax or his or her guardian, executor or administrator. (Prior code § 5193.4)

 

8.12.440 Unlawful collection and removal activities.
    A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person other than a contractor or the city to gather, collect or remove any garbage or rubbish from any premises within the city.

    B.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person not having a valid, unrevoked permit from the city to do so, to remove or cause or permit to be removed any garbage or rubbish from any street, alleyway or other place in the city, or to transport the same in, upon or across any street, alleyway or place in the city.

    C.   It is unlawful for the owner or occupant of property in the city to contract for or to use the services of a person collecting garbage, refuse or rubbish, unless such person is duly licensed by the city.

    D.  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the lawful accumulation and placement of garbage and rubbish in the first instance.

    E.   The provisions of this section shall not prohibit any of the officers or employees of the city, or any employees of a contractor, or any employees of any governmental subdivision of the state, from collecting, removing and disposing of such garbage and rubbish in the regular course of their respective duties as such officers and employees.

    F.   Householders hauling occasional loads of waste, refuse or manure, not containing garbage, from their own premises to a legal point of disposal shall be excepted from the provisions of this section.

    G.  This section does not prohibit the hauling or disposal of grass cuttings, pruning, manure or other rubbish not containing garbage, to or at a legal point of disposal as a part of gardening or horticulture. (Prior code § 5191)

 

8.12.450 Depositing human wastes unlawful where.
    A.  No person shall deposit, by means of urination or defecation, any human waste material in any public place or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view, or upon the surface of the ground or upon any premises, lot, or in any building, basement, or in any public street, or into any standing water, stream or excavation, or a public place other than a proper toilet or portable toilet.

    B.   For the purpose of this section, “human waste material” means human urine discharged from the body, or human fecal matter defecated from the rectum. (Ord. 731 § 1, 1987; prior code § 4230.5)

 

8.12.460 Illegal dumping activities.
    No person shall place, deposit, throw or dump, or cause to be placed, deposited, thrown or dumped any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, dirt, sand, rock, cement, glass, metal, carcass of any dead animal, offal, refuse, plants, cuttings or trash, or rubbish of any nature whatsoever, or any nauseous, offensive matter, in or upon any public or private road, highway, street, alley, public way, or any public or private property of any kind whatsoever. (Prior code § 4230)

Chapter 8.16 NUISANCE ABATEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Article I. Nuisance Abatement
8.16.010 Public nuisance.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 38771 of the Government Code of the state, the city council does hereby find, determine and declare that the following conditions and circumstances constitute public nuisances which may be summarily abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

    A.  Property.

    1.   Property, the topography or configuration of which, whether a natural state or as a result of grading operations, causes or will cause erosion, subsidence or surface water runoff problems which will or may be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or damaging to adjacent or nearby properties;

    2.   Overgrown vegetation (such as grass over six inches in height), dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds and other vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin or nuisances or which may be a fire hazard; or that encroaches into the public right-of-way so as to interfere with pedestrian or auto traffic or interfere with the public welfare;

    3.   Storing, discharging, holding, handling, maintaining, using or otherwise dealing with hazardous substances, as defined by applicable state or federal laws or regulations:

    a.   In violation of federal, state or local law or regulations,

    b.   In such a manner to affect in any way air or water quality, or

 

    c.   In such a manner as to create an identifiable risk of accidental release of the substances;

    4.   Keeping any animal including, but not limited to reptiles, or insects in such a manner as to pose a threat, disturbance or danger or menace to persons or property of another or in a public right-of-way;

    5.   Outside storage of any of the following:

    a.   Debris, rubbish and trash visible from public right-of-way,

    b.   Broken or discarded household furnishings, appliances, boxes and cartons, lawn maintenance equipment, play equipment, toys and similar materials,

    c.   Building materials not being used to work on the property under a valid, open building permit,

    d.   Wrecked or inoperable appliances, equipment, machines, tools and similar materials,

    e.   Materials or items of any nature not part of any approved roof structure placed, installed or stored on rooftops when visible from the public right-of-way or from neighboring property;

    6.   Attractive nuisances (those objects which, by their nature, may attract children or other curious individuals) including, but not limited to, unprotected and/or hazardous pools, stagnant water, ponds, iceboxes, refrigerators or excavations;

    7.   Clothes lines in a front yard or areas other than on the ground floor level and within the area to the rear of the rearmost building;

    8.   Garbage or trash cans or containers stored in front or side yards and visible from public streets, or which cause offensive odors;

    9.   Depositing, accumulating, or collecting of refuse unless placed in the appropriate refuse container provided by the city. Depositing of human waste on the property, dumping or depositing of refuse on public or private property without a city permit, any violation of Chapter 8.12 of the municipal code;

    10. Keeping, operating or maintaining any machinery which, emits an objectionable odor, or by reason of its dust, exhaust or fumes creates a health or safety hazard;

    11. Allowing any unlawful condition or activity to exist on any property;

    12. Permitting sewage or grease to overflow from clogged sewer lines and/or building drain lines;

    13. Conducting an activity or event without a permit from the city when a permit is required under the Pico Rivera Municipal Code to conduct such activity or event;

    14. Any front yard, parkway, or landscaped setback area which lacks turf, other planted material, decorative rock, bark, or planted ground cover or covering;

    15. Property in which required yard areas are not landscaped in accordance with the landscape requirements as set forth in Chapter 18.42.050(B)(20);

    16. Lighting which directly shines on neighboring lots or is directed off-site from the property meant to be served;

    17. Operating an unpermitted business or activity;

    18. Furniture, other than lawn or patio furniture which is constructed of waterproof materials originally intended and commonly thought of as being for outdoor use, located on porches, front or side yards, or visible from a public right-of-way or neighboring property;

    19. Accumulations of grease, oil, auto fluids, hazardous chemicals or materials on driveways, yards, fences or buildings; or allowing such materials to migrate underground or flow into the public right-of-way or neighboring property;

    20. Temporary or non-permanent coverings or structures located in required front, side or rear yard areas, that have not been issued a Planning or Building Permit by the city;

    21. Abandoned service stations as defined in Section 18.40.050(C)(19)(n) of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code;

    22. Parking, storage or repair of buses, tow trucks, construction vehicles, tractor trailers, trailers or any other commercial vehicle of any type or description in any residential zone or on any commercially zoned property without zoning approval, except for the deliveries and the performances of work requested by an occupant of the residentially zoned property;

    23. Failing to satisfy or violating any condition associated with or imposed in connection with an approval relating to land, while making use of the special entitlement granted by such permit, including, but not limited to, variances, conditional use permits, subdivisions and site plans;

    24. Maintenance of premises in such manner as to violate the Los Angeles County Public Health Code as adopted at Pico Rivera Municipal Code, Chapter 8.08. As used herein, “premises” means and includes real property, landscaping, trees, bushes, fences, buildings, fixtures, structures, and any other improvement to real property, and the outside storage of personal property.

    B.   Structures. Structures or buildings, both permanent and temporary, or other lot improvements, which are subject to any of the following conditions:

    1.   Constitute a fire hazard as determined by the fire marshal;

    2.   Have faulty weather protection including, but not limited to, crumbling, cracked, missing, broken, or loose exterior plaster or other siding (including lack of paint or other protective finish), deteriorated or unsound roofs, foundations or floors, broken or missing windows, window screens or doors;

    3.   A building or structure which is not completed and for which the permit for such construction has expired. In the case of structures which do not require a permit, an incomplete state of construction of six months of more;

    4.   A building or structure that has been boarded up for a period of six months or longer;

    5.   Unoccupied or abandoned buildings which have been left unlocked or otherwise open or unsecured from intrusion by persons, animals or the elements;

    6.   Fences or walls which violate zoning regulations regarding height, or which are in a hazardous or unsafe condition, or which are in disrepair, or the elements;

    7.   Signs, which advertise uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on the premises, except where such signs are legally permitted;

    8.   Signs, both on-site and off-site (including billboards), which are otherwise lawful but maintained in a deteriorated condition;

    9.   Temporary signs which advertise or are related to events which have already taken place;

    10. A building or structure that is marked or defaced with spray paint, dye or like substance in a manner commonly described as graffiti, for four or more calendar days;

    11. Allowing any unlawful condition or activity to exist in a structure;

    12. Any building, facility, equipment, device or structure in a condition that would constitute a substandard, dangerous conditions as defined in the Pico Rivera Building Code;

    13. Any building or structure which is partially destroyed, damaged, vacant or abandoned for more than six months;

    14. Unpermitted or illegal signs not in compliance with Chapter 18.46 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code;

    15. Unpermitted or illegal structures or storage containers;

    16. Unpermitted or otherwise illegal fencing including all barbed wire;

    17. Maintenance or premises so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties;

    18. Property maintained (in relation to others) so as to cause depreciated values, impaired investments, or social and economic maladjustments;

    19. Any building, sign or structure erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered, or any building, sign, structure or land used in any manner contrary or in violation of the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city contained in Chapter 18.18 of this code;

    20. Any nonconforming building or use which has been terminated by discontinuance or operation of law;

    21. Any encroachment on any public dedicated or acquired sidewalk, street, alley, lane, court, park, or other public place, including but not limited to those described in Section 12.36.020(B). (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.020 Inspection and reinspection fees.
    Any person who receives a notice of violation or notice to abate nuisance, and who then fails to correct the violation or nuisance within twenty-one calendar days, shall pay a reinspection fee for all subsequent inspections by city personnel until the violation or nuisance is corrected.

    The amount of the fee shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. The fee is intended to compensate the city for administrative costs for excessive inspections, and not for enforcement of the laws. The fee shall be separate from and in addition to any fine or penalty for violation of the law.

    The notice of violation or notice to abate nuisance shall contain a prominent written statement that if the violation or nuisance is not corrected within twenty-one calendar days, the violator will be responsible for the costs of all subsequent inspections and abatement costs. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.030 Notice.
    A.  Whenever the director of community development or his or her representative finds that a condition prohibited by Section 8.16.010 exists in relation to any building or structure or upon any private property; or the director of public works or his or her representative finds that a condition prohibited by Section 8.16.010 exists on any street, alley, sidewalk or right-of-way, then he or his or her representative shall give or cause to be given, in the manner hereinafter provided, a notice to abate or remove such nuisance.

    B.   Notice shall be given by personally serving it upon the owner, owner’s agent, or person in control of the property, or by mailing the notice by depositing it in the United States mail at Pico Rivera, California, addressed to the owner of the property, at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll. Notice shall be deemed served five days after depositing it in the United States mail, unless the notice is returned as undelivered by the U.S. Post Office. Notice shall also be given, in the same manner, to all persons having a recorded interest in the property. The notice shall bear the date of personal service, or mailing. In those cases where a notice is returned by the U.S. Post Office as undelivered, service may be accomplished by posting the notice on the property. Service shall be deemed complete five days after posting the notice on the property. The notice shall be headed “NOTICE TO ABATE OR REMOVE NUISANCE” in twelve-point type or larger and shall direct abatement of the nuisance. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

 

NOTICE TO ABATE OR REMOVE NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

 

As the owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the owner’s agent, or the person in control of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon the property the following conditions, each of which constitute a public nuisance.

(List all conditions here including the Pico Rivera Code sections violated)

 

You are hereby notified to abate these nuisances by the removal of the condition(s) within 21 days from the date of mailing or posting of this notice, and upon your failure to do so the nuisances will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, and inspection fees assessed to you as owner/occupant of the land on which the nuisance is located.

 

APPEAL. As the person responsible for the land on which the nuisance is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten (10) days after the date of this NOTICE TO ABATE OR REMOVE NUISANCE, submit a written request for a hearing before the City Council. If an appeal request is not received by the City Clerk within the ten (10) day period, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the condition(s) constituting a nuisance and assess the costs of abatement, administrative fees and inspection fees, against your property. You may submit a sworn written statement within the ten (10) day period denying responsibility for the presence of the condition(s) on land, with your reasons for denial, and that statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility in time for consideration at the appeal hearing.

 

Notice mailed_____

(Date)_____City Official_____

Date this _____day of_____

Director of _____

City of Pico Rivera

 

(Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.040 Appeal.
    The finding of the director of community development or his or her representative or director of public works, or his or her representative (hereinafter in this Chapter 8.16 referred to as “Director”), is appealable to the city council by any party required to receive the notice to abate or remove nuisance. The appeal shall be in writing, and it shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the notice to abate or remove nuisance. The appeal hearing shall be noticed by the city to all parties required to receive the notice to abate or remove nuisance. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.045 Notice of hearing.
    Upon receiving a timely written request by the owner of the property, or upon recommendation by the director, a hearing shall be held by the city council on the question of abatement and removal of the public nuisance.

    The Director shall cause one copy of the hearing notice titled “Notice of Nuisance Abatement Hearing” in letters not less than one inch in height to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the nuisance exists not less than ten days prior to the hearing. In addition, the director shall not less than ten days prior to the hearing, cause one copy of the notice to be served, either in a manner required by law for service of summons or by proof of mailing. Service by mail shall be deemed effective five days after mailing, unless the notice is returned by the U.S. Post Office as undelivered. Service upon those whose hearing notice is returned by the Post Office shall be deemed effected by the posting of the property. Failure of any party to receive the notice required by this paragraph shall not affect the validity of any decision made at the appeal hearing. This notice shall be served upon: (1) the owner of the property; (2) the possessor or occupant or any person in apparent charge or control of the property; and (3) all parties who have a recorded interest in the property. The notice of hearing shall contain the following information:

    A.  The street and legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the nuisance is located,

    B.   The conditions constituting the nuisance and including the code section violated,

    C.   The date, hour, and place of the hearing,

    D.  A general statement that all interested parties who desire to be heard may appear before the city council to present evidence concerning the nuisance. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.050 Hearing on appeal.
    The city council shall:

    A.  Hear and consider all competent evidence offered by any person pertaining to the matters set forth in the report and notice of hearing;

    B.   Make written findings of fact to whether or not a public nuisance exists as defined in this chapter;

    C.   Make a written order based upon such findings that there is or is not a nuisance requiring abatement as defined in this chapter;

    D.  If the city council finds that a nuisances exists, the order shall state the street address of the property involved, the legal description of the property, the particulars constituting the nuisance, the work required to do be done, the time within which the work must be commenced after service of the order, and a reasonable time in which the work shall be completed;

    E.   The city clerk shall cause a copy of the order to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises involved, and serve a copy thereof in the manner prescribed herein for service of notice of hearing upon the person or persons required to received notice of the hearing;

    F.   The prevailing party may recover attorney’s fees but only those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney’s fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorney’s fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.060 Failure to comply.
    Should the director find and determine that the nuisance is not abated within the time specified by city council, the director shall cause the work of abatement to be performed as ordered. In such an event, the director shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in the abatement of the nuisance. Within twenty days of the completion of the work, the director shall cause to be posted on the property where the work was performed, a verified statement showing the costs of the abatement, as well as a notice of the time and place when and where the verified statement of costs will be submitted to the city council for approval and confirmation. A copy of the statement of costs and notice of the time and place for confirmation of the costs shall be posted as required by Section 8.16.045 and by depositing in the U.S. mail to the same persons required by Section 8.16.045 to receive notice of hearing, and an affidavit of such posting and mailing shall be filed with the city clerk. The notice of the hearing for confirmation of the costs shall state that the costs may be made a special assessment against the property at the hearing and that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for any unpaid, delinquent assessments. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.070 Hearing on costs of abatement.
    The hearing by the city council to consider the costs of abatement shall be held not sooner than ten days, nor later than sixty days, after the mailing of notice by the director. At the time fixed for the hearing of the statement of costs for the work of abatement, the city council shall consider the statement together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for doing the work and any other interested persons. The city council may make such revision, correction or modification of the statement as it deems just, and shall confirm the costs of abatement by resolution. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.080 Lien on property.
    Pursuant to the provision of Section 38773 of the Government Code of the state of California, the cost of the work and the expense of abatement of the nuisance shall be a lien against the property on which it was maintained. “Cost,” as used in this section, means the cost after deducting therefrom any consideration or price received, if any, for materials removed in the abatement of the nuisance. In the event the cost is not paid within five days after the decision of the city council concerning the statement of costs, the costs shall constitute a lien, as a special assessment under California Government Code 38773.5, upon the real property upon which the nuisance was abated. The lien shall continue until the amount has been paid, or until it is discharged. In the event of nonpayment, the director may cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder, a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF SPECIAL

ASSESSMENT LIEN UNDER

CALIFORNIA GOVERNMENT CODE § 38773.5

 

By the authority of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code and California Government Code sections 38771, 38773, and 38773.5 the City of Pico Rivera through the undersigned, caused a nuisance to be abated on the _____ day of _____, 20_____, on the real property described below. The abatement action followed proper notice and a public hearing. The confirmation of the costs followed proper notice and a public hearing. The costs were levied as a special assessment against the property by the Pico Rivera City Council by action recorded in its official minutes for the meeting of _____, 20_____. The special assessment in the amount of $_____ has not been paid. The City of Pico Rivera hereby claims a lien on the real property described below in the amount of the special assessment and in accord with Cal. Gov’t Code 38773.5

 

The real property upon which a lien is claimed is that certain parcel of land in the City of Pico Rivera, County of Los Angeles, State of California, particularly described as follows:

 

  (Insert legal description)

Date :____ CITY OF PICO RIVERA

 

  By_____

  Director of_____

 

    Prior to recording the special assessment lien, the city shall serve the “notice of special assessment lien” on the property owner of record on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. Service shall be by certified mail and shall specify that the property may be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid, delinquent assessments.

    In accord with California Government Code 38773.5, the tax collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property owner to receive notice. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.090 Collection of costs as special assessment.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state of California, the cost of abatement shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment.

    Confirmation of the statement or report shall be confirmation of the assessment, and shall be a lien on the property or parcel where the abatement was performed. After confirmation of the statement, a certified copy of the claim shall be filed with the county auditor on or before August 10th. The description of the parcel or parcels reported shall be those used for the parcels on the county assessor’s map book for the current year. The county auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. As an alternative method, the county tax collector, in his or her discretion, may collect the assessment without reference to the general taxes, by issuing separate bills and receipts for the assessment. Laws relating to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to such special assessment taxes.

    The director may receive the amount due on the abatement cost and issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the statement prior to August 1st of that current year. The city council may order refunded all or part of a tax paid pursuant to the provisions of this section if it finds that all or part of the taxes have been erroneously levied. A tax or part shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the city clerk on or before March 1st after taxes become due and payable. The claim shall be verified by the person who pays the tax. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.100 Emergencies.
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall bar the director or any other city officer having a duty to do so to summarily abate any nuisance prior to a hearing where the nuisance constitutes an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, and appropriate warrant(s) have been obtained. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

8.16.110 Remedies cumulative.
    The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative. Nuisances may be abated in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, the terms and provisions of state law, or any other law pertaining to the abatement of public nuisance. In addition, any nuisances initiated or maintained in violation of any provision of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall constitute a misdemeanor, and may be criminally prosecuted as such.

    If, within two years, two civil or criminal judgments are entered against one property owner finding that the owner is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this Chapter 8.16, except for conditions abated pursuant to Section 17980 of the Health and Safety Code, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement with Government Code Section 387737.7. (Ord. 946 § 1, 2000)

 

Article II. Administrative Citation Program
8.16.200 Penalties for code violations—Administrative citations.
    In addition to the penalties provided in this chapter and code, the city council finds than an appropriate method of enforcement for violations of the municipal code is an administrative citation program as authorized by Government Code Section 53069.4. The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil or any other legal remedy established by law which may be pursued to address violations of the municipal code or applicable state codes. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.210 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Enforcement officer” means any officer or employee with the authority to enforce the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, or applicable state code, including but not limited to a sheriff deputy, a city neighborhood improvement officer, a city parking enforcement officer, or a city public works inspector.

    B.   “Legal interest” means any interest that is represented by a deed of trust, quitclaim deed, mortgage, judgment lien, tax or assessment lien, mechanic’s lien or other similar instrument, which is recorded with the county recorder.

    C.   “Person,” “responsible person” or “responsible party” means any individual or entity who an enforcement officer determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a violation of this code, or applicable state codes or causing or maintaining a public nuisance. The terms “person,” “responsible person,” or “responsible party” include but are not limited to a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in real property or person in possession of real property, the president or other head of a corporation or a person authorized by a corporation to receive service of process in a civil action, a business owner or manager of a business. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.220 Violations subject to administrative penalty.
    The offenses described in the following chapter(s) and section(s) of this code are subject to the provisions of Sections 8.16.230 through 8.16.290:

    Title 8—Health and Safety.

    Title 15—Building and Construction.

    Title 18—Zoning. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.230 Administrative penalty.
    A.  For any and all offenses listed in Section 8.16.220, except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this section, an administrative penalty shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by an enforcement officer, and shall be payable directly to the city treasurer. Penalties shall be set forth in a penalty schedule established by resolution of the city council. A portion of each penalty shall constitute reimbursement for the city’s administrative expenses in issuing and processing the citation. Penalties shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. Payment of a penalty shall not excuse the failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. Each offense is subject to a separate penalty. More than one offense can be charged on an individual citation.

    B.   Pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4(a)(2), in the case of violations of the building, plumbing or electrical codes, or other similar structural or zoning issues, that do not create an immediate danger to health or safety, an administrative citation shall not be issued until after the responsible party has been provided notice and a reasonable opportunity to correct the violation, and has failed to do so.

    C.   Any person who violates the same provision, or fails to comply with the same requirement, of the sections of this code set forth in Section 8.16.220 more than three times within a twelve-month period shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each violation committed thereafter within that same twelve-month period.

    D.  Any person who violates or fails to comply with the sections of this code set forth in Section 8.16.220 and who possesses no photo identification or refuses to identify himself or herself to an enforcement officer, making it impossible to issue an administrative citation, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

    E.   Each and every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense for which a penalty may be imposed. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.240 Authority.
    Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, any enforcement officer as defined herein is hereby authorized to make arrests for violations of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code or other city ordinances, and may issue citations for misdemeanors and infractions pursuant to California Penal Code Title 3, Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5). Any enforcement officer may issue administrative citations for violation of those provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code which are subject to administrative penalty and which he or she has the duty to enforce. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.250 Service procedures for issuing administrative citations.
    An administrative citation in a form approved by the city manager may be issued to a responsible party by an enforcement officer for violation of those sections set forth in Section 8.16.220 as follows:

    A.  By Personal Service. The person on whom the citation is served is required to confirm receipt by signing a copy of the citation, but his or her failure to do so shall have no effect on the citation’s validity or enforceability, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person has committed a violation. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of personal service; or

 

    B.   By Regular First-Class Mail. Service shall be deemed effective when the citation is deposited in the United States mail;

    C.   If the enforcement officer is unable to serve the citation under subsections A or B in this section, a copy of the citation may be posted on any real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible party has a legal interest. Service shall be deemed effective on the date when the notice is posted;

    D.  If the enforcement officer cannot post the citation under subsections A, B or C in this section, the citation may be published in a newspaper likely to give actual notice to the party subject to the citation. The publication shall be once a week for four successive weeks in a newspaper published at least once a week. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.260 Contents of administrative citations.
    Administrative citations shall contain all of the following information:

    A.  The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the violation was observed by the enforcement officer;

    B.   The code section violated and a description of how the section was violated;

    C.   The action required to correct the violation and a time period in which such action must be completed;

    D.  The consequences of failing to correct the violation;

    E.   The amount of penalty imposed for the violation;

    F.   A statement explaining the time period by which the penalty shall be paid, acceptable methods of payment and late fees, if not timely paid;

    G.  Information regarding the procedure to contest the citation, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation;

    H.  The name and signature of the enforcement officer, and the signature of the responsible person if that person can be located and will sign the citation. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.270 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
    A.  Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible party must either:

    1.   Remedy the violation(s) within the time specified in the citation. The time to remedy the violation(s) shall be dependant on the nature of the violation and shall not be sooner than ten days after the issuance of the citation, unless otherwise provided herein, and shall not be more than thirty days after the issuance of the citation. Notwithstanding the preceding, any violation which poses an immediate danger to the public health and safety shall be remedied immediately, the failure of which, shall result in the assessment of all fees and penalties as authorized under this chapter. If the violation is of a nature that it can be remedied, and the responsible party remedies it within the time indicated on the citation, upon providing proof of correction to the enforcement officer the responsible party is required to pay only the administrative reimbursement portion of the penalty; or

    2.   Request an administrative hearing within ten days after service of the citation. If the responsible party chooses to contest the citation, the party shall do so no later than ten days after service of the citation. The request shall be submitted in writing as directed on the citation and shall include a statement of reasons why the citation is being contested. The request shall be accompanied by a deposit in the full amount of the penalty, inclusive of the administrative reimbursement portion, or written proof of financial hardship, which at a minimum must include tax returns, financial statements, bank account records, salary records or similar documentation demonstrating that the responsible party is unable to deposit the penalty. A hearing will not be scheduled unless the full amount of the penalty is deposited, or the city finds the responsible party financially unable to do so and waives the deposit requirement; or

    3.   Pay the penalty within thirty days after service of the citation. Payment of the penalty waives the responsible party’s right to the administrative hearing and appeal process pursuant to Section 8.16.280. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city.

    B.   Abatement of a violation shall not excuse the obligation of a responsible person to pay an administrative penalty or any other charges, fees or costs imposed as a result of the citation.

    C.   Payment of an administrative penalty shall not excuse or discharge a responsible person from the duty to immediately abate a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.280 Administrative hearings.
    A.  The city manager is authorized to promulgate procedural rules and regulations governing the civil administrative penalty citation and hearing process.

    B.   The administrative hearing shall be scheduled no later than ninety days after receipt of the request for a hearing to contest the citation. The responsible party will be notified in writing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing by first class mail of the date and time of the hearing.

    C.   The hearing shall be conducted by an administrative hearing officer appointed by the city manager to perform such hearings. The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer.

    D.  The responsible person may request one continuance of the hearing, but in no event may the hearing begin later than ninety days after receipt of the request for hearing from the responsible person.

    E.   The individual to whom an administrative citation is issued, or that person’s representative, may attend the hearing in person, or in lieu of attending may submit an appearance by written declaration on a form provided by the city for that purpose.

    1.   If the cited individual or his or her representative fails to attend the scheduled hearing, or fails to submit an appearance by written declaration on the form provided by the city for that purpose, he or she shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to an administrative hearing. Under these circumstances, the administrative hearing officer shall dismiss the challenge to the administrative citation, and shall issue a written notice to that effect. An individual whose challenge to an administrative citation is dismissed under this section shall be deemed not to have availed himself or herself of the right to an administrative hearing as provided in this chapter.

    2.   An individual who has been issued an administrative citation and who has requested an administrative hearing to challenge the citation as provided in this chapter may request in writing that his or her challenge to the citation be dismissed and the hearing canceled. Upon receipt of such request, the administrative hearing officer shall dismiss the challenge to the administrative citation, cancel the pending hearing, and issue a written notice to that effect. Any individual who requests the dismissal of a challenge to an administrative citation under this section shall be deemed never to have availed himself or herself of the right to an administrative hearing as provided in this chapter.

    F.   Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence in support of his or her case and to cross-examine witnesses. The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish a violation. The citation is prima facie evidence of the violation and the enforcement officer who issued the citation is not required to participate in the hearing. The administrative hearing officer shall use preponderance of the evidence as the standard of evidence in deciding the issues. Evidence shall be submitted under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

 

8.16.290 Decision of administrative hearing officer—Appeal process.
    A.  At the conclusion of the hearing or within fifteen days thereafter, the administrative hearing officer shall render a decision as follows:

    1.   Determine that the violation for which the citation was issued occurred, and impose a fine in the amount set forth in the penalty schedule, inclusive of the administrative reimbursement portion, and if the violation has not been corrected as of the date of the hearing, order correction of the violation; or

    2.   Determine that the violation for which the citation was issued occurred, but that the responsible party has introduced credible evidence of mitigating circumstances warranting imposition of a lesser penalty than that prescribed in the penalty schedule, or no penalty at all, and imposing such lesser fine, if any, and if the violation has not been corrected as of the date of the hearing, ordering that the violation be corrected; or

    3.   Determine that the violation for which the citation was issued did not occur or that the condition did not constitute a violation of the code.

    B.   The administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision entitled “Administrative Order” no later than fifteen days after the date on which the administrative hearing concludes. The administrative order shall be served upon the responsible person by first class mail, or if that method fails, by any one of the other methods set forth in Section 8.16.250. The administrative order shall become final on the date of mailing or other service, and shall notify the responsible person of his or her right to appeal as provided in subsection D of this section. The administrative order shall also (1) either set a deadline for compliance with its terms, in the event that the responsible person fails to file an appeal, in no event less than twenty days from the date of mailing or other service, or (2) if the hearing officer determines as described in subsection (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, and the responsible party has deposited the penalty with the city, order a partial or full refund of the deposit.

    C.   If the violation is a continuing violation of the city’s building, plumbing, electrical, or zoning code, the administrative order shall provide that the responsible person has not more than thirty days from mailing or other service of the administrative order to correct the violation.

    D.  Within twenty days after mailing or other service of the administrative order to the responsible person, he or she may seek review of the administrative order by filing a notice of appeal with the Superior Court. The responsible person shall serve upon the city clerk either in person or by first-class mail a copy of the notice of appeal. If the responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal, the administrative order shall be deemed final.

    E.   Failure to comply with a final administrative order directing the abatement of a continuing violation, is a misdemeanor. In that event, or if the city prevails in an appeal of such an order to the Superior Court pursuant to subsection H of this section, and the responsible person fails to comply with the final administrative order, the city may file a criminal misdemeanor action against the responsible person. Filing a criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the city from using any other legal remedy available to gain compliance with the administrative order. For purposes of this subsection, the term “continuing violation” shall mean a single, ongoing condition or activity in violation of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1051 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.20 ABANDONED VEHICLES
8.20.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    “Abandoned/inoperative vehicles” mean motor vehicles which are immobilized on any highway, public right-of-way, upon private or public property and which lack an engine, operative battery, transmission, one or more wheels or tires, doors, windshields, a license plate, or any part or equipment necessary to operate safely or legally on the highway; or has one or more flat tires; or which is mounted upon skids or jacks; or which displays registration tabs which have been elapsed for more than twelve months.

    “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

    “Owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

    “Owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

    “Public property” does not include “highway.”

    “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 874 § 1, 1995; Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.020 Abatement authority— City findings.
    In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660, of the Vehicle Code as amended, to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

    The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.030 Exceptions to chapter application.
    A.  This chapter shall not apply to:

    1.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

    2.   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junkyard, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

    B.   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance, as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code, and this chapter. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.040 Administration and enforcement.
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager or designee. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his or her deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of vehicle, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1027 § 1, 2007; Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.050 Abatement—Right of entry.
    When the city council has contracted with a tow company or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.060 Abatement authority—Procedure.
    Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1027 § 2, 2007; Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.070 Intent to remove—Notice.
    A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following form:

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

(Name and address of owner of the land)

 

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 8.20.020 et seq. of Pico Rivera Municipal Code has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle registered to __________________, license number _______________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.20 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

 

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle or said parts thereof, within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. Upon your failure to do so, you will be assessed a fee of [insert applicable fee per adopted schedule]. If the vehicle is not abated within 20 days from the date of mailing of this notice, the vehicle will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, will be assessed to you as owner of the land on which said vehicle or parts is located.

 

As owner of the land on which said vehicle or parts is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing. If such a request is not received by the city manager or designee within such 10-day period, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) after 20 days have elapsed since the first notice as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.

 

Notice Mailed_____(date)

 

City Manager or Designee___________

 

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

[Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—notice should be given to both if different]

 

As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of [description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.], you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Section 8.20.020 et seq. of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle at [describe location and whether it is public or private property] and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.20 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

 

You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. If said vehicle is not abated within this period, you will be assessed a fee of [insert applicable fee per adopted schedule].

 

As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing. If such a request is not received by the city manager or designee within such 10-day period, or if said vehicle is not abated within 20 days from the initial notice, the city manager or designee shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) and to assess all costs for its removal without a hearing.

 

Notice Mailed_____(date)

 

City Manager or Designee ________

 

(Ord. 1027 § 3, 2007; Ord. 836 § 1, 1993)

 

8.20.080 Notice to remove—Public hearing.
    A.  Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or the land received by the city manager or designee within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the city manager or designee on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

    B.   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his or her presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, at least ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicles, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove or if the vehicle is not abated in that period, the owner of the vehicle shall be assessed a fee of (insert applicable fee per adopted schedule) and the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 1027 § 4, 2007; Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.090 Public hearing—Procedures.
    A.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city manager or designee, who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on such private or public property. The city manager or designee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing, or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle or parts thereof on the land, with his or her reasons for such denial.

    B.   The city manager or designee may impose such conditions and take such other action as he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He or she may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city manager or designee may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicles, if available at site.

    C.   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city manager or designee shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicles is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

    D.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land, but does not appear, or if any interested party makes a written presentation to the city manager or designee but does not appear, he or she shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 1027 § 5, 2007; Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.100 Declaration of nuisance—Appeal.
    A.  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the city manager or designee by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager or designee within five days after his or her decision.

    B.   Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order, or take other action deemed appropriate.

    C.   The clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 8.20.070.

    D.  In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 1027 § 6, 2007; Ord. 860 § 1, 1993)

 

8.20.110 Removal of vehicle or parts.
    Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision, if such notice is required by Section 8.20.070, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.120 Notice to state.
    Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.130 Removal—Administrative costs.
    The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof, under this chapter. (Ord. 836 § 1, 1993)

 

8.20.140 Cost assessment—Attorney’s fees.
    A.  If the administrative costs and cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.20.060 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefor, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 or Section 25845 of Government Code, and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. Alternatively, the city may pursue abatement liens to recover such costs.

    B.   The prevailing party may recover attorney’s fees incurred in any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to abate and remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and for abatement of public nuisance, but only those individual actions or proceedings in which the city elects, at the initiation of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees. In no action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding shall an award of attorney’s fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 1027 § 7, 2007; Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.150 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
    This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.160 Violation—Overtime vehicle storage.
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property, not including highways, within the city for a period in excess of five days, unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

 

8.20.170 Violation—Failure to remove vehicle.
    It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law, where such state law is applicable. (Ord. 860 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 8.24 ABANDONED WELLS AND REFRIGERATORS
8.24.010 Responsibility for abandoned wells.
    Every person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns or controls any abandoned water well or abandoned oil well, and every person owning or having possession of any premises on which any abandoned well is located or exists, shall cap or otherwise close the mouth of or entrance to such well in such a manner as to prevent persons from falling therein, and in such a manner that such capping or covering cannot be removed by accident or inadvertence, or such person shall fill such a well. (Prior code § 4500.1)

 

8.24.020 Wells—Capping or filling requirements.
    No person shall abandon any water or oil well without capping or covering the same so that the cap cannot be removed, unless such well is filled with dirt or other solid material. (Prior code § 4500)

 

8.24.030 Wells—City to perform work when.
    Whenever any person fails or refuses to perform any act required by Section 8.24.010 and 8.24.020, the city may itself cap, cover or fill such a well. It is not necessary, however, to follow the provisions of this section as a condition precedent to any criminal prosecution for violation of the aforementioned sections. (Prior code § 4500.2)

 

8.24.040 Abandoned refrigerators or boxes.
    No chest or box with more than one and one-half cubic feet in capacity with an attached latch shall be discarded or abandoned, including refrigerators and iceboxes. (Prior code § 4502)

Chapter 8.28 ALARM SYSTEMS
8.28.010 Title for citation.
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Burglar and Robbery Alarm Ordinance.” (Prior code § 6430)

 

8.28.020 Findings.
    The city council finds:

    A.  The majority of burglar and holdup alarms to which law enforcement responds are false. Such false alarms result in an enormous waste of manpower and there are such a large percentage of false alarms as may lull law enforcement officers into a sense of false security. In responding to an alarm, they will probably assume it is a false alarm and may be wounded or killed by criminals at the location.

    B.   Alarm systems which automatically and directly dial any emergency phone number are very prone to be activated by current failures or other events having no connection with criminal activity, and tie up such emergency phones, making them unavailable to receive genuine emergency calls.

    C.   The danger to citizens through emergency response created by false alarms is unnecessary and hazardous.

    D.  The unnecessary waste of tax dollars through responses to false alarms must be eliminated.

    E.   False burglar and holdup alarms have created conditions causing danger and annoyance to the general public. (Prior code § 6431)

 

8.28.030 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the words defined in this section are used as so defined, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

    A.  “Alarm system” means any device, whether known as a burglary, robbery or intrusion alarm, direct-dial telephone device, audible or silent alarm, or by any other name, which is used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or to signal the commission of an unlawful act. It shall include those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only, are supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and all otherwise known as “proprietary alarm systems”; auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in this definition.

    B.   “Alarm owner” means the person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use, by his or her agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system.

    C.   “Audible alarm” means a device designed to notify persons in the immediate vicinity of the protected premises by emission of an audible sound of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act.

    D.  “Direct-dial device” means a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of an alarm system, automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response.

    E.   “False alarm” means an alarm signal activated by causes other than the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act which the alarm system is designed to detect. An alarm signal activated by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not subject to the control of the alarm owner shall not constitute a false alarm. (Prior code § 6432 — 6437)

 

8.28.040 Direct-dial devices prohibited.
    No person shall use any alarm system which is equipped with a direct-dial device, and which, when activated, automatically dials any telephone number in any office of the sheriff. (Prior code § 6438)

 

8.28.050 Audible alarm restrictions.
    For every audible alarm, the alarm owner thereof shall post the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or service during any hour of the day or night during which the audible alarm is operated. An audible alarm shall terminate its operation or the audible alarm shall automatically reset within thirty minutes of its being activated. (Prior code § 6439)

 

8.28.060 False alarms—Prohibited when.
    A person shall not knowingly turn in a false alarm. This section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the sheriff. (Prior code § 6440)

 

8.28.070 False alarms—Report of repairs.
    After any false alarm, the alarm owner shall, upon request by the sheriff, submit a written report to the sheriff describing actions taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This report shall be submitted within ten days of request by the sheriff. (Prior code § 6441)

 

8.28.080 Nuisance alarms.
    An alarm owner shall not operate an alarm system which generates more than three false alarms in any twelve-month period. (Prior code § 6442)

 

8.28.090 Exemptions from chapter application.
    The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. (Prior code § 6443)

 

8.28.100 Violation—Notice and corrective action.
    Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted in the same manner as any other misdemeanor. However, upon the first violation of Section 8.28.080 of this chapter, the sher-

iff shall serve a written notice on the violator describing the violation and specifying that the causes of the violation shall be corrected within ten days of the date of service of the written notice. No further action shall be taken, provided that the sheriff determines that the causes of the violation have been removed or fully corrected within the time period specified in this section. (Prior code § 6445)

 

8.28.110 Violation—Penalty.
    Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 6444)

Chapter 8.32 EXCAVATIONS
8.32.010 Cover, fence and gate requirements.
    A.  Every person in possession of land within the city, either as owner, purchaser under contract or otherwise, fee holder, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which there is situated any man-made excavation, including, but not intended to exclude, other man-made excavations thereby, oil-well sumps, quarries, ditches or mines, where such man-made excavation is three feet or more in depth, shall either cover it or shall erect a fence or other solid structure not less than five feet in height above the underlying ground, with no opening therein, other than doors or gates, larger than three inches square.

    B.   This section shall not apply to any man-made excavation during the course of the construction of the same, where the same is being excavated in accordance with a permit issued for that purpose or a related purpose under any other chapter of this code, provided the provisions of such permit and said chapter are fully complied with at all times. (Prior code § 4501)

Chapter 8.36 FIREWORKS
Note
*   Prior history: Prior code §§ 3105—3106 as amended by Ords. 692, 742, 904, 926, 981, 1023, 1024, 1044 and 1045.

 

8.36.010 Purpose.
    This chapter shall govern the sale, offer for sale, the use, ignition, discharge of, firing or possession of fireworks within the city. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section.

    “Dangerous fireworks” mean the fireworks listed and defined in California Health and Safety Code Sections 12505 and 12561 and the relevant sections of Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Fireworks” means any device, container, or vessel containing chemical elements and chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and producing audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effects which are useful as pyrotechnic devices or for entertainment. These items include, but are not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, rockets, Daygo bombs, sparklers, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs, and fireworks kits. The term “fireworks” includes both “dangerous fireworks” and “safe and sane fireworks.”

    “Fireworks stand” means any building, counter, or other structure of a temporary nature used in the sale, the offering for sale, or display for sale of “safe and sane fireworks.”

    “Fireworks wholesaler” and “fireworks distributor” means a person, other than an importer, exporter, or manufacturer selling only to wholesalers, who sells safe and sane fireworks to a retailer or any other person for resale. It also includes any person who sells dangerous fireworks to public display permittees.

    “Permittee” means a person or organization to which a permit has been issued pursuant to this chapter.

    “Person” means any person, partnership, organization, firm, corporation, association or any combination thereof, or any city, county, city and county, and state, and shall include any of their employees and authorized representatives.

    “Property” means any private property, rented residential premises, or rented commercial residences; including, but not limited to, a home, yard, field, apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, other dwelling unit, a hall or meeting room, commercial property, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether or not occupied as a dwelling, party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation.

    “Response costs” means those reasonable and necessary costs directly incurred by public safety personnel for a response to an illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and include the cost of providing law enforcement, firefighting, and/or other emergency services at the scene of the illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, including, but not limited to: (1) salaries and benefits of public safety personnel for the amount of time spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks, and the administrative costs attributable to the response(s); and (2) the cost of any medical treatment to or for any public safety personnel injured responding to, remaining at or leaving the scene of the illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks; and (3) the cost of repairing any public safety equipment or property damage, and the cost of the use of any such equipment, in responding to, remaining at, or leaving the scene of an illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks.

    “Retail sales permit” means a permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter authorizing the display for sale and sale of safe and sane fireworks.

    “Safe and sane fireworks” or “state-approved fireworks” means any fireworks that do not come within the definition of “dangerous fireworks” or “exempt fireworks. All safe and sane fireworks shall be labeled with the safe and sane fireworks seal as authorized by the state fire marshal.

    “Social host” means a person or persons with a right of possession of the residence or other private property at which illegal fireworks are sold, offered to be sold, possessed, stored, used, ignited or discharged including but not limited to: (1) any owner of the residence or other private property—meaning the record owner of the title to property as of the time of the possession, storage, sale, use, ignition or discharge, wherever that person or entity resides at that time; (2) a tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property at the time when the illegal fireworks are possessed, stored, sold, used, ignited, or discharged; (3) the person(s) in charge of the residence or other private property at the time when illegal fireworks are possessed, stored, sold, used, ignited or discharged; (4) the person(s) who organizes, supervises, officiates, conducts or controls the gathering or any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such gatherings where illegal fireworks are possessed. A social host need not be present at the time illegal fireworks are possessed, stored, sold, used, ignited or discharged for the city to impose penalties. Prior knowledge of the possession, storage, sale, use, ignition or discharge is not a prerequisite to a finding that any specific individual is a social host as defined by this section.

    “State Fireworks Law” means the laws and regulations set forth under the California Health and Safety Code Sections 12500 et seq. and relevant sections of Title 19 of the California Code of Regulations, as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.030 General prohibition against possession, use, or sale of fireworks.
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall possess, offer for sale, sell, use, display, explode, ignite, or discharge any fireworks within the city except as provided under Section 8.36.040. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.040 Exceptions.
    A.  Safe and Sane Fireworks. Display for sale and sale of safe and sane fireworks. The display for sale and sale of safe and sane fireworks is only permitted during the period beginning at 12:00 p.m. on July 1st and ending at 12:00 a.m. on July 5th of the same year. The retail display and sale of safe and sane fireworks without a retail sales permit as required under Section 8.36.100 shall be unlawful.

    B.   Public Displays of Fireworks. Public displays of fireworks may be permitted where authorized pursuant to a permit for supervised public display by a public agency or a nonprofit civic organization. Such public displays shall be subject to all rules and regulations pertaining thereto in the Fire Code. No such public display shall be conducted until a permit has been granted by the fire department and the city manager or designee. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the public display of fireworks, as authorized in this section; subject to the terms and provisions of the State Fireworks Law. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

   

8.36.050 Social host liability.
    A.  It is unlawful for any social host to allow, by invitation or consent, the possession, offer for sale, sale, use, display, explosion, ignition, or discharge any fireworks within the city except as provided under Section 8.36.040 on his or her property or other private property. Such a violation subjects any and all social host(s) to penalties for violation of this chapter as prescribed in Section 8.36.170 of this code.

    B.   In the event that a juvenile hosts a gathering at a property or other private property at which illegal possession, offer for sale, sale, use, display, explosion, ignition or discharge of fireworks occurs, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severable liable for any penalties incurred pursuant to this section.

    C.   In the event that a juvenile and/or his or her parents are found to be responsible under subsection B of this section, community service hours in lieu of, or in addition to, penalties under this section may be granted at the discretion of the city attorney or city prosecutor. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.060 Wholesale permit—Required.
    A.  It is unlawful to engage in the activity or business of fireworks wholesaler or fireworks distributor within the city without first obtaining a wholesale permit from the city. The city may grant a fireworks wholesale permit for the possession and wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks within the city to any person licensed by the State Fire Marshal as a manufacturer, importer, exporter, or wholesaler of safe and sane fireworks. Any such permit shall be upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter and comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter.

    B.   The term of the fireworks wholesale permit shall be twelve months and may be renewed annually. The city does not guarantee that each and every applicant submitting a wholesale permit or an application for renewal will be granted a permit. Applicants will be reviewed on a first-come, first-served basis. Applications for a fireworks wholesale permit or an application for renewal shall be filed with the city manager or designee on or before the second Tuesday in February of each year on a form approved by the city and with the application fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.070 Wholesale permit—Application.
    Any application for a wholesale permit to engage in the possession and wholesale distribution of safe and sane fireworks in the city shall be in writing on a form approved by the city and shall conform with the following:

    A.  The application shall be in writing, verified and accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and a refundable fireworks stand removal deposit in amounts to be established by resolution of the city council;

    B.   The application shall be filed with the city manager or designee on or before the second Tuesday in February of the year in which such permit is to be effective;

    C.   The application shall be accompanied by a statement that, prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall submit to the city certificates of product liability, general liability and property damage insurance in an aggregate amount of not less than two million dollars. Such policy shall be with a corporate insurance company and in such form as shall be approved by the city and shall name the city, its officers, and employees as additional insureds;

    D.  The application shall contain such other information as may be required by the city manager or designee;

    E.   The application shall set forth the name, principal place of business and telephone number of the applicant, its state fireworks license number or numbers, the names and addresses of its principal partners, owners or officers, and the name, residence address and capacity of the person signing the application;

    F.   The application shall contain a statement that fireworks will not be furnished, sold, distributed or placed in the possession of any person or organization in the city, or for sale, use or distribution in the city, unless such person or organization holds a valid and unrevoked retail sales permit from the city to so possess, sell, use, or distribute such fireworks as required under Section 8.36.090. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.080 Fee imposed upon wholesalers and distributors.
    A.  Each fireworks wholesaler or distributor providing safe and sane fireworks to organizations or persons licensed under this chapter shall pay an annual cost recovery fee to the city in an amount established by resolution of the city council;

    B.   The fee required by this section shall be payable within five days from the date that the city manager or designee notifies applicant of permit approval;

    C.   No fireworks wholesaler or distributor may supply, offer for sale or sell fireworks, unless and until the fee imposed by this section has been paid to the city and a wholesale permit has been issued by the city. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.090 Retail sales permit—Required.
    Except as provided herein, no person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks of any kind in the city without having first applied for and received a retail sales permit. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.100 Retail sales permit—Application and fee.
    All applications for permits to sell at retail “safe and sane fireworks” shall be in writing on a form furnished by the city manager or designee, shall comply with and be governed by the provisions of the State Fireworks Law, and in addition shall be governed by the following:

    A.  Applications for the Fourth of July celebration shall be made on or before the second Tuesday in February of each year.

    B.   Each application shall be accompanied by the requisite city business license fee.

    C.   Each application shall be accompanied by an application processing fee established by resolution of the city council.

    D.  Each application shall set forth the following:

    1.   The name of the applicant and the name of each of the principal officers of the applicant, with the residence and business address and telephone number of each;

    2.   The date of organization of the applicant;

    3.   The length of its continual existence;

    4.   Its nature, purposes, and activities;

    5.   A roster listing each member of the applicant organization;

    6.   A statement whether or not the personnel who will be inside the stand at any time, whether as salesman or otherwise, will be adult members of the applicant organization or their immediate family members;

    7.   The proposed location of the fireworks stand applied for, and whether or not the applicant has permission to locate a fireworks stand at such location;

    8.   The name and address of the owner of the proposed location;

    9.   A statement that the person signing the application has read and is familiar with the terms of this chapter regarding the nature of the permit granted, the location of fireworks stands, and the permitted times of storage and sale of fireworks at such locations;

    10. A statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any retail sales permit granted to it and to account to the city for transactions engaged in pursuant to the permit and for the use and distribution of the funds realized from the holding of such permit.

    E.   Every application shall include a notice of determination from the Internal Revenue Service or the California Franchise Tax Board or other official documentation showing that the organization is qualified and in good standing as one of the nonprofit organizations eligible to receive a retail sales permit pursuant to Section 8.36.110.

    F.   Organizations affiliated with a qualified organization shall also provide a copy of the authorization letter from the qualified organization as required by Section 8.36.110.

    G.  The city shall refer all such applications to the fire department for a report. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.110 Retail sales permit—Qualifications.
    The following qualifications must be met in addition to the other requirements set forth in this chapter, or set forth in the State Fireworks Law, before a retail sales permit may be issued:

    A.  No organization shall be eligible for a retail sales permit unless such organization is a nonprofit organization or corporation organized primarily for veterans, patriotic, social welfare, civic betterment, charitable or educational purposes and qualified under Sections 501(a), 501(c)(3) through (6) (if the organization is a chamber of commerce), (7), (8), (10), (19) or (23) of the Internal Revenue Code, corresponding provision of the California Revenue and Taxation Code or is a public school. A PTA, booster club, or similar organizations (groups) affiliated with a qualified organization shall be eligible to receive a permit if the qualified organization provides a written statement that the group is affiliated with the qualified organization and is authorized by the qualified organization to obtain a retail sales permit.

    B.   Every retail sales permittee shall furnish proof of commercial general liability insurance in an amount of not less than two million dollars to include products and complete operations. Such policy shall name the city, its officers and employees as additional insureds, and shall be in a form approved by the city.

    C.   Every retail sales permittee shall furnish a copy of a reseller’s or temporary reseller’s permit issued by the California State Board of Equalization.

    D.  Each organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place in the city, and must have been organized and established in the city for a minimum of one year continually preceding the filing of the application for the permit. In addition, such organizations must have a bona fide membership of at least twenty-five members at least forty percent of whom shall reside within the city, or maintain places of business or be employed in the city.

    E.   There shall be not more than one fireworks stand per permittee.

    F.   The city council declares its intention to issue only a limited number of permits in order to prevent an undue concentration of fireworks stands. The maximum number of permits to be issued shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.120 Retail sales permit—Issuance.
    A.  Upon the receipt of the reports from the fire department for all applications timely received by the city, the city council shall determine which of the applicants meet the qualifications of this chapter.

    B.   The city council shall issue permits to applicants determined to be qualified, but the number of retail sales permits issued shall not exceed the number set by resolution of the city council.

    C.   Permits will be issued to qualified applicants on a first-come, first-served basis.

 

    D.  Each applicant issued a permit under this chapter shall participate in the city’s designated fireworks safety education program as detailed by the city and shall contribute a portion of its sales to such safety education program(s) as determined by the city.

    E.   Retail sales permits issued under this chapter are non-transferable and may not be used, sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to any person or entity not listed on the permit. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.130 Stands—Operator restrictions.
    A.  No person other than the permittee, its members, or representatives, shall operate the stand for which the permit is issued, or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of such stand. No person under the age of eighteen years may sell fireworks.

    B.   No person shall be paid any consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at such stand.

    C.   An adult over the age of twenty-one years must be on the premises and in charge of operation of the stand at all times while fireworks are stored or for sale at the stand.

    D.  Holders of permits for the retail sale and distribution of fireworks shall be permitted to purchase from only one wholesaler, licensed by the city, during each calendar year, and shall file written notice of the wholesaler selected with the city manager or designee on or before the second Tuesday in February of each year; provided, however, that in the event the permit of a wholesaler is revoked, the retail sales permittees previously purchasing from such wholesale permittee in such year may make further purchases from a different wholesale permittee.

    Retail permittees may sell any leftover supply of permitted fireworks purchased by such retail sales permittee in the prior year from the same or any other then-licensed wholesale permittee. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.140 Stands—Location and construction.
    All retail sales of “safe and sane fireworks” shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:

    A.  No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building, nor within one hundred feet of any place where flammable liquids are dispensed or stored.

    B.   Fireworks stands, as temporary structures, shall not be subject to the terms and provisions of the building code; provided, however, that all such stands shall otherwise comply with the Pico Rivera Municipal Code and are constructed in a manner which will reasonably insure the safety of the attendance of patrons.

    C.   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of four hundred square feet.

    D.  Each stand must have at least two exits, and each stand in excess of forty feet in length must have at least three exits spaced approximately equal distance apart; provided, however, that in no case shall the distance between the exits exceed twenty-four feet.

    E.   Each stand shall be equipped with two, two-and-one-half gallon soda-and-acid or equivalent type fire extinguishers, in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire.

 

    F.   The stand shall not be delivered to the location earlier than June 20th prior to the date the sale of fireworks can commence pursuant to Section 8.36.040 and 8.36.150. Delivery of the fireworks stand prior to this time will subject the holder of the wholesale permit to a penalty to be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.150 Stands—Rules and regulations.
    A.  A stand shall not be located within five hundred feet of another fireworks stand.

    B.   All weeds and combustible material, not including structures, shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least one hundred feet surrounding the stand.

    C.   “No Smoking” signs shall be prominently displayed in four-inch letters both inside and outside the fireworks stand.

    D.  Each stand must have an adult watchman in attendance and in charge thereof when the stand is not being used for the sale or dispensing of fireworks. Watchmen shall not sleep inside the fireworks stand.

    E.   The sale of fireworks for the Fourth of July celebration shall not begin before 12:00 p.m. on July 1st and shall not continue past 12:00 a.m. on July 5th.

    F.   All unsold stock and accompanying litter shall be removed from the location by 12:00 p.m. on the second calendar day following expiration of the permit.

    G.  The fireworks stand shall be removed from the temporary location no later than the fourteenth day following expiration of the permit, and all accompanying property, materials, and litter shall be cleared from the location by such time and date.

    H.  No person or permittee shall sell or transfer any fireworks to a person who is under eighteen years of age. No person selling fireworks shall be under eighteen years of age.

    I.    For the Fourth of July celebration, all permits and licenses shall expire at 12:01 a.m. July 5th of each year; except, when the fourth day of July falls on a Sunday, such permits and licenses shall expire at 11:59 p.m. July 4th. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.160 Tie-in location for fireworks stands prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person to sell, provide, or distribute fireworks to a retail seller of safe and sane fireworks, on the condition that the retail seller of such fireworks shall sell or distribute such fireworks only from a fireworks stand location in which the provider has any interest, option or lease, or in any other manner to restrict the location of such fireworks stand. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

 

8.36.170 Penalties for violation.
    A.  Misdemeanor or Infraction. Any person in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction at the discretion of the city attorney or city prosecutor and punished as prescribed in Chapter 1.20. The person shall also be responsible for all expenses, costs, and fees associated with the safe disposal of all confiscated fireworks.

    B.   Administrative Fines and Penalties.

    1.   Excluding violations of subsection (B)(2) of this section, any person or entity who is in violation of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative fine or fines in the amounts as follows: one thousand dollars for the first violation; one thousand two hundred fifty dollars for the second viola-

tion; and one thousand five hundred dollars for the third or any additional violation of the same provision.

    2.   Any person or entity that possesses, uses, stores, sells, or displays for sale less than twenty-five pounds of dangerous fireworks shall be subject to administrative fine or fines in the amounts as follows: one thousand dollars for the first violation; two thousand dollars for the second violation; and three thousand dollars for the third or any additional violation of the same provision. Any person or entity that possesses, uses, stores, sells or displays more than twenty-five pounds of dangerous fireworks is subject to fines and penalties under California Health and Safety Code Sections 12700 et seq.

    3.   Any person or entity that allows, permits, aids, or abets, any violation of this chapter by another person, shall be subject to an administrative fine or fines in the amounts as follows: one thousand dollars for the first violation; one thousand two hundred fifty dollars for the second; and one thousand five hundred dollars for the third or any additional violation of the same provision.

    4.   Any violation of this chapter may be summarily abated by law enforcement by all reasonable means. A person who has been issued a second administrative citation and/or written notice of violation of this chapter may be liable for response costs incurred in responding to the illegal discharge or illegal storage of fireworks. All such persons shall be jointly and severally liable for response costs incurred in the response and all subsequent responses. If a person is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile and the juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the response costs incurred pursuant to this chapter. To incur liability for response costs imposed by this chapter, a person need not be present at the event that causes the response giving rise to the imposition of response costs. This chapter therefore imposes vicarious as well as direct liability upon a person.

    5.   Administrative fines shall be subject to the procedures established in Chapter 8.16 of this code.

    6.   The remedies set forth in this chapter are in addition to all other legal and equitable remedies, administrative, criminal or civil, that may be pursued by the city to address violations of this chapter including, as an alternative to the issuance of an administrative fine pursuant to this section, and in his or her sole discretion, the city attorney may criminally prosecute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1132 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 8.40 NOISE
8.40.010 Unnecessary noises prohibited.
    A.  No person shall make, cause or suffer, or permit to be made, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, any unnecessary noises or sounds which are physically annoying to persons of ordinary sensitiveness, or which are so harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time or place as to occasion physical discomfort to the inhabitants of any neighborhood.

    B.   When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held, and the city’s law enforcement agency is required to respond to the scene in response to citizen complaints, and the senior peace officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, then that senior peace officer shall notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where the assemblage exists, and/or the person responsible for said assemblage, that such person or persons, or in the case of a minor, the parents and/or guardians of such minor, shall be held personally liable for the cost of providing additional law enforcement personnel on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided by the law enforcement agency in response to such assemblage. Such person or persons shall be given a first warning, in the form of notification by the senior peace officer that the first police response shall be deemed to be the normal police services provided. Such notice may include a written notice, receipt of which is signed by the owner, responsible person or person in charge. The police personnel necessarily utilized after such first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided and the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where such assemblage occurs, and/or the person responsible for the cost of such special security assignment in an amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the city. The cost of such special security assignment shall include damage to city property and/or injuries to city personnel. A fee charged will not be in excess of five hundred dollars for a single incident. The city reserves its legal options to elect any other legal remedies when said costs or damage exceed five hundred dollars.

    C.   The city council declares that loud or unruly assemblages described in subsection B of this section are a public nuisance. The cost of abating such public nuisance, including police services, may be made a lien upon the property where the nuisance is located, and/or collected as a special assessment against the property at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected. Prior to the recordation of the lien, or the collection of the charge in the manner of a municipal tax, the property owner shall be entitled to a hearing before the city council upon at least ten days prior written notice. Notice shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1. (Ord. 873 § 1, 1995; prior code § 4201)

 

8.40.020 Motor vehicle operation—Restrictions.
    A person shall not operate any motor vehicle (including any motorcycle, trail bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, go-cart or jeep), or the motor thereof, on any vacant lot, parking lot, vacant property or acreage so as to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood by noise, dust, smoke or fumes caused by such motor vehicle. (Prior code § 4201.1)

 

8.40.030 Motor vehicle operation—Exceptions.
    The provisions of Section 8.40.020 do not apply to any act prohibited by Section 372 of the Penal Code, or prohibited or expressly permitted by any statute of the state. (Prior code § 4201.2)

Chapter 8.44 PARKS
8.44.010 Rules and regulations.
    Whenever rules and regulations in addition to the provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code (and where not in conflict with the same) are deemed necessary by the superintendent or manager of any park or recreation area, such rules and regulations may be adopted by the superintendent and posted in accordance with Section 8.44.050 of this chapter, and shall thereafter be in full force and effect, provided that such rules and regulations have been submitted to and approved by the city council. (Prior code § 4240(l))

 

8.44.020 Hours of operation—Violations.
    A.  No person, other than authorized personnel of the city, shall enter on, remain in or visit any part or portion of any park or recreation area under the jurisdiction of the city between the hours of ten p.m. and one-half hour before sunrise of any day, unless an attendant or supervisor is present.

    B.   No person shall remain on the premises of any park and recreation area within the jurisdiction of the city when asked to leave by a law enforcement officer or authorized personnel of the city.

    C.   Any person going on, remaining on, entering or visiting the aforementioned premises in violation of the foregoing, or any person refusing to leave the aforementioned premises after being so asked to do so is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 4240(m))

 

8.44.030 Unlawful activities—Designated.
    Within the limits of any park or recreation area within the city, it is unlawful for any person to do or commit, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be done or committed any of the following:

    A.  To throw upon, along or across any public highway, street, roadway or driveway any missile capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property, or to throw such missile at or toward, or in the vicinity of any vehicle standing or moving along, upon or across any section, highway, street, roadway or driveway;

    B.   To take or otherwise transport, or have in possession therein, or to fire or discharge therein, any firearm, firecracker, rocket, torpedo, fireworks, gun or slingshot;

    C.   To pick, dig, move, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub or bloom, flower, or any portion thereof, growing therein;

    D.  To cut, break, injure, deface or destroy any structure, apparatus, equipment or property therein, building, monument, sign, fence or bench, or any portion thereof, or to make or place thereon, or any portion thereof, any mark, writing or printing, or to attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device;

    E.   To throw, place or dispose of any garbage, refuse or can in any place therein other than into a garbage can or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose, or to throw, place or dispose of any waste paper or refuse in any place other than into an incinerator, or into some can or receptacle maintained therein for that purpose;

    F.   To bring or maintain therein any dog or cat, unless such dog or cat is kept at all times under a leash under full control of its owner or custodian;

    G.  To disturb the peace or quiet therein by any undue loud or unusual noise, or by tooting, blowing or sounding any automobile siren, horn or signal, or any noisemaking device, or any tumultuous conduct, or to use any vulgar, profane or indecent language therein;

    H.  To solicit in any manner or for any purpose therein, or to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares or merchandise therein, or to distribute, or pass out any handbill, advertising matter or literature therein, unless such act is done pursuant to concession granted by the city;

    I.    To enter any swimming pool, plunge, park or other recreation area when refused admission by the person or persons in charge thereon, when the person seeking to enter or who has entered has any contagious disease, infectious condition such as colds, ringworm, or fever, or is infected with foot infections, skin lesions, carbuncles, pimples, inflamed eyes, ear discharges, excessive sunburn, abrasions which have not healed, or a person who is wearing corn plasters, bunion pads, adhesive tape, rubber bandages or other type of bandage, or who is afflicted with any conditions which have the appearance of being infectious or dangerous to the other persons using such pool, plunge or park or recreation area. In addition, no person shall enter any pool, plunge, park or recreation area when refused admission for other reasons by the person or persons in charge thereof because of a condition on said person who seeks to enter or who has entered, which may endanger the public health and safety. (Prior code § 4240, (a) — (i))

 

8.44.040 Unlawful activities—Pool areas.
    It is unlawful for any person to chew, drink, swallow or use food, drink, gum or tobacco in the pool area, or to unnecessarily expectorate, spout water or engage in roughness or rowdiness within the pool area of any pool, plunge or park or recreation area within the city. (Prior code § 4240(j))

 

8.44.050 Violation—Authority to evict persons.
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations of the city for the pool, park, or any recreation area operated or maintained by the city where the rules or regulations have been posted. The city-designated representative shall have the authority to evict any person from the pool, park or recreation area for violation of any provisions of this chapter, or other provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, or of any rules and regulations adopted by the city, or the director of parks and recreation. (Ord. 694 § 12, 1985; prior code § 4240(k))

Chapter 8.48 SMOKING
8.48.010 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply to this chapter.

    “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, that can be used to deliver an inhale dose of nicotine or other substances. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such devices whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, and electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor.

    “Smoke” means the gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the byproducts, except when the combusting or vaporizing material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term “smoke” includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors, marijuana smoke, and crack cocaine smoke.

    “Smoking” means engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for example: possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar, an operating electronic cigarette or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or lighting or igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, or a cigarette of any kind.

    “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, and any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any cessation product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco dependence. (Ord. 1079 § 5, 2013; Ord. 868 § 2, 1995)

 

8.48.015 Other applicable laws.
    This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 1079 § 6, 2013)

 

8.48.020 Smoking prohibited in specified locations.
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following public places:

    A.  School campuses by pupils of the school while the pupils are on school campus, or while attending school-sponsored activities or while under the supervision and control of school district employees;

    B.   Public buildings owned by a public agency;

    C.   Child day care facilities as defined in the California Health and Safety Code;

    D.  Public parks operated by a public agency;

    E.   Polling places during an election or during the counting of votes;

 

    F.   Retail establishments selling electronic cigarettes. (Ord. 1079 § 7, 2013; prior code § 4245)

 

8.48.040 Enforcement agency.
    The Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, and the city manager, or designee, shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 868 § 3, 1995)

Chapter 8.52 FLOOD CONTROL CHANNELS
8.52.010 Entering or dumping in certain areas prohibited.
    No person shall enter, interfere with, place or dump rubbish, or any kind of property or things whatsoever, in any storm drain, drainage ditch, drain channel or flood control channel. (Prior code § 4504)

Chapter 8.56 DISPOSAL OF USED MEDICAL SUPPLIES
8.56.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following definitions apply:

    A.  “Drug” means as defined in Section 4031 of the Business and Professions Code;

    B.   “Medicine” means and includes drugs intended for use in the diagnosis, care, mitigation, treatment or prevention of disease, disorders, sickness or ailment in man or other animals.

    C.   “Physicians, dentists, pharmacists, podiatrists and veterinarians” means such terms as defined in Section 4033 of the Business and Professions Code.

    D.  “Poison” means as defined in Section 4160 of the Business and Professions Code. (Prior code § 5170)

 

8.56.020 Disposal restrictions for designated medical supplies.
    A.  No pharmacist, physician, surgeon, dentist, podiatrist, veterinarian, nurse, nurse’s aid or helper, or the agent or employee of the foregoing or of any clinic or hospital, or other person or custodian responsible for the disposal of the following, shall dispose of, leave or discard outside the exterior walls of the building wherein used, any container, bottle, syringe, hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe, or needles, designed for or used in dispensing, giving or injecting medicines, drugs or poisons, or any bandage, dressing or gauze that has been used in treating or caring for an infectious or contagious disease, except as follows:

    1.   By placing the foregoing in metal trash containers which have overlapping, flytight lids. The lids shall be secured in place at all times while the container is not being filled or emptied. The containers, except while being filled or emptied under supervision of the foregoing persons, shall be sealed by a lid securely fastened with a padlock or similar locking device under the control of such persons; or

    2.   By incineration in an incinerator approved by the Air Pollution Control District.

    B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, bandages, dressings or gauze that have been used in treating or caring for an infectious or contagious disease shall either be incinerated or placed in said containers securely wrapped in heavy paper or plastic bags, the open ends of which have been tied or stapled so as to securely contain the infectious material therein. (Prior code § 5170)

Chapter 8.60 DEMOLITION AND RECYCLING
8.60.010 Findings.
    A.  The city of Pico Rivera, hereinafter “city”, finds that the state of California through its California Waste Management Act of 1989, Assembly Bill 939 (AB 939), requires that each local jurisdiction in the state divert fifty percent of discarded materials (base year 1990, state methodology) from landfills by December 31, 2000.

    B.   The city finds that every city and county in California, including Pico Rivera, could face fines up to ten thousand dollars a day for not meeting the above mandated goal.

    C.   The city finds that reusing and recycling construction and demolition (C & D) debris is essential to further the city’s efforts to reduce waste and comply with AB 939 goals.

    D.  The city finds that C & D debris waste reduction and recycling have been proven to reduce the amount of such material which is landfilled, increase site and worker safety, and be cost effective.

    E.   The city finds that, except in unusual circumstances, it is feasible to divert an average of at least fifty percent of all C & D debris from construction, demolition, and renovation projects.

    F.   The city finds that, to ensure compliance with this chapter and to ensure that those contractors that comply with this chapter are not placed at a competitive disadvantage, it is necessary to impose a performance security requirement. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.020 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

    A.  “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city.

    B.   “Construction” means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

    C.   “Construction and demolition debris” means used or discarded materials removed from premises during construction or renovation of a structure resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure.

    D.  “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan.

    E.   “Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.60.030(A).

    F.   “Deconstruction” means the selective dismantling or removal of materials from buildings before or instead of demolition.

    G.  “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

    H.  “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

    I.    “Diversion requirement” means the diversion of at least fifty percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an impossibility exemption pursuant to Section 8.60.080, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project.

    J.    “Noncovered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 8.60.030(B).

    K.  “Performance security” means any performance bond, surety bond, money order, letter of credit, or certificate of deposit submitted to the city pursuant to Section 8.60.050.

    L.   “Project” means any activity which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the city.

    M.  “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

    N.  “Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.

    O.  “Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris.

    P.   “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

    Q.  “Waste management plan” means a completed WMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered or noncovered project.

    R.   “WMP Compliance Official” means the director of community development or the designated staff person(s) authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.030 Threshold for covered projects.
    A.  Covered Projects. All construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city, the total costs of which are, or are projected to be, greater than or equal to one hundred thousand dollars (“covered projects”) shall comply with this chapter. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the project applicant to the full range of enforcement mechanisms set forth in Section 8.60.090.

    B.   Noncovered Projects. Applicants for construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city whose total costs are less than one hundred thousand dollars (“noncovered projects”) shall be encouraged to divert at least fifty percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris, but shall not be required to submit a waste management plan to the WMP Compliance Official.

    C.   City-Sponsored Projects. All city-sponsored construction, demolition, and renovation projects, whose total costs are equal to or greater than one hundred thousand dollars, shall be considered “covered projects” for the purposes of this chapter.

    D.  Compliance as a Condition of Approval. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.040 Submission of waste management plan.
    A.  WMP Forms. Applicants for building or demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a waste management plan (“WMP”), on a WMP form approved by the city for this purpose as part of the application packet for the building or demolition permit. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following:

    1.   The estimated volume or weight of project C&D debris, by materials type, to be generated;

    2.   The maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling;

    3.   The vendor or facility that the applicant proposes to use to collect or receive that material; and

    4.   The estimated volume or weight of C&D materials that will be landfilled.

    5.   Any special or specific activities that the applicant will use to comply with the provisions of this section.

    B.   Calculating Volume and Weight of Debris. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

    C.   Deconstruction. In preparing the WMP, applicants for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage prior to landfilling. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.050 Performance security.
    The applicant for any covered project shall submit with the WMP a performance security. The amount of the performance security shall be calculated as the lesser of three percent of total project cost or ten thousand dollars. Acceptable forms of performance security include the following: performance bonds, surety bonds, money orders, letters of credit, and certificates of deposit. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.060 Review of waste management plan.
    A.  Approval: Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved the WMP. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety, the WMP compliance official shall only approve a WMP if he or she first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

    1.   The WMP provides all of the information set forth in Section 8.60.040;

    2.   The WMP indicates that at least fifty percent of all C&D debris generated by the project will be diverted; and

    3.   The applicant has submitted an appropriate performance security in compliance with Section 8.60.050.

    If the WMP compliance official determines that these three conditions have been met, he or she shall mark the WMP “Approved”, return a copy of the WMP to the applicant, and notify the building division that the WMP has been approved.

    B.   Nonapproval. If the WMP compliance official determines that the WMP is incomplete or fails to indicate that at least fifty percent of all C&D debris generated by the project will be reused or recycled, he or she shall either:

    1.   Return the WMP to the applicant marked “Denied”, including a statement of reasons, and so notify the building official, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application; or

    2.   Return the WMP to the applicant marked “A Further Explanation Required”, including a statement of reasons, and so notify the building division, which shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.070 Compliance with waste management plan.
    A.  Documentation. Within thirty days after the completion of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the WMP compliance official documentation that it has met the diversion requirement for the project. The diversion requirement shall be that the applicant has diverted at least fifty percent of the total C&D debris generated by the project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 8.60.080, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the WMP compliance official for the project. This documentation shall include all of the following:

    1.   Receipts from the vendor or facility which collected or received each material showing the actual weight or volume of that material;

    2.   A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and landfilled;

    3.   Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with this chapter.

    B.   Weighing of Wastes. Applicants shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C&D debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C&D debris shall be weighed by measurement on scales. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For C&D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

    C.   Determination of Compliance and Release of Performance Security. The WMP compliance official shall review the information submitted under subsection 8.60.070(A) and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement, as follows:

    1.   Full Compliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has fully complied with the diversion requirement applicable to the project, he or she shall cause the full performance security to be released to the applicant.

    2.   Good Faith Effort to Comply. If the WMP compliance official determines that the diversion requirement has not been achieved, he or she shall determine on a case-by-case basis whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter. In making this determination, the WMP compliance official shall consider the availability of markets for the C&D debris landfilled, the size of the project, and the documented efforts of the applicant to divert C&D debris. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, he or she shall release the performance security, or a portion thereof, to the applicant. Any portion of the performance security not released to the applicant shall be forfeited to the city, and shall be used for the purposes of promoting recycling within the city.

    3.   Noncompliance. If the WMP compliance official determines that the applicant has not made a good faith effort to comply with this chapter, or if the applicant fails to submit the documentation required by subsection 8.60.070(A) within the required time period, then the performance security shall be forfeited to the city. All forfeited performance securities shall be used for the purposes of promoting recycling within the city. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.080 Exemption to waste management plan.
    A.  Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time that he or she submits the WMP required under Section 8.06.040. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

    B.   Meeting with WMP Compliance Official. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Upon request of the jurisdiction, the WMP compliance official may request that staff from the Los Angeles County Sanitation District attend this meeting or may require the applicant to request a separate meeting with Los Angeles County Sanitation District staff. Based on the information supplied by the applicant and, if applicable, Los Angeles County Sanitation District staff, the WMP compliance official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

    C.   Granting of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. The WMP compliance official shall return a copy of the WMP to the applicant marked “Approved for Exemption” and shall notify the building division that the WMP has been approved.

    D.  Denial of Exemption. If the WMP compliance official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty days to resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with Section 8.60.040. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Section 8.60.040, the WMP compliance official shall deny the WMP in accordance with Section 8.60.060. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

 

8.60.090 Enforcement.
    A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its attorney’s fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.

    B.   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for the first violation, a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for the second violation within one year, and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year. There shall be a separate infraction for each day on which a violation occurs. Where the violation is the failure to achieve the diversion requirement applicable to the project and the C&D materials from the project have already been landfilled, the violation shall be deemed to have ceased after a period of ten days. The city shall recover costs and attorneys’ fees incurred in connection with enforcement of this chapter.

    C.   Enforcement pursuant to this section shall be undertaken by the city through its community development director and the city attorney. (Ord. 972 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 8.65 REGISTRATION, MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY OF PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE
8.65.010 Title.
    This chapter shall be known and designated as the “Registration, Maintenance and Security of Properties in Foreclosure Ordinance.” (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.020 Purpose of chapter.
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish a property registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties due to foreclosure. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.030 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall govern all terms of this chapter and shall supersede any term otherwise defined in this code:

    A.  “Abandoned” means any property that is vacant and is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale, and/or any property which has been the subject of a foreclosure sale, trustee sale or judicially authorized sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary under its deed of trust upon the conclusion of the foreclosure and any property transferred by the trustor under a deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale to either the beneficiary, the trustee or to any authorized entity as approved by the beneficiary.

    B.   “Agent” means and refers to a trustee and any other person authorized to act on behalf of a beneficiary with respect to a mortgage loan account, or real property which is pledged to the beneficiary as security to a mortgage loan, and for the purposes of this chapter, the term “agent” includes any person authorized to act on behalf of a beneficiary who has completed a foreclosure of property from and after the time such beneficiary has acquired title to the property which was formerly secured by a deed of trust in favor of such beneficiary when the agent is undertaking any work or responsibility for the former beneficiary with respect to the ownership, maintenance, use or other disposition of such property, including any affiliate of such a beneficiary which acquire title to such property either, at the time of foreclosure (or recordation of a deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale).

    C.   “Beneficiary” means a lender under a promissory note to pay money secured by a deed of trust on property. The word “beneficiary” as used in this chapter means and includes any assignee or successor to such beneficiary, whether such assignee or successor acquires its interest in the beneficiary’s promissory note either before a notice of default is recorded on the property securing the obligation payable to the beneficiary or after a notice of default is recorded. In the event that a property may provide security for the loan or obligation of more than one beneficiary, the beneficiary who causes its notice of default to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property as set forth in this chapter.

    D.  “City” means the city of Pico Rivera.

    E.   “Deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale” means an instrument that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

    F.   “Deed of trust” means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. This definition applies to all deeds of trust regardless of priority.

    G.  “Default” means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or non-monetary.

    H.  “Distressed” means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

    I.    “Foreclosure” means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults.

    J.    “Local” means within fifty road/driving miles distance of the subject property.

    K.  “Notice of default” or “notice of trustee’s sale” means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale or other similar remedies authorized by law.

    L.   “Out of area” means in excess of fifty road/driving miles distance of the subject property.

    M.  “Property in foreclosure” or “property” means any property upon which a notice of default has been issued by a lender, mortgagee, or beneficiary of any deed of trust, or real property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale. “Property in foreclosure” or “property” also means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city of Pico Rivera and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition.

    N.  “Trustee” means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property.

    O.  “Trustor” means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

    P.   “Vacant” means a building/structure that is not legally occupied. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.040 Registration of properties in foreclosure.
    A.  Any beneficiary or its agent, or trustee, who holds, or has an interest in, a deed of trust on a property in foreclosure, located within the city, shall register the property in foreclosure with the community and economic development department of the city. If the beneficiary or trustee issues a notice of default after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, they shall register such property with the city within thirty calendar days of the issuance of such notice of default. If the beneficiary or trustee issues a notice of default prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and such notice of default has not been rescinded, the beneficiary or trustee shall register the property in foreclosure with the city within thirty calendar days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    The registration requirement described in this section shall also apply to property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale.

    B.   The registration requirements of this section shall be satisfied by providing the city the following information:

    1.   The address and assessor parcel number (APN) of the property in foreclosure;

    2.   The name of the beneficiary and/or trustee (corporation or individual);

    3.   The name(s) of all beneficiaries and/or trustees (corporations or individuals) who holds security interest at the time when the notice of default is recorded;

    4.   The direct street and/or office mailing address of the beneficiary and/or trustee (P.O. boxes are insufficient);

    5.   A direct contact name and phone number person(s) or agent(s) acting on behalf of the beneficiary and/or trustee;

    6.   In the case of a corporation or out of area beneficiary and/or trustee, a direct contact staff member name and phone number with the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property; such staff member must be empowered to: (i) comply with code enforcement orders issued by the city; (ii) provide a trespass authorization upon request of local law enforcement authorities if the property is unlawfully occupied; (iii) conduct weekly inspections of the property; and (iv) accept rental payments from tenants of the property if no management company is otherwise employed for such person; and

    7.   Other information as deemed necessary by the community and economic development department.

    C.   Any person, firm, or corporation that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration with the community and economic development department within ten calendar days of the change. If the community and economic development department determines that the beneficiary and/or trustee has failed to comply with the registry requirements of this section, the community and economic development department shall notify the beneficiary and/or trustee at the last known address as provided in subsection B of the failure to comply with this section. If the beneficiary and/or trustee fail to comply with this section within thirty calendar days of the community and economic development department’s notification, the beneficiary and/or trustee shall pay a penalty as prescribed in Section 8.65.120 subsequent to the community and economic development department’s notification.

    D.  Properties subject to this chapter shall remain subject to the annual registration requirement and the security and maintenance standards of this chapter as long as they remain in foreclosure. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.050 Registration fee.
    An annual foreclosed properties registration fee, as prescribed in Section 8.65.100, shall be paid to city at the time of registration. The beneficiary or its agent shall annually renew a registration of each property which the beneficiary has previously registered with the city under this chapter, and in which such beneficiary retains either an equitable or legal interest as of the first anniversary of the registration of such property with the city. The beneficiary or its agent shall re-register the property on forms authorized by the city. Registration fees shall not be prorated. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.060 Special provisions where property is encumbered with the security interests of multiple beneficiaries.
    A.  In the event that a property is encumbered by the security interests of more than one beneficiary at the time when a notice of default is recorded, the beneficiary who causes a notice of default for its security interest to be recorded shall be responsible for registering the property with the city as provided in Section 8.65.040.

    B.   Upon the recordation of a notice of default on a property by any beneficiary, regardless of the security lien interest priority of such beneficiary in the property in relation to the priority of the security interests of the other beneficiaries in the same property, the city, in its discretion may elect to enforce the provisions of this chapter against one or more beneficiaries who have not separately recorded a notice of default against the property. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.070 Maintenance and security of properties in foreclosure.
    A.  Properties subject to or threatened with the foreclosure process which are abandoned or vacant shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, maintained in the following manner: watering and mowing of lawn; trimming of trees, hedges, and shrubbery; kept free and cleared of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned; maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure; and repairing aesthetic features of the structure to be compatible to the surrounding structures. In general, the maintenance shall comply with the standards set forth in current HUD securing standards, or such other standard as may hereafter be ordered in writing by the community development director, building official, or the city manager. Adherence to the maintenance and monitoring standard set forth in this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners’ association rules and regulations which may apply to the property.

    B.   If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out of area beneficiary/trustee
/owner, a local property management company that holds a valid and current city business license shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the property is in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the company’s responsibility to bring the property into compliance.

    C.   Properties subject to or threatened with the foreclosure process which are abandoned or vacant shall be secured in the following manner: the closing and locking of windows, doors (walkthrough, sliding, and garage), gates and any other opening that may allow access to the interior of the property and/or structure(s). In the case of broken windows, “secured” means re-glazing or boarding-up the window.

    D.  If a pool and/or spa exists on the property, it must be completely emptied of all water and kept dry, and must be inspected and drained periodically so not to accumulate rainwater.

    E.   The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four hour contact phone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be eight and one-half inches by eleven inches or larger in size, shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of twenty feet, and shall contain the following verbiage:

 

“THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY __________,” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL (name and phone number).”

 

The posting shall be placed on the interior side of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street on the front of the property so it is visible from the street. If no such area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting, in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property, and to the extent possible, not readily accessible to potential vandalism. Exterior posting must be constructed of, and printed with weather resistant materials. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.080 Declaration of public nuisance.
    The duties/obligations specified in this chapter shall be joint and several among and between all trustees and beneficiaries and their respective agents. The provisions of this chapter as described herein shall apply to properties subject to this chapter. Should a property be deemed a public nuisance, hazardous, or substandard by the city, the city may initiate the abatement procedures described in Title 8, Chapter 8.16, Article I against the beneficiary and/or trustee. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.090 Notice by beneficiary to city of disposition of registered property.
    A.  Within ten days following the release of a notice of default and the reinstatement of the loan of the trustor, the beneficiary or its agent shall give the city written notice of such release and reinstatement.

    B.   Within ten days following the sale, transfer or other conveyance to a third person of a property registered with the city under this chapter, the beneficiary or its agent, shall give the city written notice of such sale, transfer or other conveyance together with current contact information for such bona fide purchaser/successor-in-interest to the beneficiary in such property. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.100 Fees.
    A.  A foreclosed properties registration fee and re-registration fee will be required for properties subject to this chapter. The fees shall be applied towards reimbursing the city for reasonable city costs incurred and resources expended the administration of this chapter.

    B.   The foreclosed properties registration fee and re-registration fee shall be set by resolution as approved by the city council.

    C.   Additional hourly inspection fees as set forth in the city’s fees schedule may be levied on a property for staff time to inspect and enforce the provisions of this code when a complaint has been filed on a property subject to this chapter. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.110 Authority and enforcement.
    The community and economic development department shall manage the implementation, coordination, documentation, administration and enforcement of this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the city’s authority to contract or utilize third parties in the enforcement and implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.120 Penalties.
    A.  Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action, including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter.

    B.   Pursuant to the provisions of Title 8, Chapter 8.16, Article II of this code, any beneficiary and/or trustee of a property on which a building is situated which is in violation of this chapter shall be subject to an administrative penalty, in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars per building for the first violation.

    C.   Subsequent Violations. A second administrative penalty shall be imposed upon a beneficiary and/or trustee pursuant to this chapter if the building remains in violation of this chapter fifteen calendar days following the imposition of the first administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars. Additional penalties may be imposed for each succeeding fifteen-day period following the imposition of the preceding administrative penalty under this chapter. Additional penalties may be imposed for each violation so long as the violation continues. Subsequent penalties shall be in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars per fifteen-day period.

    D.  Multiple Offense Penalties. If a previous administrative penalty has been imposed pursuant to this chapter upon a beneficiary or trustee within six months of the date of the imposition of the prior administrative penalty, and that previous administrative penalty related to a property in foreclosure other than the subject property to a subsequent administrative penalty, any such penalty imposed shall be imposed pursuant to Section 8.16.230 of this code, but in no case shall it be less than two thousand dollars, or more than ten thousand dollars, subject to the determination of the city.

    E.   Obligation to Correct Violation. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to mean that because a responsible party has paid the administrative fine he, she, or it is excused from correcting the violation. If the responsible party fails to correct the violation(s), subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violation(s). The amount of the fine for failure to correct the violation shall increase at a rate specified in this chapter.

    F.   Discretion of Penalty. The issuance of an administrative citation under this chapter is solely at the discretion of the enforcement official and is one option the city may exercise to address violations of this code. The procedures established in this chapter shall supplement and be in addition to any criminal, civil or other remedy established by law or under the provisions of this code to address violations of this code or violations of any other Pico Rivera ordinance. Issuance of an administrative citation shall be cumulative to, and shall not limit or be deemed a waiver of, the use of any other remedy. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.130 Prohibition against passing on costs, fees and fines to a trustor, subsequent purchaser or transferee.
    It is unlawful for any trustee, beneficiary or agent of a beneficiary to pass on any costs, fees or fines imposed under any provisions of this chapter to any trustor, subsequent bona fide purchaser or transferee of a property, either as a condition of sale or transfer, or included as a cost or fee in escrow. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

 

8.65.140 Applicability of other laws.
    Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any beneficiary or trustee of the duty to comply with any and all other applicable statutes, regulations, ordinances, codes, and laws regulating property maintenance, zoning, or building construction. Compliance with this chapter shall not relieve any beneficiary or trustee of any legal duties under such laws. (Ord. 1081 § 1, 2013)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Chapter 9.20 CONSUMER PROTECTION
Chapter 9.24 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Chapter 9.28 WEAPONS
Chapter 9.32 LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS
Chapter 9.36 GRAFFITI
Chapter 9.40 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY PROHIBITION
Chapter 9.44 LOCAL REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDERS

Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
9.04.010 False impersonation of certain officers.
    No person shall falsely impersonate or cause or permit to be falsely impersonated the sheriff, district attorney or city prosecutor, or member of the State Highway Patrol, or a deputy of, representative of, or connected with either. No person shall wear the uniform of the sheriff, State Highway Patrol, or deputies thereof, or any part of such uniform, or any uniform part of which is similar to the uniform of the sheriff or State Highway Patrol or deputies thereof, unless such a person is a member of such organization. (Prior code § 4235)

 

9.04.020 False reports of crimes.
    No person shall inform or report to a peace officer that a crime has been committed, whether a felony or a misdemeanor, unless he or she in good faith believes such crime has been committed. (Prior code § 4234)

 

9.04.030 Radios receiving police calls.
    No person shall equip a vehicle with a radio capable of receiving police, sheriff, State Highway Patrol, forester and fire wardens’ calls. (Prior code § 4238)

 

9.04.040 Reports of accidents and wounds.
    It shall be the duty of every physician, surgeon, druggist or pharmacist, or other person who shall render any treatment or service, or who shall assist in rendering any treatment or service to any person suffering from a gunshot wound, or a knife wound, not resulting from a surgical operation, or any other wound or injury not resulting from accident, to report the same by telephone to the sheriff of Los Angeles County as soon as such wound or injury shall have been brought to the attention of such physician, surgeon, druggist or pharmacist, or other person. (Prior code § 4506)

 

9.04.050 Defacing public notices.
    No person shall intentionally deface, tear, tear down, obliterate or destroy any copy, transcript or extract of or from any ordinance of the city which shall be posted in, on or along any highway or other public place, or any proclamation, advertisement or notice set up at any place by authority of any ordinance of the city, before the expiration of the time in which such proclamation, advertisement or notice was to remain set up. (Prior code § 4505)

Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Article I Alcoholic Beverages
9.08.010 Drinking on public streets.
    No person shall drink any alcoholic beverage upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway, or in any public buildings, public lavatories, auto park or lobby or entrance way to any public building within the city, except as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 867 § 1, 1995; prior code § 4400)

 

9.08.020 Consumption prohibited where.
    No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic beverage on the grounds within any public school or any stadium or athletic field while being used by a public school, or on the grounds of or within any public park or building or recreation facility owned, managed or controlled by the city, or any other city or county, or under the jurisdiction of the city in either incorporated or unincorporated territory, except as follows:

    A.  Any concession facility duly authorized by the city council, and properly licensed;

    B.   Any park providing overnight vehicular and equestrian accommodations, when duly authorized by the city council;

    C.   Any public building or part thereof leased or rented by the city to community groups, when duly authorized by the city council and properly licensed. (Ord. 867 § 2, 1995; prior code § 4404)

 

9.08.025 Alcoholic beverage defined.
    Alcoholic beverage as used in Sections 9.08.010 and 9.08.020 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall mean any liquid or solid material intended to be ingested by a person which contains ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, drinking alcohol or alcohol, including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages as defined in Section 23004 of the Business and Professions Code, intoxicating liquor, malt beverage, beer, wine, spirits, liqueur, whiskey, rum, vodka, cordials, gin and brandy, and any mixture containing one or more alcoholic beverages. Alcoholic beverage includes a mixture of one or more alcoholic beverages whether found or ingested separately or as a mixture. (Ord. 867 § 3, 1995)

 

9.08.030 Serving of setups.
    No person shall serve setups between two a.m. and six a.m. if they are to be used with distilled spirits. (Prior code § 4403)

 

9.08.040 Intoxicated persons—In public ways.
    It is unlawful for any intoxicated person, or any person in an intoxicated condition, wilfully to appear, remain, or to be in or on any public highway, street, alley, way, park, playground or public place in the incorporated territory of the city, whether such person is or is not in or upon any automobile, street or interurban car, vehicle or conveyance. (Prior code § 4401)

 

9.08.050 Intoxicated persons—In public places.
    An intoxicated person, or a person in an intoxicated condition shall not wilfully appear, remain or be in or on any public place open to public view, or in any store, railroad depot, stadium or other place to which the public is admitted or invited. (Prior code § 4402)

 

9.08.060 Intoxicated persons—Private places.
    An intoxicated person or a person in an intoxicated condition shall not wilfully appear, remain or be in or on any private premises or in any private house to the annoyance of any other person. (Prior code § 4402.1)

 

9.08.070 Disorderly or helpless persons.
    No person shall lie and sleep on any of the sidewalks, streets or other public places within the city, or appear therein in such a state of intoxication or drunkenness as to be unable to take proper care of himself, or disturb the peace or quiet of any person, family or neighborhood by drunkenness, or by making loud and unusual noises, or by violent or offensive language, or by boisterous, tumultuous or offensive conduct, or by the threatening, traducing, quarrelling, fighting or offering or challenging to fight, or in any way or manner whatever shall disturb the peace, quiet and decency of any person, street or neighborhood. (Prior code § 4406)

 

Article II Drug Paraphernalia
9.08.080 Sale or display—Separate rooms.
    A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room shall be signposted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that narcotics paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room, and minors unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. (Prior code § 6421(c))

 

9.08.090 Persons under eighteen—Prohibited where.
    No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any room in any place of business selling or displaying for the purpose of sale any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), as well as roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of eighteen years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. (Prior code § 6421(a))

 

9.08.100 Persons under eighteen—Exclusion.
    A person under the age of eighteen years shall not be, remain in, enter or visit any room in any place used for the sale or displaying for sale, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs), including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless such person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian. (Prior code § 6421(b))

 

9.08.110 Sale or display—Nuisance—Abatement.
    The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded, as set forth in this Article II, and where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than drugs for which a prescription has been issued), including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this code. (Prior code § 6421(d))

 

Article III Gambling
9.08.120 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Gambling devices” means any machine, contrivance, appliance, device, game, ticket, chance, share, interest, instrument or article operated, used, kept, possessed, placed or maintained in violation of the provision of:

    1.   Section 330a of the Penal Code of the state; or

    2.   Any section enumerated in Part 1, Title 9, Chapter 9 of the Penal Code; or

    3.   The provisions of this chapter.

    B.   “Poolroom” means a room or place where betting or laying of wagers upon the result of races or contests is carried on as a business. (Prior code §§ 4300, 4301.2)

 

9.08.130 Certain devices prohibited.
    No person shall keep, maintain, possess or have under control in any place of business or in any other place of public resort, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagee or otherwise, any table games or devices commonly known as pinball game,” marble game,” fawn game” or lite-a-line,” or any claw, scoop or grab machine, or any horse-racing” machine or game, or any device similar thereto, the operation, use or play of which is controlled by placing therein any coin, plate, disk, plug, key or other device, or by the payment of any fee. (Prior code § 4300.1)

 

9.08.140 Gambling information—Transmission prohibited.
    A.  No person, either as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall let or lease any telegraph or telephone line or wire, knowing that it is to be used for the purpose of conducting or carrying on a poolroom, or for the purpose of conducting the business of making books or selling pools on races or other contests, or of betting or laying of wages upon the result of any race or contest.

    B.   No person shall transmit any message over any telephone or telegraph line or wire owned, controlled or leased by any person engaged in conducting or carrying on a poolroom, or in conducting the business of making books or selling pools on races or other contests, or of betting or laying of wagers upon the result of any race or contest, knowing that such message is to be used in conducting or carrying on such poolroom or business. (Prior code § 4301)

 

9.08.150 Gambling information—Printed material.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to have in his or her or its possession in the city any written or printed form, chart, table, list, sheet, circular or publication of any kind, giving or purporting to give, or represented as giving, any list or probable or possible list, of entries for any horse race or other contest thereafter anywhere to take place, or which is anywhere taking place, if there is written or printed or published as part thereof, or in connection therewith, or in any other publication, printing or writing accompanying the same or referring thereto or connected therewith, any tip, information, prediction or selection of, or advice as to, or any key, cipher or cryptogram indicating, containing or giving any tip, information, publication or selection of, or advice as to the winner or probable winner, or a loser or probable loser, or probable result of any such race or other contest, or the standing or probable standing of any horse or other contestant therein, or any statement as to, or comment upon or reference to the form, condition or standing of any horse or other contestant, or the actual, probable or possible result of any race or contest, or the actual, probable or possible state, past, present or future, of the betting, wagering or odds upon or against any horse or other contestant named in such list, or probable or possible list of entries, unless the names of such horses or other contestants shall be arranged in such list, or probable or possible list, in alphabetical order, and shall all be printed in type of the same size and face of identical appearance, and shall all be printed flush with the left side of the column in which the same are printed, or all of an equal distance therefrom. (Prior code § 4301.1)

 

9.08.160 Bookmaking and related activities.
    No person shall have in his or her possession a book, paper, apparatus, device or paraphernalia for the purpose of recording or registering any bet or any purported bet or wager, or any purported wager, upon the result or purported result of any trial or purported trial or contest of skill, speed, power or endurance of man or beast, or between men, beasts or mechanical apparatus, or upon the result, or purported result, of any lot, chance, casualty or contingent event whatsoever. (Prior code § 4304)

 

9.08.170 Tip sheets and score sheets.
    No person shall distribute on the highway or elsewhere in the city any such list of entries, tips, odds or results as described in Section 9.08.150 unless published in a newspaper of general circulation. (Prior code § 4301.3)

 

9.08.180 Games prohibited—Misdemeanor.
    A.  No person shall play or bet at or, as an owner or employee, open, deal, play, carry on or conduct any game of chance played with cards, dice, balls, pins, checkers, counters, quoits, beans, spindles, tables, rings, wheels, machines, or any other device, contrivance or apparatus, or with any combination of any thereof, for money, checks, credits or things of value, and every person who bets at any of such prohibited games is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    B.   Provided, however, that no provision of this section shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by the provisions of Sections 320, 320a, 330, 330a, 330b, 330c, 330.1, 330.2, 330.3, 330.4, 330.5, 330.6, 331, 332, 335a, 336 or 337a of the Penal Code, or of any other code section or general law of the state, it being the intention of the city council to prohibit by this section all games of chance, operations or transactions herein described not prohibited by the provisions of any general law of the state, including but not limited specifically thereto, such games as Ringo,” Keno,” Tango,” Movie Tango,” Bingo,” Beano,” Skill Ball,” Fortune,” Quintain,” Fascination” or Inspiration,” and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto, regardless of the name designated. (Prior code § 4302)

 

9.08.190 Games of chance—Activities designated.
    A.  It is unlawful in the city for any person, firm, corporation or association, either as owner, lessee, manager, employee, agent or servant, to conduct, manage, carry on, maintain, operate, open, deal or deal in, or cause or permit to be conducted, managed, carried on, maintained, operated, dealt or dealt in any game, operation or transaction wherein any price, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity, consisting of any money, check, token, credit, goods, wares, merchandise, property or thing of value is or is to be given, awarded or delivered, either directly or indirectly, and wherein chance is a determining factor, or is any determining factor of the result of such game, operation or transaction, which game, operation or transaction is conducted, carried on, maintained, operated or played by the throwing, tossing, dropping, depositing or placing of any ball, marker, object, thing or substance into any perforation, hole or indentation in or upon any surface, receptacle, container, object or thing having marked, designated or identified thereon by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark of any kind, or by the selecting, designating, turning, indicating, choosing or projecting of any such figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark of any device, apparatus or equipment, or by the drawing, selecting, choosing or removing from any receptacle or container of any ball, disk, object, substance or material marked, designated or identified by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark, any such figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark hereinabove referred to, corresponding to, duplicating, referring to or relating to, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, any figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark upon any card, paper, board, fabric, surface, object, substance or thing held, used, operated or maintained by any player or participant therein, or by any person, where, by any predetermined or prearranged, or by any rule, method, scheme, design or procedure, any person is found, declared or determined to be, or is, or is to be the winner, donee, recipient or taker of such prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity, in the event that any such player or participant pays, deposits, expends, gives or pledges, either directly or indirectly, or agrees, promises or intends to pay, deposit, expend, give or pledge, either directly or indirectly, any money, check, credit, property or thing of value, or makes or agrees to make any purchase for the privilege of playing or participating therein, or of gaining admission to the place or premises where such game, operation or transaction is or is to be played, conducted, carried on, maintained or operated, or to any other place or premises.

    B.   Provided, however, that no provision of this Article III shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by the provisions of Section 320, or of Section 320a, or of Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, or of any other code section or general law of the state, it being the intent of the city council to prohibit by this article all games, operations or transactions herein described, not prohibited by the provisions of any general law of the state, including all games, operations or transactions for profit commonly known as Keno,” Tango,” Movie Tango,” Bingo,” Beano,” Skill Ball,” Fortune,” Quintain,” Fascination” or Inspiration,” and all games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated. (Prior code § 4303)

 

9.08.200 Games of chance—Prohibited.
    It is unlawful in the city for any person to participate in, play, play in or engage in, either directly or indirectly, any game, operation or transaction prohibited by the provisions of Section 9.08.190 of this article. (Prior code § 4303.1)

 

9.08.210 Games of chance—Permitting prohibited.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association owning, leasing, managing, controlling or having any interest in any property or premises lying within the city to cause or permit the maintenance or operation in or on such property or premises, having knowledge, or after reasonable notice, of the existence thereof of any game, operation or transaction declared by the provisions of Section 9.08.190 of this article to be unlawful. (Prior code § 4303.2)

 

Article IV Other Unlawful Activities
9.08.220 Disorderly houses.
    No person shall keep a riotous or disorderly house, or permit any riotous or disorderly conduct in his or her house, yard or premises connected with his or her house, or be guilty of any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard or premises, whereby the peace, quiet or decency of the neighborhood of such house, or of any person, may be disturbed. (Prior code § 4251)

 

9.08.230 Indecent exposure—Topless.
    A.  It is unlawful for any female who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer, all of which places serve or allow consumption of alcoholic beverages, to:

    1.   Expose any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts are below such a straight line; or

    2.   Employ any device or covering which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or

 

 

    3.   Wear any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person to permit, counsel or assist any person to violate any provision of this section.

    C.   This section shall not apply to a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 694 § 14, 1985; prior code § 4330)

 

9.08.240 Indecent exposure— Bottomless.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to expose his or her private parts or buttocks, or employ any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair, while participating in any live act or demonstration in any place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer, all of which is done in any place serving or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person to permit, procure or assist any person to so expose him or herself, or to employ any such device.

    C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances. (Ord. 694 § 15, 1985; prior code § 4331)

 

9.08.250 Obscene signs or statements.
    No person shall exhibit, post or display upon any sign or billboard any statement, words, picture, illustration or signs of any obscene, indecent or immoral nature. (Ord. 694 § 23, 1985; prior code § 6412(b))

 

9.08.260 Impersonating persons of opposite sex.
    No person shall dress as a person of the opposite sex without a permit from the sheriff, except for the purpose of amusement, show or drama. (Ord. 694 § 10, 1985; prior code § 4237.1)

 

9.08.270 Wearing masks or disguises.
    No person shall wear a mask or disguise on a public street during the commission of a fraudulent, illegal or criminal act, or with the intent to engage in a fraudulent, illegal or criminal act. (Ord. 694 § 11, 1985; prior code § 4237.2)

 

9.08.280 Sale of aerosol spray paint containers and marker pens.
    A.  Every person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment selling aerosol spray paint containers, or marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters in width containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall store or cause such aerosol spray paint containers or marker pens to be stored in an area visible by, but not accessible to the public without employee assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of such paint and marker pens.

    B.   Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 833 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
9.12.010 Disorderly conduct— Prohibited activities.
    No person shall:

    A.  Engage in any disorderly or boisterous conduct; or

    B.   Disturb the peace by assaulting, striking or fighting; or

    C.   Be found in an intoxicated or drunken condition upon any street, thoroughfare, alley, sidewalk or grounds, or in or upon any premises within the city; or

    D.  Expose his or her person or any part thereof in any indecent or lewd manner in any place; or

    E.   Suffer to be made on his or her premises or upon premises under his or her control any disorder or tumult, to the disturbance of the public peace; or

    F.   Utter in the presence of two or more persons any bawdy, lewd or obscene words or epithets, or address any words, language or expressions having a tendency to create a breach of the peace; or

    G.  Utter or use within the hearing of one or more persons any seditious language. (Prior code § 4200)

 

9.12.020 Handbills promoting unlawful activities.
    No person shall post, hand out or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill, circular, tract or leaflet which reasonably shall tend to incite riot or other public disorder, or which advocates disloyalty to, or the overthrow of the government of the United States by force and arms or other unlawful means, or which urges any unlawful conduct or encourages or reasonably tends to encourage a breach of the public peace of the community. (Ord. 714 § 2, 1986; prior code § 4250)

 

9.12.030 Low-flying aircraft.
    A.  “Aircraft,” as used in this section, means and comprises all balloons, whether fixed or free, kites, airships, or flying machines.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive or cause to be driven, or to conduct or cause to be conducted any aircraft, as defined in this section, in the air at a distance of less than four hundred feet from the ground, except when such aircraft is ascending from or descending to the ground. (Prior code §§ 4211, 4211.1)

 

9.12.040 Throwing missiles on public ways.
    It is unlawful for any person to throw upon, along or across any public highway, road, street, alley or sidewalk any missile capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property at or toward any person or any vehicle. (Prior code § 4246)

 

9.12.050 Lookouts for illegal activities.
    No person shall act as a lookout for a gambling game, house of prostitution or other illegal act. (Prior code § 4237)

 

9.12.060 Gate-crashing.
    A.  No person, with intent gratuitously to avail him or herself of the entertainment or recreation furnished or the privileges conferred therein, shall enter any theater, stadium, athletic club, ballpark, golf course, golf club, tennis club, beach club, bathing beach, or other place of amusement, entertainment or recreation, for admission to which an admission fee or membership fee is charged, without first paying such admission fee or membership fee.

    B.   Any person who is a bona fide guest of a member of any club may enter such club in accordance with the rules thereof. Any person may enter any place which is within the purview of this section with the consent of the owner or manager thereof.

    C.   This section shall not be deemed to apply to the entry into any such place by a law enforcement officer acting within the scope and course of his or her official duties. (Prior code § 4236)

 

9.12.070 Newspaper sales in public ways.
    It is unlawful to sell newspapers or magazines on any portion of a public highway, street, alley, or any other right-of-way used for vehicular traffic, including center islands, medians or other areas within the part of the roadway used by vehicular traffic, including turning pockets, safety zones, bus turnouts and taxi stands. (Ord. 696 § 6, 1985; prior code § 4264)

 

9.12.080 Soliciting for food, clothing or money.
    No person shall visit any house within the city for the purpose of soliciting food or clothing or alms, or shall in any public place in the city solicit alms or money from any person. This section shall not apply to tax-exempt charitable organizations licensed to solicit within the city. (Ord. 694 § 9, 1985; prior code § 4233)

 

9.12.090 Loitering.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the same, or so as in any manner to annoy or molest persons passing along the same.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, theater or place of public assemblage so as in any manner to obstruct such entrance. (Prior code §§ 4202, 4202.1)

 

9.12.095 Aggressive panhandling and panhandling in unauthorized locations.
    A.  Purpose and Findings.

    1.   It is the intent of the council in enacting the ordinance codified in this section to improve the quality of life and economic vitality of the city, and to protect the safety of the general public against certain abusive conduct of persons engaged in aggressive panhandling by imposing reasonable restrictions on aggressive, intrusive, or unsafe panhandling while respecting the constitutional rights of free speech for all citizens.

    2.   Aggressive and intrusive panhandling typically includes approaching or following pedestrians, the use of abusive language, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The city council finds that an increase in aggressive and intrusive panhandling in the city has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses, and has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also in certain circumstances to an enhanced sense of fear, and disorder. Aggressive panhandling unquestionably threatens the public’s safety and welfare. Aggressive panhandling also undermines the public’s inherent right to use and enjoy public places without being accosted by or be in reasonable apprehension of persons demanding money or goods in a forceful manner. The actions of individuals engaged in aggressive panhandling likewise can create a climate of intimidation and anxiety among members of the public, who when confronted, reasonably and legitimately fear harm if they refuse to give in to the solicitations of individuals engaged in this type of conduct.

    3.   Aggressive panhandling usually includes approaching or following pedestrians, the use of abusive language, unwanted physical contact, or the intentional blocking of pedestrians. The city council further finds that the presence of individuals who panhandle from persons at or near banks or automated teller machines (and similar retail financial businesses), in parking lots, at transit stops and in certain other public locations is especially threatening and dangerous. Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both person and property.

    4.   The city council further finds as abusive the panhandling of people in places where they are a “captive audience” in which it is impossible or difficult for them to exercise their own right to decline to listen to or to avoid panhandling from others. Such places include parking lots and structures, transit stops and outdoor dining areas. Aggressive and targeted panhandling of commercial customers as they enter and exit retail stores, restaurants, bars and cafes has become increasingly disturbing to residents and business, and threatens the economic vitality of the city. Restricting panhandling in such locations will provide a balance between the rights of those panhandling and the rights of persons who wish to decline or avoid such panhandling, and will help avoid or diminish the threat of violence in such unwarranted and unavoidable confrontations. The city council further finds that the presence of individuals who panhandle for money from persons at or near banks or automated teller machines is especially threatening and dangerous. Such activity often carries with it an implicit threat to both person and property. Restricting panhandling in such places will provide a balance between the rights of panhandlers and the rights of persons who wish to decline or avoid such panhandlings, and will help avoid or diminish the threat of violence in such unwarranted and unavoidable confrontations.

 

    5.   The city council has considered evidence presented to it concerning the safety of individuals standing on median islands who have directed their activities at persons traveling in vehicles on city streets and the secondary effects of those activities on traffic, moving vehicles, and/or those persons who were in moving vehicles. Panhandling on roadway median strips, at traffic intersections, and in the public roadway increases the risk of drivers becoming distracted from their primary duty to watch traffic which may result in automobile accidents, congestion and blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems.

    6.   The city council finds that soliciting on medians presents safety hazards to the persons on the median islands, traffic congestion, interference with passage on public streets, and other safety impacts which result from the conduct occurring on or near the median islands and not from the content or viewpoint of any such speech activity in which any of them may be engaged.

    7.   The city council declares that its intent in enacting this ordinance is not to interfere with the exercise of First Amendment rights of those lingering, loitering, or soliciting on the medians, but only to minimize the safety hazards of those in the median islands as well as the drivers of vehicles in a particular place and manner which minimizes those safety hazards.

    8.   The city council further finds that the practice of panhandling near driveways accessing shopping centers, retail, and business establishments is unsafe and hazardous for panhandlers, drivers, pedestrians and the general public. The location of the panhandler near the driveway compromises the panhandler’s safety, impedes visibility, and impairs a driver’s ability to safely enter and exit. Drivers also become distracted from their duty to watch traffic which may result in automobile accidents, congestion and blockage of streets, and delay and obstruction of the free flow of travel, all of which constitute substantial traffic safety problems.

    9.   The restrictions contained herein are neither overbroad nor vague and are narrowly tailored to serve a substantial governmental interest. Furthermore, in enacting this legislation, the council recognizes the availability of warnings, community service or other sentencing alternatives, which may be appropriate remedies for violations of this law.

    B.   Definitions. For purposes of this section:

    1    “Aggressive panhandling” means any of the following:

    a.   Approaching, speaking, or non-verbally communicating to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting, asking or begging, in a manner that is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:

    i.    Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or

    ii.   Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;

    b.   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person’s consent in the course of soliciting, asking or begging;

    c.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact in the course of soliciting, asking or begging;

    d.   Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking or begging;

    e.   Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words or conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the panhandler; or

    f.    Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction before, during, or after soliciting, asking or begging.

    2.   “Automated teller machine” means any electronic information processing device which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account.

    3.   “Automated teller machine facility” means the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines, and any adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours.

    4.   “Bank” means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

    5.   “Check cashing business” means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000.

    6.   “Credit union” means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration.

    7.   “Median strip” means a paved, striped or planted area of the public right-of-way that divides a street or highway according to the direction of travel.

    8.   “Panhandle or panhandling” means the solicitation, asking, or begging for an immediate donation of money, service, or thing of value using spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures.

    9.   “Public place” means a place to which a governmental entity has ownership or to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence.

    10. “Savings and loan association” means any federal savings and loan association and any “insured institution” as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act.

    11. “Solicit or solicitation,” in addition to the activities defined under Section 5.04.440 of this code, shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or soliciting the sale of goods, services or any request, offer, enticement, or action which announces the availability of a person to engage in an employment transaction.

    C.   Aggressive Panhandling Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive panhandling (as defined in subsection (B)(1)) on a public street or sidewalk or any other public place, whether publicly or privately owned.

    D.  All Panhandling Prohibited At Specified Locations.

    1.   Banks and Automated Teller Machines. No person shall panhandle within forty feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within forty feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers’ use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas.

    a.   Exemptions. The provisions of subsection (D)(1) shall not apply to any automated teller machine located within any building, structure, or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including, but not limited to, supermarkets, clothing stores, and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure or space in which such machine is located.

    2.   Medians. It is unlawful for any person, while that person is located on a street median designated by resolution of the city council, to panhandle from occupants of a motor vehicle on that street location.

    3.   Parking Lots. No person shall panhandle in any public or private parking lot or structure any time after dark, unless with the express authorization of the owner, manager, or supervisor of the business operating at the property in which the parking lot is located. “After dark” means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.

    4.   Public Transportation Stop. No person shall panhandle within twenty feet of any bus or other public transportation vehicle stop.

    5.   Outdoor Dining Areas. It is unlawful for any person to panhandle within twenty feet of any outdoor dining area of a restaurant, café, or dining establishments serving food.

    6.   Queuing Areas. No person shall panhandle within twenty feet of a queue of two or more persons or vehicle waiting to gain admission to a place or waiting to purchase an item or admission ticket. Queuing areas shall include, but are not limited to, restaurant drive-thrus, movie theater lines, restaurant lines, or lines for live entertainment.

    7.   Driveways Accessing Public or Private Property. It is unlawful for any person located within twenty feet of a driveway providing vehicular access to private or public property to panhandle from occupants of a motor vehicle.

    E.   Penalty. Any person in violation of any provision of this section, or who causes, allows or permits said violation shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.20 (General Penalty) of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    F.   Non-Exclusivity. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws. (Ord. 1128 § 3, 2019)

 

9.12.100 Obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
    No person shall block, impede or obstruct any public place, or any entrance, exit or approach to any place of business in or upon any public place, in a manner calculated to or with the intent to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any other person who is entering, occupying or leaving any place of business, or who is performing any service or labor, or who is seeking or obtaining employment, purchasing, selling, using, delivering, transporting or receiving any goods, wares, merchandise, services, entertainment, accommodations or articles, or who is attempting or seeking to do any of the foregoing; or to prevent, delay, hinder or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any vehicle or conveyance operated by or in custody of any such other person, or in which any such other person is riding or attempting to ride. (Prior code § 3329.1)

 

9.12.110 Daytime restrictions for minors.
    A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to be “absent from school and found in a public place,” as defined in subsection B of this section, unless the minor has one of the valid excuses specified in subsection C of this section.

    B.   For purposes of this section, a minor is “absent from school and found in a public place” if said minor is found idling, wandering, strolling, playing, or aimlessly driving or riding about in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, or any place open to the public during the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. of the same day on days when said minor’s school is in session.

    C.   Valid Excuses. The provisions of this section shall not apply when a minor has one of the following valid excuses:

    1.   The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of said minor, which excuse provides a reasonable explanation, as determined by the court, for the minor’s absence from school;

    2.   The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;

    3.   The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by said minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;

    4.   The minor is going to or returning directly from a medical appointment;

    5.   The minor has permission to leave campus and said minor has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit;

    6.   The minor is going to or returning directly from a public meeting, or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of said minor’s school; or

    7.   The presence of the minor in said place or places is connected with or required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged.

    D.  Hearing Requirement—Parental Obligation to Attend. A minor cited for an infraction under this section must attend a court hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of said minor. If any such parental or custodial person(s) fails to attend the hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court shall continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to said parental or custodial person(s) directing said person(s) to appear at the continued hearing with the minor.

    E.   Penalty may be set aside for first infraction. Notwithstanding subsection F of this section, the court may set aside the fine imposed by this chapter, or any portion thereof, if the fine is based on the minor’s first infraction under this chapter and provided the minor produces proof satisfactory to the court that the following has occurred during the period between the initial hearing on the infraction and any subsequent hearing set by the court:

    1.   The minor has had no unexcused absences from school; and

    2.   The minor has performed ten hours of court-approved community service during times other than said minor’s hours of school attendance; or

    3.   The minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of said minor has or have attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court.

    F.   Infraction—Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars. (Ord. 879 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
9.16.010 Damaging or destroying property.
    No person shall wilfully or maliciously break or destroy any window, window sash, door, blind or pane of glass of any occupied or unoccupied house or outhouse in the city, or enter any unoccupied house or outhouse and commit any nuisance therein, or break, destroy or injure anything therein or any part of such house or outhouse, or any fence or improvement whatever, or aid, abet or assist anyone to commit such nuisance or injure such property. (Prior code § 4232)

 

9.16.020 Trespassing.
    A.  No person shall trespass in, upon, on or across the property of another without the permission and consent of the person in charge or control thereof, provided that such person shall have posted at each of the corners of the property a notice, in writing, upon either a metallic or wooden sign, or other substantial material, which sign shall be at least one square foot in area, and shall be placed three feet above the normal level of the ground, and upon which such posted notice there appear in legible letters, at least two inches in height, the words “PRIVATE PROPERTY — NO TRESPASS” and such other words as may be desired indicating that trespassers are subject to prosecution. The sign shall have either a white or black base, and in the event the white base is used, the letters shall be in black, and if the black base is used, the letters shall be in white; provided, further, that in the event such property exceeds a total area of one acre, in addition to the posting of such notices at the corners thereof, there shall be posted at intervals of three hundred feet, or less, on or near the boundary lines of such property, notices of similar character.

    B.   These provisions shall have no application to a trespass committed by any officially authorized peace officer or law enforcement agent, when such trespass is committed in the execution of such officer’s or agent’s official duty, nor to any person visiting or calling at the residence or place of business of another person for the purpose of transacting any legitimate business. (Prior code § 4239)

 

9.16.030 Changing signs, billboards or clocks.
    No person shall erect, move, alter, change, repair, place, suspend, attach or maintain, or cause or permit to be erected, moved, altered, changed, repaired, placed, suspended, attached or maintained, any sign, street clock, street bulletin or street banner on, over or above any public street or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the director of public works to do so. (Prior code § 6412(a))

 

9.16.040 Posting handbills or signs.
    No person, except a public officer or employee in the performance of a public duty, or a private person in giving a legal notice, shall paste, post, paint, print, nail or tack, or otherwise fasten any card, banner, handbill, sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind upon any property without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent or trustee thereof. (Prior code § 6412(d))

 

9.16.050 Painting or posting advertising matter.
    No person shall scatter, daub or leave any paint, paste, glue or other substance used for painting or fixing advertising matter upon any public street or sidewalk, or scatter or throw or permit to be scattered or thrown any bills, wastepaper, paper, cloth or materials of whatsoever kind removed from billboards on any public street or on private property. (Prior code § 6412(c))

 

9.16.060 Shopping carts—Use restrictions.
    No person shall use any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device for any purpose other than that intended by the owner of such cart, basket or device. (Prior code § 4512(d))

 

9.16.070 Shopping carts—Removal from premises.
    No person shall remove any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device from the premises or parking area of any business establishment if such shopping cart, basket or device has permanently affixed to it a sign identifying it as belonging to the owner or operator of such business establishment and a notification to the effect that such cart, basket or device is not to be removed from the premises. (Prior code § 4512(a))

 

9.16.080 Shopping carts—Unlawful possession.
    No person shall have in his or her possession any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device which has been removed from the premises of any business establishment operated by the owner of such cart, basket or device, and which has permanently affixed to it a sign identifying it as belonging to the operator of a business establishment and a notification to the effect that such cart, basket or device is not to be removed from the premises of such establishment. (Prior code § 4512(c))

 

9.16.090 Shopping carts— Conversion to other use.
    No person shall alter, convert or tamper with any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device, or remove any part thereof. (Prior code § 4512(e))

 

9.16.100 Shopping carts— Abandonment—Public nuisance.
    No person shall abandon or leave any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device which has been removed from the owner’s premises upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway or other public place, nor upon any private property except that of the owner of such cart, basket or device. Such acts are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement as hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 4512(b))

 

9.16.110 Shopping carts—Pickup and impoundment.
    Any shopping cart, shopping basket or other similar device (all referred to in Sections 9.16.060 through 9.16.160 as “shopping cart”) which is abandoned or left upon any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property, is declared to be a nuisance, and shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in Sections 9.16.060 through 9.16.160. (Prior code § 4512(f))

 

9.16.120 Shopping carts— Regulations to be posted.
    In addition to the aforesaid signs affixed to the shopping carts, all business establishments utilizing such shopping carts shall conspicuously post signs at each of their entrances and exits notifying customers of Sections 9.16.060 through 9.16.160 prohibiting the removal of shopping carts from the premises. (Prior code § 4512(g)(part))

 

9.16.130 Shopping carts— Abandoned— Impoundment.
    Any shopping cart so abandoned or left may be picked up by the city or its duly authorized officer, agent or employee, and impounded at a location set aside therefor by the city. (Prior code § 4512(g)(1))

 

9.16.140 Shopping carts—Impoundment—Notice.
    Written or telephonic notice that such cart has been impounded by the city shall be given to the owner identified by the sign upon the shopping cart. Such notice shall state that the shopping cart may be retrieved by the owner at the hours and days specified therein upon the payment of the fees and charges provided for in Section 9.16.150. Such notice shall further provide that the person seeking to retrieve shall provide evidence of authority to act for the owner. (Ord. 882 § 1, 1996; prior code § 4512(g)(2))

 

9.16.150 Shopping carts —Impoundment—Fee.
    For each shopping cart so impounded there shall be an impound fee of five dollars. (Ord. 882 § 1, 1996; prior code § 4512(g)(3))

 

9.16.160 Shopping carts—Sale authorized when.
    A.  If within fifteen days from the date of the written notice provided for in Section 9.16.140, the owner of such shopping cart has not claimed the same and paid the fees prescribed for the impounding and storage of such shopping cart, such shopping carts may be disposed of by the city as follows:

    1.   To the highest bidder, as determined pursuant to annual sealed bids submitted to the city in accordance with the procedures established by the city for receiving such bids; or

    2.   If no bid has been received for the purchase of such shopping carts, then any shopping cart which has not been claimed within the time prescribed in Sections 9.16.060 through 9.16.160 may be disposed of by the city in such manner as the city may deem advisable.

    B.   At the time of the sale, each such shopping cart shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash, but the city shall have the right to refuse any bid for less than the minimum sales price. In the event the sales price of any such shopping cart exceeds the minimum sales price, the excess over and above the minimum sale price shall be paid to the business establishment whose sign was affixed to such shopping cart at the time of impoundment, if a claim therefor is made by the owner within ten days from the date of the sale; otherwise such excess shall be paid into the general fund of the city.

    C.   Each such sale made by the city shall be without any express or implied warranty, guaranty or representation as to title, mechanical condition, quality or fitness for any purpose or use. (Ord. 882 § 3, 1996; prior code § 4512(g)(4)—(6))

 

9.16.230 Cumulative remedies.
    The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative. Nuisances may be abated in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter, the terms and provisions of state law, or any other law pertaining to the abatement of public nuisances. Any other remedial action by civil suit or criminal suit may be pursued, and is not to be deemed preempted by this chapter. (Ord. 811 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 9.20 CONSUMER PROTECTION
9.20.010 False scales or measures.
    It is unlawful to use any scale or measuring device that does not give true net weight or measure. (Prior code § 4503)

Chapter 9.24 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
9.24.010 Loitering by persons under eighteen after ten p.m. unlawful—Exceptions.
    A.  It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots, or any unsupervised place between the hours of ten p.m. and daylight immediately following; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the minor is returning directly home from a meeting, entertainment, recreational activity or dance.

    B.   Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 749 § 1, 1988; prior code § 4242)

Chapter 9.28 WEAPONS
9.28.010 Firearms—Unlawful devices and activities.
    Except as provided in Section 9.28.020, no person within this city shall fire or discharge or cause to be fired or discharged, nor shall any parent, guardian or person having the care, custody or control of any minor permit such minor to have in his or her possession within the city, or to fire, discharge or cause to be fired or discharged within the city, any firearm or explosive device, rifle, air rifle, airgun, BB gun or pellet gun, sling, slingshot, bows, or bows and arrows, or any instrument of any kind, character or description which throws or projects bullets or missiles of any kind to any distance by means of elastic force, air, or any explosive substance. (Prior code § 3500)

 

9.28.020 Firearms—Permitted activities.
    The provisions of Section 9.28.010 as to the use of any device, firearm or instrument mentioned therein shall not apply to any of the following cases:

    A.  To police, peace officers, law enforcement officers, or persons in military service, or in the discharge of their duties;

    B.   To any person using a firearm in necessary self-defense of self or property, or otherwise authorized or permitted by law;

    C.   To any person using a firearm in accordance with any duty or function bestowed upon that person by law or recognized by law;

    D.  The discharge or firing of such firearms, or causing them to be discharged or fired, at a target range or authorized hunting ground;

    E.   To the discharge or firing of fireworks as authorized by law or this code;

    F.   To the use of firearms for the purpose of protecting life or property against animals, birds or rodents, where a permit to so discharge the same has been issued by the chief of police;

    G.  To the use or discharge of any air rifle, airgun, BB gun or pellet gun, slingshot, bow, arrow, or bows and arrows, or similar devices for hunting or target practice purposes on the private property of the person using or discharging such device, provided that no person under eighteen shall so use or discharge the foregoing as authorized in this section unless under the direct supervision and control, at the time of use or discharge of the foregoing, by his or her parent or guardian owning such private property, or an adult person having direct supervision and control of such minor and in possession of such private property; and provided further, that the use or discharge of such device shall not result in any projectile, arrow, shot or other missile landing or lodging beyond the boundaries of such private property. (Prior code § 3501)

 

9.28.030 Replica firearms.
    A.  As used in this chapter:

    1.   The meaning of the term firearm” shall be the same as the meaning of that term under the State Dangerous Weapons Control laws, and shall include air rifles, pellet guns or BB guns.

    2.   Replica firearm” means and shall include any device or object made of plastic, wood, metal, or any other material, which is a facsimile or toy version of or is otherwise recognizable as a pistol, revolver, shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or any other firearm as that term is used under the provisions of Sections 12001, 12001.5, 12020(d)(1) and 12570 of the State Penal Code.

    B.   Every person who, except in self-defense, in the presence of any other person, draws, exhibits or brandishes a replica firearm, or who simulates a firearm in a rude, angry and threatening manner, or who in any manner, unlawfully uses the same in any fight or quarrel, and causes the victim to reasonably believe that the person is actually in possession of an operable firearm, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 734 § 1, 1987; prior code §§ 3550, 3551)

Chapter 9.32 LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS
9.32.010 Prohibited acts.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a “criminal street gang,” as that term is defined in California Penal Code Section 186.22(f), or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a “criminal street gang,” to loiter or idle in a “public place” as defined in Section 9.32.010, subsection B, under any of the following circumstances:

    1.   With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang’s dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate non-members of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area;

    2.   With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity.

    B.   For purposes of this chapter, a “public place” means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any “public place” also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house. (Ord. 994 § 1, 2003)

 

9.32.020 Powers of law enforcement officers not limited.
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in absence of this chapter. (Ord. 994 § 1, 2003)

 

9.32.030 Parental control.
    Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 994 § 1, 2003)

 

9.32.040 Penalty.
    Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. (Ord. 994 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 9.36 GRAFFITI
9.36.010 Intent.
    It is the intent of the provisions of this chapter to provide an immediate and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby graffiti or other inscribed or affixed material may be removed from permanent structures located on public or privately owned real property in order to reduce blight and deterioration within the city. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.020 Findings.
    Graffiti constitutes an obnoxious public nuisance. The city council finds that graffiti or other inscribed or affixed materials placed upon any permanent structure, real or personal property visible from any publicly owned property, is found to be obnoxious and constitutes a public nuisance. As such, the city may abate graffiti as a nuisance and recover its costs in abating the nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.16 of this code. Such costs include, but are not limited to, court costs, attorneys’ fees, rewards, costs of removal of the graffiti, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, costs of administering and monitoring the participation of the defendant and his or her parents or guardians in a graffiti abatement program, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the person who created, caused or committed the graffiti or other inscribed or affixed material on the publicly or privately owned real or personal property within the city. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.030 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply:

    “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property.

    “Etching cream” means any caustic cream, gel, liquid, or solution capable, by means of a chemical action, of defacing, damaging, or destroying hard surfaces in a manner similar to acid.

    “Etching tool” means an instrument, tool or device designed or commonly used for making, cutting or defacing glass and includes devices designed for marking surfaces and capable of marking glass.

    “Expense of abatement” includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorneys’ fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the city, Los Angeles County, or the city and county in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person who placed the graffiti on real or personal property.

    “Felt tip marker” means any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width is greater than four millimeters, containing ink that is not water soluble.

    “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, figure, mark or design which is written, marked, etched, scratched, scribed, drawn, painted, posted or otherwise affixed to or on real or personal property.

    “Graffiti implement” means any aerosol container, etching cream, felt tip marker, paint stick, etching instrument, stickers, decals, stencils or any other device containing paint, ink, chalk, dye or similar substance which when used or applied is capable of defacing glass, metal, concrete or wood.

    “Minor” means a person who is under eighteen years of age.

    “Parent” means either parent if both parents have legal custody, or the parent or person having legal custody, or the guardian of a minor.

    “Responsible party” means an owner of property located within the city, a person with primary responsibility for control of property within the city or a person with primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property within the city. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.040 Removal of graffiti.
    A.  Right of City to Require Removal. It is unlawful for any responsible party to permit the property which is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period of forty-eight hours after telephonic notice or posting of notice by the city on the property. This prohibition does not apply if:

    1.   The responsible party demonstrates by a preponderance of evidence that he or she does not have the financial ability to remove the defacing graffiti; or

    2.   The responsible party demonstrates that he or she has an active program for the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part of that program, in which case it is unlawful to permit such property to remain defaced with graffiti for a period of three calendar days after written notice is posted on the property and mailed first-class postage prepaid to the address of the property.

    B.   Right of City to Remove.

    1.   Use of Public Funds. Whenever the city becomes aware, or is notified and determines that graffiti is located on public or privately owned property, is viewable from a public or quasi-public place within the city, the city is authorized to use public funds for the removal, repair or replacement of the same. The city will not authorize or undertake to remove, repair or replace any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the city determines that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.

    2.   Right of Entry on Private Property.

    a.   Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering private property, or property owned by another public entity, for the purposes of graffiti removal, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the responsible party and a release of the city from liability for private or public property damage.

    b.   Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. The city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    C.   Method of Removal.

    1.   Common Utility Colors and Paint—Type. Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the city, other than an electric utility, will paint their above-surface metal fixtures installed after the effective date of this chapter, with a uniform paint type and color.

    2.   Conditions on Encroachment Permits. Encroachment permits issued by the city may, among other things, be conditioned on any of the following: (i) the permittee applying an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city; (ii) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; (iii) the right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure; (iv) the permittee providing city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object or structure containing graffiti.

    3.   Conditions on Discretionary Approvals. In imposing conditions upon conditional use permits, variances, building permits, design or development applications or other similar land use entitlements, the city may impose graffiti removal requirements or any or all of the following conditions:

    a.   Use of Anti-Graffiti Material. The applicant must apply an anti-graffiti material to publicly viewable surfaces which will be constructed on the site and which the city deems are likely to attract graffiti (referred to hereafter as “graffiti-attracting surfaces”). Such material must be approved by the city in advance.

    b.   Right of Access to Remove Graffiti. The applicant must grant to the city, in writing, the right of entry over and access to such parcels for the purpose of removing or “painting over” graffiti on graffiti-attracting surfaces previously designated by the city. Such entry will only be allowed upon forty-eight hours’ posted notice. This grant will be an express condition of approval and will run with the land.

    c.   Supply City with Graffiti-Removal Material. For a specified period of years after approval, the applicant, and any and all successors in interest, must provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of graffiti on the designated graffiti-attracting surfaces.

    d.   Owner to Immediately Remove Graffiti. Persons applying for subdivision maps must, as part of the conditions, covenants and restrictions, covenant that the owners of the lots will immediately remove any graffiti placed on publicly viewable trees and structures thereon to the city’s satisfaction. Such covenants will run with the land and must be in a form satisfactory to the city.

    D.  Preservation Procedures Adopted Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.3(c)(2). Prior to or during removal, the city will follow any procedures adopted by the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department for pre-removal preservation of sufficient evidence of the graffiti for criminal prosecutions or proceedings under Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.050 Storage, display and sale of aerosol spray paint contain-ers, etching cream and marker pens.
    Any person who owns, conducts, operates, manages or carries on any business, company, shop or retail commercial enterprise, including without limitation, any swap meet or garage sale, which sells aerosol spray paint containers, marker pens with tips exceeding four millimeters in width or etching cream, containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries, shall cause such aerosol containers, marker pens or etching cream to be stored, maintained or displayed in a place or manner which is locked or secured so as not to be accessible to the public except with the assistance of the seller or the seller’s employees. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.060 Possession—Prohibition of spray paint in public parks and buildings.
    Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594.1(d), it is unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person and in plain view to the public, etching cream or an aerosol container of paint while in any posted facility, park, playground, swimming pool, or recreational area owned, operated or maintained by the city (other than a highway, street or alley). This prohibition against possession does not apply to authorized employees or agents of the city or a person having the authorization of an authorized employee or agent of the city. The community services director, or his or her designee, will post a notice at appropriate locations indicating that, pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594.1(d), no person shall possess etching cream or any can of spray paint in that city-owned building, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational area or other city facility without the permission of an authorized city officer. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.070 Rewards.
    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.5, the city may, from time to time, offer a reward in an amount set by resolution of the city council for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for violation within the city of California Penal Code Sections 594, 594.3, 640, 640.5, or 640.6.

    A.  In the event of multiple, verifiable sources of information, the city or its designee will divide the reward in the manner it deems appropriate.

    B.   For the purposes of this section, diversion of the violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, constitutes a conviction.

    C.   Claims for rewards under this section must be filed with the city or its designee prior to the conviction of a person and must:

    1.   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property damaged or destroyed;

    2.   Identify by name the person who was convicted;

    3.   Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred; and

    4.   Be in writing and filed within ninety days of such conviction.

    D.  No reward will be granted until the city or its designee investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied.

    E.   The person committing the graffiti vandalism, and if a minor, then his or her parent or lawful guardian will be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section and Government Code Section 53069.5. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.080 Recovery of law enforcement costs.
    A.  Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, the court may order a person convicted of violating California Penal Code Section 594 to pay all or part of the law enforcement costs incurred in identifying and apprehending the defendant. The court will first determine whether the defendant has the ability to pay the costs, not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars. If the defendant does have such ability, the court will order defendant to pay the costs; however, such order shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars. The law enforcement agency must provide evidence of, and bears the burden of establishing the reasonableness of, such costs.

    B.   The law enforcement costs authorized in subsection A of this section are in addition to any other costs incurred or recovered by the law enforcement agency, and payment of these costs does not in any way limit, preclude, or restrict any other right, remedy, or action otherwise available to the law enforcement agency. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.090 Nuisance abatement.
    A.  Pursuant to California Government Code Section 38772, any minor or other person who creates, causes or commits a nuisance by defacing the property of another with graffiti is liable for the cost of abatement of the nuisance caused. The city may recover this cost by making the expense of abatement a lien against the property of the minor or the minor’s parent, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

    1.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:

    “Minor” or “other person” means a minor or other person who has confessed to, admitted to, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the California Penal Code; or a minor convicted by final judgment of a violation of Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the California Penal Code; or a minor declared a ward of the juvenile court pursuant to Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code.

    B.   Procedures.

    1.   To recover the expense of abatement, the city will give notice to the minor prior to the recordation of a lien on the parcel of land owned by the minor and notice to the parent prior to the recordation of a lien on the parcel of land owned by the parent. This notice will be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the California Code of Civil Procedure.

    2.   Notice When Minor or Parent Cannot Be Found.

    a.   If the minor, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property owned by the minor, in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten days. The notice must also be published pursuant to Government Code Section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in the county in which the property is located.

    b.   If a minor’s parent, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon the property owned by the parent in a conspicuous place for a period of ten days. The notice must also be published pursuant to Government Code Section 6062 in a newspaper of general circulation that is published in the county in which the property is located.

    3.   A graffiti nuisance abatement lien will be recorded in the county recorder’s office in the county in which the parcel of land is located. From the date of recording, the lien shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien.

    4.   A graffiti nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section will specify the amount of the lien; the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed; the date of the abatement order; the street address, legal description, and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

    5.   A graffiti nuisance abatement lien may be satisfied through foreclosure in an action brought by the city.

    6.   If the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (B)(4) of this section shall be recorded by the city. A graffiti nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in the grantor-grantee index.

    7.   If the county recorder imposes a fee on the city to reimburse the costs of processing and recording the lien and providing notice to the property owner, the city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred for processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

    C.   Alternative Procedure for Assessment. As an alternative to the lien in subsections A and B of this section, the city may make the abatement and related administrative costs a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or by the parent, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 8.16 of this code. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and are subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment. However, if any real property to which the abatement and related administrative costs relates has been transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become delinquent, then the abatement and related administrative costs will not result in a lien against the real property but will instead be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. Notices or instruments relating to the abatement proceeding or special assessment may be recorded. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.100 Suspension or delay of driving privileges.
    For each conviction of a person aged thirteen years or older, for violation of this chapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the city shall petition the sentencing court to suspend existing driving privileges or delay the issuance of driving privileges in accordance to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.110 Parental responsibility.
    Pursuant to California Civil Code Section 1714.1(D), where graffiti is applied by a minor, the parents or legal guardians of said minor shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of civil damages resulting from the misconduct of the minor in an amount not to exceed twenty-five thousand dollars for each such offense. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.120 Failure to remove graffiti upon notice—Penalty.
    In addition to any costs incurred by the city for the abatement of graffiti from private property, failure to voluntarily abate graffiti after notice shall result in the following penalties:

    A.  The failure of any person, firm, partnership or corporation in failing to remove graffiti within the prescribed period as set forth in this chapter constitutes an infraction and is punishable by a fine of one hundred dollars upon first conviction thereof.

    B.   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter for a second time shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars.

    C.   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter for a third time or any subsequent number of times shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars.

    D.  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation previously convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter for a third time shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 9.36.130. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.130 Penalty for violation of chapter.
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter to remove graffiti.

    A.  Except as provided above, any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this chapter or the California Penal Code.

    B.   Notwithstanding the penalties set forth herein, any person who maliciously defaces, damages or destroys property with a graffiti implement is guilty of vandalism, pursuant to California Penal Code Section 594, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison or in the county jail for a period not to exceed one year, or by fine of five thousand dollars but no more that fifty thousand dollars depending on the severity and the amount of the defacement, damage or destruction to property, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

    C.   The penalties set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this code or by law. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.140 Community service.
    A.  Upon conviction of any person for violation of this chapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, the city shall petition the sentencing court to impose community service time, pursuant to California Penal Code Section 640.6. The sentencing court may require the performance of community service within the city in addition to any monetary penalties imposed. In the event the sentencing court approves community service, the city shall request any adult or emancipated minor convicted of vandalism, as defined by California Penal Code Section 594(a)(1) to: (1) complete a minimum of twenty-four hours, but no more than forty-eight hours of community services cleaning up, removing and repairing property damaged by graffiti for the first conviction; and (2) complete forty-eight hours, but no more than ninety-six hours of community services cleaning up, removing and repairing property damaged by graffiti for each subsequent conviction.

    B.   Any person who is under the age of eighteen when he or she violates any provision of this chapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a graffiti implement, and is found to be the person described in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 by reason of the commission of vandalism, may be required to perform community service time pursuant to California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 728. For any minor found guilty of vandalism, the city shall petition the juvenile court and the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed by the city, require the minor to provide the necessary labor to clean up, repair or replace the defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or otherwise make restitution to the property owner.

    C.   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating any provision of this chapter or is otherwise unable to make restitution for damages, the minor’s parent or legal guardian shall be liable for payment of the fine or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make restitution, the sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or community service time by the parent or legal guardian upon a finding of good cause. If the sentencing court waives the payment of the fine by the parent or legal guardian, the city shall petition the sentencing court, and the court at its option, may order the parents or legal guardian to provide the necessary labor equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor deemed guilty of violating any provision of this chapter, to clean up, repair or replace property damaged by the minor. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.150 Additional remedies and penalties.
    The remedies and penalties set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and may be used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this code or by law. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

 

9.36.160 Violations.
    A violation of Section 9.36.050 or 9.36.060 of this chapter is a misdemeanor which is punishable by the general penalty of Chapter 1.20 of this code. (Ord. 998 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 9.40 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY PROHIBITION
9.40.010 Findings and purpose.
    A.  The city council finds that the prohibitions on medical and adult-use commercial cannabis uses are necessary for the preservation and protection of the public peace, health, safety, and welfare for the city and its community. It is also the intent of this chapter to regulate indoor cannabis cultivation, and to prohibit all outdoor cultivation, for personal use, including by qualified patients and primary caregivers. The city council’s prohibition of such activities is within the authority conferred upon the city council by the California Constitution and other state law.

    B.   The city council finds that this chapter: (1) exercises its local authority to enact and enforce local regulations and ordinances, including those regarding the zoning, permitting, licensing, or other entitlement of the activities prohibited by this chapter; and (2) exercises its police power to enact and enforce regulations for the public benefit, safety, and welfare of the city and its community. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.020 Definitions.
    “Cannabis” has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Cannabis products” have the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code, Section 26001(i) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Caregiver” or “primary caregiver” has the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Commercial cannabis activity” has the same meaning as that set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(k) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Cooperative” means two or more persons collectively or cooperatively cultivating, using, transporting, possessing, administering, delivering or making available medical marijuana, with or without compensation.

    “Cultivation” has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(l) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Delivery” has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(p) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Distribution” has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(r) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Indoor” means any location that is totally contained within a fully enclosed and secure private residence or accessory building located on the grounds of the private residence.

    “Manufacturer” has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(ah) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Medical cannabis” or “medical cannabis product” has the same meanings as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(ai) as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Outdoor” means any location that is not totally contained within a fully enclosed and secure accessory building or primary residence.

    “Personal cultivation” means cannabis cultivation for a natural person’s own personal use and possession in accordance with this code and state law, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, as may be amended, and such person does not sell or distribute cannabis to any other person. “Personal use” also means and includes cultivation of medical cannabis conducted by a qualified patient exclusively for his or her personal medical use, and cultivation conducted by a primary caregiver for the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, in accordance with state law, including Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.7 and 11362.765, as may be amended. Except as herein defined, personal cultivation does not include, and shall not authorize, any cultivation conducted as part of a business or commercial activity, including cultivation for compensation or retail or wholesale sales of cannabis.

    “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, accessory dwelling unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling occupied for residential purposes.

    “Qualifying patient” or “qualified patient” has the same meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 as the same may be amended from time to time.

    “Retailer” means a facility where cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for ritual sale to customers, including an establishment that delivers cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale or conducts sales exclusively by delivery. For purposes of this code, the term “retailer” includes microbusinesses, nonprofits licensed under Business and Professions Code, Section 26070.5, and any other state license designation that authorized distribution, whether for freer or in exchange for any consideration, of cannabis and/or cannabis products to individual customers. For purposes of this code, “cannabis retailer” also includes medical cannabis dispensaries, patient collective and cooperatives operating, or proposing to operate, pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.5) and/or the Medical Marijuana Program (Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.7 et seq.), as may be amended from time to time.

    “Testing laboratory” has the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(at) as the same may be amended from time to time.

 (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.030 Prohibition.
    A.  Commercial cannabis activities of all types are expressly prohibited in all zones, all specific plans, and all overlay zones in the city of Pico Rivera. No use permit, variance, building permit, or any other entitlement or permit, whether administrative or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for the establishment or operation of a commercial cannabis use in any zoning district, and no person shall establish, operate, conduct or allow a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city limits.

    B.   Cannabis Deliveries. To the fullest extent allowed by state law, the ban on commercial cannabis uses also prohibits the operation of a cannabis delivery service to customers in the city of Pico Rivera, including those deliveries originating from a physical location outside of the city. This section shall not be construed to prohibit use of the public roads pursuant to Business and Professions Code, Section 26090 or those activities allowed by Section 26054, subdivisions (c) or (d).

    C.   Outdoor Cultivation Prohibited. Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited in all zoning districts in the city of Pico Rivera, including cultivation for personal medical use by a qualified patient or primary caregiver, personal adult-use, or commercial purposes. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.040 Indoor personal cultivation—Permit required.
    A.  Personal Cultivation Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the indoor cultivation of cannabis for personal use, including cannabis cultivation for personal medical use by a qualified patient or primary caregiver, without first obtaining and maintaining a valid personal cultivation permit under this section.

    B.   Application. Every person required to have a personal cultivation permit under this chapter shall make an application therefor, on a form prescribed by the city, to the director of community and economic development and the payment of the fee established by resolution of the city council. No more than one permit per private residence shall be issued and maintained at any one time, regardless of the number of persons dwelling or residing in the private residence or upon the grounds thereof.

    C.   Indoor Personal Cultivation Regulations. Permittees issued a personal cultivation permit under this chapter shall, at all times, conduct the activities authorized by said permit in strict accordance with the requirements of this section listed below, any conditions of approval imposed by the city, and the California Adult Use of Marijuana Act, whichever is more restrictive.

    1.   Cannabis cultivation shall only occur indoors at a private residence, or inside a legal accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private residence.

    2.   Cannabis cultivation shall be limited to six plants total per residence, whether immature or mature, regardless of how many residents reside at the private residence.

    3.   Persons engaging in indoor cultivation must comply with all State and Local laws regarding fire safety, water use, electrical wiring, buildings, and indoor cultivation, including without limitation, Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2.

    4.   The use of gas products (CO2, butane, propane, natural gas, etc.) or generators for cultivation of cannabis is prohibited. Use of gas products shall be limited to those al-

lowed by the California Building, Electrical, and Fire Codes as adopted and amended by the city of Pico Rivera.

    5.   The residence shall maintain a fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident(s), and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for cannabis cultivation.

    6.   Any structure used for the cultivation of cannabis shall be equipped with permanently installed and permitted electric service, and shall not be served by temporary extension cords or generators.

    7.   All areas used for cannabis cultivation shall be located within a fully enclosed and secure structure. “Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building, greenhouse, or other legal structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by connecting, enclosed walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors.

    8.   A fully enclosed and secure structure used for the cultivation of cannabis that is separate from the main residential structure, must maintain a minimum setback of ten feet from any property line.

    9.   Any structure used for the cultivation of cannabis must have proper ventilation and air filtration to protect the health and safety of occupants and the neighborhood, prevent mold damage, and to prevent cannabis plant odors or particles from becoming a public nuisance.

    D.  Permit Fees. A filing and processing fee, in an amount established by resolution the city council, shall be submitted with each application for an original permit, or applications for permit renewals. The fee provided for in this section is imposed to cover the reasonable cost of processing and reviewing permit applications, and to cover the cost of site inspections provided for in this chapter. The fee provided for in this section may be amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.050 Grounds for permit denial.
    The director of community and economic development shall deny any application for a permit or for the renewal thereof if the director of community and economic development makes any of the following determinations:

    A.  The applicant has not first obtained or has not maintained in full force and effect the permit required under this chapter prior to engaging in the activities authorized by the permit.

    B.   The private residence or accessory structure used to indoor cultivation fails to comply with all applicable health, safety, zoning, fire, building and safety laws and regulations.

    C.   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the permit or renewal of the permit.

    D.  The applicant is in violation of a provision of this code or owes taxes, fees, or penalties pursuant to this chapter or any other provision of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    E.   The applicant (new or renewal) has had a permit denied or revoked by the city within the preceding twelve months. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

 

9.40.060 Notice of denial.
    Upon determination of the existence of any factors or conditions specified in Section 9.04.050, the director of community and economic development shall advise the applicant by serving upon the applicant a notice of denial in writing within ten business days of such determination. The notice of denial shall state the director’s findings and/or determinations that justify denial of the permit application, and shall include a summary of the evidence upon which such findings and/or determinations are based. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.070 Appeal of permit denial.
    The denial of any application for a permit may be appealed to the city manager or his or her designee, and such appeal shall be governed by the standards and procedures set forth in Section 9.04.090 with regards to revocation. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.080 Term of permit;—Transfers prohibited.
    A.  Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance. Permits may be renewed upon the filing of an application for renewal with the director of community and economic development. The application for renewal shall be in the same form as an application for an original permit. It shall be issued or denied as in the case of the original permit.

    B.   Transfer of Permit Prohibited. No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferrable or assignable to any other person. The activities authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall only be conducted inside the private residence or accessory structure for which the permit was issued. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

9.40.090 Permit revocation.
    A.  Grounds for Revocation. The director of community and economic development shall revoke any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, if the director makes any of the following findings or determinations:

    1.   There exists any ground for denial of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

    2.   The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in any report required to be filed by law.

    3.   The permittee has violated or is violating any condition of approval imposed on such permit, or upon any other entitlement granted by the city or other government agency.

    4.   The permittee has violated or is violating any ordinance, law, or regulation of the city, county of Los Angeles, or state of California in the course of exercising any rights under the permit.

    5.   Any condition or offense deemed a public nuisance under the Pico Rivera Municipal Code exists on the property listed in the permit.

    6.   The continued activities under the permit would endanger, disrupt or otherwise be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals or general welfare of the city or its inhabitants, or constitute a public nuisance.

    B.   Order of Revocation. The director of community and economic development shall serve a written order of revocation upon the permittee stating the grounds for revocation and advise the licensee/permittee of the effective date of the revocation.

    C.   Effectiveness of Order. Any permit revoked pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall become effective, and the permittee shall cease all activities authorized under such permit, no later than ten calendar days from the service of the order of revocation. Where an appeal is timely filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the notice of revocation shall be stayed pending the resolution of the appeal pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.100 Appeal of revocation.
    A.  Request for Appeal. A permittee may appeal any notice of denial or order of revocation issued by the director of community and economic development by filing a request for an appeal with the city clerk, and tendering a filing and processing fee as set by resolution of the city council, within ten calendar days of service of the notice/order of such denial or revocation. The request for an appeal must be made in writing and shall contain the following information:

    1.   The name of the appellant and the address of the applicable location where the appellant was authorized (or was seeking to be authorized) to engage in the activities authorized by a permit issued under this chapter;

    2.   The date of denial or revocation by the director;

    3.   A statement as to all grounds for appeal in sufficient detail to articulate and understand the nature of the controversy; and

    4.   The signature of the appellant under penalty of perjury as to the contents of the request for appeal.

    B.   Upon receipt of such written appeal and fee, the city manager or designee shall set the matter for consideration within forty-five days from the timely filing of a request for appeal and payment of applicable fees, unless an alternative appeal date is mutually agreed upon in writing by the city manager or designee and the appellant. The city manager or designee shall issue written notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing to the appellant at least seven calendar days’ prior thereto. If a request for an appeal is not timely submitted (with all applicable fees) to the city clerk, the notice of denial or order of revocation shall be deemed final and binding, and the permittee shall be deemed to have failed to exhaust all administrative remedies.

    C.   Written notice of the city manager’s or designee’s decision of whether to approve, revoke, reinstate or conditionally reinstate the permit shall be issued to the appellant within ten business days of the decision. The determination of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.110 Violation—Penalties.
    A.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.20 of this code. Any such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day a violation of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted to be continued by such person.

    B.   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this chapter, the city prosecutor or city attorney may enforce any violation of this chapter by means of an administrative or civil enforcement process through a restraining order, a preliminary or permanent injunction, or by any other means available by law. The city prosecutor or city attorney may be awarded costs, including the costs of investigation and discovery and reasonable attorney’s fees, in connection with such civil enforcement process.

    C.   In the event of any conflict between the penalties enumerated under this code and any penalties set forth in state law, the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern. To the extent certain conduct is immune from arrest and criminal liability pursuant to state law, including the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5) or the Medical Marijuana Program (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7 et seq.), criminal penalties shall not apply. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

 

9.40.120 Public nuisance.
    Any use or condition caused, or permitted to exist, in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, Pico Rivera Municipal Code, or any other remedy available to the city at law or equity. (Ord. 1137 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 9.44 LOCAL REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDERS
9.44.010 Incorporation of applicable laws and regulations.
    The city shall enforce, and all persons shall comply with, all valid state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the regulation of registered sex offenders, including, but not limited to, all enforceable provisions of the Sexual Predator Punishment and Control Act, also known as Jessica’s Law. (Ord. 1122 § 2, 2018)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.12 ACCIDENTS AND REPORTS
Chapter 10.16 ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10.20 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.24 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.28 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.32 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
Chapter 10.36 PRIVATE ROADS
Chapter 10.40 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.42 LIVING IN MOTOR HOMES OR OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Chapter 10.44 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
Chapter 10.48 CRUISING
Chapter 10.52 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS
Chapter 10.56 TRUCKS AND WEIGHT LIMITS
Chapter 10.60 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRANSPORT
Chapter 10.64 VEHICLE REPOSSESSION
Chapter 10.68 PEDESTRIANS
Chapter 10.72 BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
Chapter 10.74 SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLERSKATES
Chapter 10.76 RAILROADS
Chapter 10.80 OVERSIZED VEHICLE OVERNIGHT PARKING REGULATIONS

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.04.010 Rules and regulations.
    A.  It is the intention of the city to provide reasonable traffic and parking rules, regulations and laws. All intersections, safety zones, crosswalks, roadway or curb parking, loading and standing regulation markings, stop signs, boulevard stop signs, speed limit signs, slow signs, danger signs, caution signs, warning signs, traffic signals, and all other traffic-control signs and devices, parking limit signs and roadway markings relative to traffic direction and control, and also relative to parking, now painted or marked or posted or in place or designated or authorized by existing county ordinances, or by the county road commission, or by the county sheriff or by the State Highway Patrol, or by other agencies to whom such authority was delegated by the state or county shall so continue as if found, established or designated by the city council, and shall be enforced pursuant to this title as part of the traffic regulations of the city of Pico Rivera until the city council adopts rules or regulations or laws to the contrary. No person shall drive, stand or park a vehicle in violation thereof.

    B.   The foregoing shall remain enforceable as long as they conform with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state, or until changed by the city council. Hereafter, future designations relative to the foregoing shall be done pursuant to authorization given or granted by the city council to any person, agency or organization. (Prior code § 3344)

 

10.04.020 Exceptions for emergency and official vehicles.
    A.  The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the sheriff, State Highway Patrol or fire department, any public ambulance, or any public utility vehicle, or any private ambulance which has qualified as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

    B.   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her wilful disregard of the safety of others.

    C.   The provisions of this title regulating the parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility while necessarily in use for construction or repair work, or to any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States Mail. (Prior code § 3326)

 

10.04.030 Authority to divert vehicular traffic.
    Pursuant to Section 21101.2 of the Vehicle Code of the state, if the Los Angeles County sheriff, or any of his or her duly appointed deputies, determines that the traffic load on a particular street or highway, or any portion thereof, within the incorporated city of Pico Rivera, is such that little or no vehicular flow is occurring and, additionally, if the sheriff or any of his or her duly appointed deputies finds that a significant number of vehicles are not promptly moving when the opportunity arises to do so, the sheriff or any of his or her duly appointed deputies may divert vehicles, excepting public safety or emergency vehicles, from that street or highway, or portion thereof, subject to traffic congestion until such time as reasonably flowing traffic is restored. (Ord. 721 § 1, 1986; prior code § 3329.2)

 

10.04.040 Provisions supplemental to state law.
    The purpose of this title is to supplement the general law, or to impose regulations where the state has not by general laws already legislated on the same subject matter, so as to have occupied the field of enactment by the city. In the event any section of this title should so conflict with the general laws as now or hereafter enacted, such general law shall control. (Prior code § 3300)

 

10.04.050 Certain roads temporarily closed—Exceptions.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle in, out of or upon any street, highway or alley which has been posted as a closed street by resolution of the city council.

    B.   All streets, highways or alleys to be temporarily closed shall be closed by resolution of the city council setting forth the days and times of closure.

    C.   This section shall not apply to the drivers or operators of the following vehicles:

    1.   Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, fuel or delivery vehicles;

    2.   Termite or pesticide vehicles;

    3.   Vehicles delivering life-support and health commodities to residential areas and schools;

    4.   Emergency and law enforcement vehicles.

    D.  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, on conviction thereof, be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than thirty days nor more than six months or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 766 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 10.08 DEFINITIONS
10.08.010 Definitions generally.
    For the purposes of this title, the definitions set out in this chapter shall be used in applying the provisions of this title where the same can be validly imposed as local traffic regulations. (Prior code § 3300)

 

10.08.020 Business district.
    A.  “Business district” means that portion of a highway and the property contiguous thereto:

    1.   Upon one side of which highway, for a distance of six hundred feet, fifty percent or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by buildings in use for business; or

    2.   Upon both sides of which highway, collectively, for a distance of three hundred feet, fifty percent or more of the contiguous property fronting thereon is so occupied.

    B.   A business district may be longer than the distances specified in this section if the above ratio of buildings in use for business to the length of the highway exists. (Prior code § 3318.1)

 

10.08.030 Commercial vehicle.
    “Commercial vehicle” means a vehicle used or maintained for the transportation of persons for hire, compensation or profit, or designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. (Prior code § 3318.3)

 

10.08.040 Intersection.
    “Intersection” means the area embraced within the prolongation of the curblines of two or more streets which join at an angle, whether or not one such street crosses the other. (Prior code § 3300.1)

 

10.08.050 Loading zone.
    “Loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles actually engaged in loading or unloading of materials. (Prior code § 3301)

 

10.08.060 Official traffic signals.
    “Official traffic signals” means and includes any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed, and which is placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction. (Prior code § 3302)

 

10.08.070 Official warning and direction signs and signals.
    “Official warning and direction signs and signals” means and includes all warning and direction signs and signals not inconsistent with this title placed or erected under this title or by authority of the city council, or by any one person with authority given such person or agency by the city council. (Prior code § 3303)

 

10.08.080 Operator.
    “Operator” means and includes the driver, rider or leader of a horse, and a person who pushes, draws, propels, operates or who is in charge of a vehicle. (Prior code § 3304)

 

10.08.085 Oversized vehicle.
    “Oversized vehicle” shall be defined as any vehicle, whether motorized or nonmotorized, that exceeds eighteen feet in length, or eighty inches in width or eighty inches in height. Any extension caused by any mirror or any accessory attached to such vehicle such as trailer, cabin, mount, or other structure attached to the vehicle shall be considered part of the measured length, width, or height. (Ord. 1106 § 3, 2017)

 

10.08.090 Park.
    “Park” means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading passengers or materials. (Prior code § 3305)

 

10.08.110 Passenger loading zone.
    “Passenger loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. (Prior code § 3307)

 

10.08.120 Pedestrian.
    “Pedestrian” means any person afoot. (Prior code § 3308)

 

10.08.130 Residence district.
    A.  “Residence district” means that portion of a highway and the property contiguous thereto, other than a business district:

    1.   Upon one side of which highway, within a distance of a quarter of a mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by thirteen or more separate dwelling houses or business structures; or

    2.   Upon both sides of which highway, collectively, within a distance of a quarter of a mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by sixteen or more separate dwelling houses or business structures.

    B.   A residence district may be longer than one-quarter of a mile if the above ratio of separate dwelling houses or business structures to the length of the highway exists. (Prior code § 3318.2)

 

10.08.140 Right-of-way.
    “Right-of-way” means the privilege of the immediate use of the street. (Prior code § 3310)

 

10.08.150 Roadway.
    “Roadway” means and includes that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. (Ord. 768 § 2, 1989; prior code § 3309)

 

10.08.160 Safety zone.
    “Safety zone” means that marked portion of a roadway reserved for exclusive use of pedestrians. (Prior code § 3311)

 

10.08.170 Sidewalk.
    “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street, other than the roadway, set apart by curb, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel. (Ord. 768 § 3, 1989; prior code § 3312)

 

10.08.180 Stop or stop when required.
    “Stop” or “stop when required” means a complete cessation of movement. (Prior code § 3313)

 

10.08.190 Street.
    “Street” means every way more than thirty feet in width between property lines. (Prior code § 3314)

 

10.08.200 Streetcar.
    “Streetcar” means and includes every device traveling exclusively upon rails. (Prior code § 3315)

 

10.08.210 Traffic.
    “Traffic” means and includes pedestrians, vehicles and streetcars, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. (Prior code § 3316)

 

10.08.220 Vehicle.
    “Vehicle” means and includes every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a street, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Prior code § 3317)

 

10.08.230 Vehicle Code.
    “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 3318)

Chapter 10.12 ACCIDENTS AND REPORTS
10.12.010 Accident reports required when—Contents.
    A.  It shall be the duty of every person riding, driving or in charge of any animal, or riding, driving, propelling or in charge of any vehicle upon any public street, alley or other public place within the city that shall collide with any animal, with any vehicle or with any person, or with any public property, or any equipment, property or fixtures of a public utility, where a personal injury has been sustained or property damage of any kind in excess of one hundred dollars, or damage to public property, or damage to the property, equipment or fixtures of a public utility has been sustained, to report the same within twenty-four hours to the Norwalk Office, or other office of the sheriff as may be designated by the sheriff of the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department, in writing.

    B.   Such report shall state the time when, and the place where such collision took place; the correct name and address of the person owning and the person or persons riding, driving or in charge of the animal, or riding, driving, propelling or in charge of the vehicle; the correct license number of such vehicle; and such further information as requested by the sheriff or his or her authorized deputies. (Prior code § 3342)

 

10.12.020 Investigation of accidents.
    All members of the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department shall have the power to investigate accidents resulting in property damage, damage to public property, damage to public utilities, personal injuries or death, and to gather evidence for the purpose of prosecuting the person or persons guilty of any violation of the law contributing to the happening of such an accident, as well as members of the California Highway Patrol. (Prior code § 3343)

Chapter 10.16 ENFORCEMENT
10.16.010 Definitions.
    Whenever the word or words “policeman” or “law enforcement agency” or other designation indicating law enforcement agency or traffic law enforcement agency are used in this title, they mean the Los Angeles County sheriff and the county sheriff’s department and the officers and deputies thereof; except, where the California Highway Patrol has continued to provide traffic law enforcement on streets other than state highways, said agency shall also be designated the law enforcement agency. (Prior code § 3344.1(part))

 

10.16.020 Authority of county and state officers.
    The enforcement of state traffic laws and rules, the enforcement of rules, regulations and laws of this title, and the enforcement of the city ordinances and resolutions pertaining to traffic and traffic matters, shall be done by the Los Angeles County sheriff and the county sheriff’s department, and the California State Highway Patrol and the officers and deputies thereof. (Prior code § 3344.1(part))

 

10.16.030 Traffic direction—Obedience required.
    The Los Angeles County Sheriff and officers of the county sheriff’s department, as well as the California Highway Patrol, are authorized to direct all traffic by means of visible or audible signal, and no person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of any of such officers. (Prior code § 3319)

Chapter 10.20 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
10.20.010 Regulations—Operative date and authority.
    A.  Where authorized by the terms and provisions of the Vehicle Code, and in accordance therewith and subject to the terms and provisions thereof, as well as subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter, the city council may adopt regulations pertaining to the operation, driving, standing and parking of vehicles and pedestrian traffic upon the roads, streets, highways, sidewalks and other public places of the city, where necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and where pursuant to traffic or other study determining the necessity therefor. Any regulation or posting or signing adopted pursuant thereto shall conform to all requirements of the Vehicle Code.

    B.   Such regulations shall, in addition, be subject to the following:

    1.   Any provision of this title or this code, or any ordinance or resolution of the city regulating traffic or delegating the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the Department of Public Works of the state is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval by the Department of Public Works;

    2.   Whenever this code or this title or any ordinance or resolution of the city delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state law requires the prior approval of the Department of Public Works, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the Department of Public Works when and to the extent required by the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3323)

 

10.20.020 Installation and maintenance.
    The director of public works shall determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices and signals, conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents, and devise remedial measures, conduct engineering and traffic investigation of traffic conditions, and cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties bestowed upon him or her by any ordinance of the city. Whenever, by the provisions of this code, a power is granted to the director of public works, or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his or her deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Prior code § 3323.1(part))

 

10.20.030 Traffic engineer powers and duties.
    The director of public works, as city traffic engineer, shall have the following powers and duties in addition to any other power and duty bestowed upon him or her by this code:

    A.  The director of public works shall place or maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this title.

    B.   Whenever the Vehicle Code or this title requires for the effectiveness of any provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to the public of the application of such law, he or she is authorized to install or cause to be installed the necessary devices, subject to any limitation or restriction set forth in the Vehicle Code or this title applicable thereto.

    C.   Whenever the city council has determined by resolution or ordinance that certain streets, sidewalks, intersections or areas within the dedicated right-of-way, or portions of any of the foregoing, by reason of traffic conditions or lack of visibility or other factors, necessitate the placement and maintenance of traffic-control devices, regulations or pavement marking in order to protect the public health and safety, he or she shall install and maintain traffic-control devices or warning postings or paintings as he or she may deem necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic or pedestrian use of the foregoing.

    D.  The director of public works may also place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices, postings or pavement markings as he or she deems necessary or proper to regulate vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or to guide or warn the same in the following cases, provided such determination is based upon traffic warrants of the city council and traffic investigation, and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be set forth in this title or may be determined by the city council:

    1.   Designating and establishing boulevard stops on each and every street intersecting a through or major street, as established by the city council;

    2.   Designating and establishing boulevard stops or yield right-of-way intersections at those intersections where he or she has, pursuant to engineering studies and accident reports, determined the same hazardous to the public use thereof without such regulations;

    3.   Designating and establishing marked crosswalks at intersections;

    4.   Designating or establishing intersections where pedestrians shall not cross in a crosswalk, indicated at the intersections where engineering studies and accident reports indicate the necessity for such control in order to protect the public health and safety;

    5.   Designating by pavement markings travel lanes upon the surface of any highway;

    6.   Temporarily designating by pavement marking or signposting travel lanes upon the surface of any highway, regardless of the centerline of the highway, where necessary in an emergency or in the course of a construction project in order to protect the public health and safety;

    7.   Designating by markers, buttons or signs a different course of travel than that specified in Section 22100 of the Vehicle Code to be traveled by vehicles turning at intersections, or allocating and indicating more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right-hand or left-hand turns where traffic studies and accident reports indicate the necessity for such control in order to protect the public health and safety;

    8.   Designating no-parking or no-stopping zones in those areas where he or she has determined pursuant to traffic studies and accident reports that the parking or stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or endanger life or property;

    9.   Designating temporary no-parking zones on any street or highway:

    a.   Where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway, or the installation of underground utilities, or

    b.   Where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or

    c.   Where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, structures or personal property of unusual size and the parking of such vehicles would prohibit or interfere with such movement;

    10. Designating emergency no-parking zones where he or she has determined that traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblies, gatherings or functions, or for other unusual and extraordinary reasons. (Prior code § 3323.1(part))

 

10.20.040 City council authority.
    The director of public works shall not establish or put into effect any of the aforementioned traffic controls where contrary to the recommendation of the city council, or where contrary to any ordinance or resolution of the city council establishing or designating any different or inconsistent control or regulation. The director of public works shall report all action taken by him or her under this section and Sections 10.20.020, 10.20.030 and 10.20.050 to the city council at its first monthly meeting. (Prior code § 3323.1(part))

 

10.20.050 Protest of traffic controls.
    Any person affected by any traffic control or regulation installed by the director of public works pursuant to Sections 10.20.020 through 10.20.050, may protest the same to the city council. The director of public works is directed to promptly terminate and remove any traffic-control regulations, posting, painting or marking installed under Sections 10.20.020 through 10.20.050 upon the adoption by the city council of any finding recommending to the city council the termination of any such traffic control or regulation, or any part thereof. Such traffic regulation, control, posting, painting or marking shall not thereafter be reestablished until authorized by the city council in accordance with the terms and provisions of this title. (Prior code § 3323.1(part))

 

10.20.060 Official signals designated.
    Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic signals exhibiting the words “GO,” “CAUTION” or STOP,” or exhibiting different colored lights successively, one at a time, such signals shall conform with the requirements of the Vehicle Code and all traffic shall comply with such signals. (Prior code § 3320)

 

10.20.070 Crosswalks.
    The city council is authorized and required to establish and maintain, or cause to be established and maintained, and to designate upon the surface of the roadway by appropriate marks, or white or yellow lines, crosswalks approximately equal in width to the adjacent sidewalk at all intersections, and between intersections where, in their opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. (Prior code § 3322)

 

10.20.080 Obedience to signals and signs.
    No person shall disobey instructions of:

    A.  Any official traffic signal;

    B.   Any traffic sign; or

    C.   Any paint marks placed upon the surface of the roadway; or

    D.  Any banner or sign erected by any officer or agency authorized to do so by the city or by anyone given authority to do so in accordance with the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 3321)

 

10.20.090 Stops required where.
    No operator of any vehicle or streetcar shall fail to stop such vehicle or streetcar at every stop sign erected and maintained pursuant to this title at the entrance of any intersection, before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal. (Prior code § 3324)

 

10.20.100 Barricaded streets or pavement.
    No person shall ride or drive any animal, or ride, drive or propel any vehicle over or across any new pavement in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier, or at or near which there is a person or a sign warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement, or a sign stating that the street is closed. (Prior code § 3325)

Chapter 10.24 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.24.010 Prohibited turns at intersections.
    No vehicle shall make any turning movement at any intersection between any designated intersection as hereinafter set forth where markers, buttons or signals are placed within or adjacent to such intersections requiring and directing that a different course be traveled by the vehicle at said intersection or between said intersection. (Prior code § 3366)

 

10.24.020 Right turns—Paramount onto Washington.
    No vehicle shall make a right turn from Paramount onto Washington against a red or stop signal as long as such area is appropriately designated by street markings prohibiting such a right turn. (Prior code § 3366.1)

 

10.24.030 Left turns—Portion of Rosemead Boulevard West Service Road.
    Left turns by southbound traffic on Rosemead Boulevard West Service Road at Coffman-Pico Road are prohibited as long as designated by appropriate street markings or signs. (Prior code § 3366.2)

Chapter 10.28 SPEED LIMITS
10.28.050 State speed laws applicable.
    The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city, except as this chapter, as authorized by state law, declares and determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that certain speed regulations shall be applicable upon specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of any speed so declared in this chapter when signs are in place giving notice thereof. (Ord. 1059 § 2, 2009)

 

10.28.060 Authority to regulate speeds.
    A.  Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, the city council by resolution, may decrease maximum speed limits at intersections and outside urban districts and increase limits within urban districts.

    B.   Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, the city council by resolution may determine the maximum speed limits on arterial streets.

    C.   Speed limits established pursuant to this section shall be applicable at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. (Ord. 1059 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 10.32 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS
10.32.010 Direction of traffic—Posting and marking.
    No vehicle shall be moved or operated on any street, road, highway or alley within the city where the same has been hereinafter designated and appropriately posted and marked as a one-way street, road, highway or alley, requiring that all vehicles thereon be moved in one specified direction, except in the direction as so designated. (Prior code § 3364)

 

10.32.020 Alley—Between Citronell and Lindsey.
    The alley located south of Whittier Boulevard between Citronell Avenue and Lindsey Avenue is established as a one-way alley requiring vehicles to move in an easterly direction only in such alley. (Prior code § 3364.1)

 

10.32.030 Alley—Between Lindell and Bequette.
    The alley located south of Balfour Street between Lindell Avenue and Bequette Avenue is established as a one-way alley requiring vehicles to move in a westerly directly only in such alley. (Prior code § 3364.3)

 

10.32.040 Alley—Between Rosemead and Lindell.
    The alley located south of Balfour Street between Rosemead Boulevard and Lindell Avenue is established as a one-way alley requiring vehicles to move in an easterly direction only in such alley. (Prior code § 3364.2)

Chapter 10.36 PRIVATE ROADS
10.36.010 Privately owned and maintained roads designated.
    The city council finds and determines that the following are privately owned and maintained roads which are generally held open for use of the public for the purpose of vehicular traffic, and which so connect with highways that the public cannot determine that such privately owned and maintained roads are not highways:

    A.  Industry Avenue, approximately sixty feet in width, from is intersection with Slauson Avenue to its intersection with Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way.

    B.   Trojan Street, approximately sixty feet wide, from its intersection with Paramount Boulevard to its intersection with Industry Avenue.

    C.   Warvale Street, approximately sixty feet wide, from its intersection with Industry Avenue easterly to its termination at Paramount Boulevard.

    D.  Fishman Road, approximately forty feet wide from its intersection with Paramount Boulevard to its westerly termination. (Ord. 828 § 1, 1993; Ord. 698 § 1, 1985; prior code § 3390(part))

 

10.36.020 Enforcement of traffic regulations.
    A.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21107.5 of the Vehicle Code, the city council declares that the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code shall apply to the privately owned and maintained roads listed in Section 10.36.010 unless there is posted on such roads a notice of such size, shape and color as to be readily legible during the daylight hours from a distance of one hundred feet, to the effect that such roads are privately owned and maintained and that they are not subject to public traffic regulation and control.

    B.   The city council further finds and determines that, so long as such roads are not so posted, that it shall provide traffic law enforcement on such streets, and that such streets shall be subject to all the provisions of this code and the Vehicle Code, and except as provided in this chapter, the city shall not be deemed to assume any responsibility or liability for the maintenance or care of such privately owned and maintained streets. (Ord. 828 § 2, 1993; Ord. 698 § 1, 1985; prior code § 3390)

 

10.36.030 Boulevard stop requirements.
    The city council further finds and determines that the existing boulevard stops in place on the streets designated in Sections 10.36.010 and 10.36.040 are necessary in order to protect the public health and safety, and the same are designated as boulevard stops of the city as though heretofore marked or posted pursuant to authorization of the city council, and the same shall so continue to be in force and effect pursuant to the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code of the state as a part of the traffic regulations of the city until modified by the city. No person shall drive, stand or park a vehicle in violation thereof. (Ord. 828 § 3, 1993; Ord. 698 § 1, 1985; prior code § 3390)

 

10.36.040 Enforcement of traffic regulations on private streets not generally held open to the public.
    A.  The city council finds and declares that the following list of privately owned and maintained roads are not generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel but, by reason of their proximity to or connection with highways, the interests of any residents residing along the roads and the motoring public will be best served by application of the provision of the California Vehicle Code and of this code to those roads. No street shall be listed, and no ordinance or resolutions shall be adopted to enforce this section until:

    1.   There is filed with the city a petition requesting the enforcement of the Vehicle Code on such roads by a majority of the owners of any privately owned and maintained road, or by at least a majority of the board of directors of a common interest development, as defined by Section 1351 of the Civil Code, that is responsible for maintaining the road.

    2.   A public hearing is held on the matter upon ten days prior written notice to all owners of the road or all owners of the development.

    3.   Appropriate signs are erected at the entrance to the road of such size, shape, and color as to be readily legible during daylight hours from a distance of one hundred feet, to the effect that the road is subject to the provisions of the Vehicle Code and this code.

    B.   The following roads shall be subject to the provisions of this section:

    1.   Berkshire Road, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Gallatin Road to its easterly termination.

    2.   Saratoga Street, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Berkshire Road to its intersection with Oaklawn Lane.

    3.   Arlington Drive, approximately fifty-four feet in width, from its intersection with Gallatin Road to its intersection with Del Mar Drive.

    4.   Del Mar Drive, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection of Saratoga Street to its intersection with Oaklawn Lane.

    5.   Pocono Court, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Berkshire Road to its westerly termination.

    6.   Suffolk Court, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Berkshire Road to its westerly termination.

    7.   Belmont Street, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Arlington Drive to its intersection with Oaklawn Lane.

    8.   Prescott Street, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Arlington Drive to its connection with Oaklawn Lane.

    9.   Oaklawn Lane, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Prescott Street to its northerly termination.

    10. Sandown Road, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Berkshire Road to its intersection with Oaklawn Lane, and approximately fifty-four feet in width from the intersection with Oaklawn Lane to its intersection with Durfee Avenue.

    11. Longacres Avenue, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection of Monmouth Way to its easterly termination, and from Monmouth Way to its westerly termination.

    12. Monmouth Way, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection of Saratoga Street to its intersection with Longacres Avenue.

    13. Fairmount Lane, approximately thirty-two feet in width, from its intersection with Saratoga Street to its easterly termination.

    14. Blossom Court, approximately thirty-seven feet in width, from its intersection with Danbridge Street to its northerly termination.

    15. Grove Terrace, approximately thirty-seven feet in width, from its intersection with Blossom Court to its intersection with Primrose Drive.

    16. Orchid Lane, approximately thirty-seven feet in width, from its intersection with Grove Terrace to its southerly termination.

    17. Primrose Drive, approximately thirty-seven feet in width, from its intersection with Orchid Lane to its northerly termination.

    18. Terrazas Way, approximately seventy feet in width, from its intersection with Rosemead Boulevard to its intersection with Blossom Court.

    19. Wildflower Lane, approximately thirty-seven feet in width, from its intersection with Primrose Drive to its intersection with Grove Terrace.

    20. Bolker Way, approximately twenty-six feet in width, from its intersection with Gallatin Road to its intersection with Victoria Lane.

    21. Alexander Way, approximately twenty-six feet in width, from its intersection with Victoria Lane to its intersection with Julliene Way.

    22. Julliene Way, approximately twenty-six feet in width, from its southerly termination to its intersection with Brightonwood Avenue.

    23. Cindy Lane, approximately twenty-six feet in width from its intersection with Alexander Way to its intersection with Victoria Lane.

    24. Victoria Lane, approximately twenty-six feet in width, from its westerly termination west of Alexander Way to its intersection with Wendy Lane.

    25. Brightonwood Avenue, approximately twenty-six to thirty-four feet in width, from its southeasterly terminus, southeast of Victoria Lane, to its northerly termination, north of Julliene Way.

    26. Wendy Lane, approximately twenty-six feet in width, from its southeasterly terminus, southeast of Victoria Lane, to its northerly termination.

    27. Roadway between the City Hall and El Rancho High School, generally described as the westerly extension of Homebrook Street, approximately twenty feet in width, from its intersection with Passons Boulevard to its intersection with Loch Alene Avenue.

    28. Fishman Road, approximately forty feet in width, from its intersection with Paramount Boulevard to its westerly termination.

    29. Rex Road, approximately sixty-eight feet in width, from its intersection with Paramount Boulevard to its intersection with Rosemead Boulevard.

    30. Montana Calva Circle, approximately twenty-six to forty feet in width, from its intersection with Passons Boulevard to its termination.

    31. Cypress Point Drive, approximately forty-one feet in width, from its intersection with Fairway Drive to Shadow Creek Lane.

    32. Spanish Trails, approximately forty-one feet in width, from its intersection with Hilton Head Way to its junction with Amistad Avenue.

    33. Augusta Way, approximately forty-one feet in width, between Spanish Trails and Hilton Head Way.

    34. Hilton Head Way, approximately forty-one feet in width, between Augusta Way and Par Place.

    35. Par Place, approximately forty-one feet in width, from its southerly terminus to its intersection with Torrey Pines Way.

    36. Torrey Pines Way, approximately forty-one feet in width, from Par Way to its intersection with Sandoval Avenue.

    37. Shadow Creek Lane, approximately forty-one feet in width, between Torrey Pines Way and Cypress Point Drive.

    38. Whispering Palms, approximately forty-one feet in width, between Toney Pines Way and Cypress Point Drive.

    39. Pebble Beach Court, approximately forty-one feet in width, from its southerly terminus to Par Place.

    40. Saint Andrews Court, approximately forty-one feet in width, from its southerly terminus to Pebble Beach Court.

    41. Mercury Lane, approximately fifty-six feet in width, from its intersection with Paramount Boulevard to its junction with Stealth Parkway.

    42. Stealth Parkway, approximately fifty-six feet in width, from its junction with Mercury Lane to its intersection with Rex Road.

    43. Danbridge Street, approximately fifty-six feet in width, from its intersection with Stealth Parkway to its intersection with Rosemead Boulevard.

    C.   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21107.7 of the Vehicle Code, the city council declares that the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code of the State of California shall apply to the privately owned and maintained roads listed in Section 10.36.040(B). (Ord. 1031 § 1, 2007; Ord. 974 § 1, 2001; Ord. 953 § 1, 2000; Ord. 951 § 1, 2000; Ord. 941 § 1, 2000; Ord. 924 § 1, 1999; Ord. 906 § 1, 1998; Ord. 889 § 1, 1997; Ord. 872 § 1, 1995; Ord. 828 § 4, 1993)

Chapter 10.40 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.40.010 Standing vehicles—Restrictions.
    No person shall leave a vehicle standing, other than one temporarily disabled as set forth in Section 10.40.120, on any portion of a public highway unless a clear and unobstructed width of not less than twenty feet is left for other vehicles, unless such vehicle is disabled and it is impracticable to move the vehicle. (Prior code § 3348.10)

 

10.40.020 Alley parking or standing.
    No person shall park in an alley, except to unload materials (twenty minutes) or passengers (three minutes); except that, where the alley is within a block which dead-ends and is dedicated and improved to standard width, the city council may authorize times other than those specified in this section and the same shall be so designated. (Prior code § 3348)

 

10.40.030 Stopping for person carrying white cane.
    The driver of a vehicle, the operator of a motor-driven vehicle, and pedestrians approaching or coming into contact with a blind person carrying a white or white-and-red cane shall come to a full stop, and take necessary precautions to avoid accident or injury to such person. (Prior code § 3348.12)

 

10.40.040 Emergency stopping, standing or parking.
    The provisions of this title prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device. (Prior code § 3346)

 

10.40.050 Parking—Removal of ignition key.
    No person shall park a vehicle without removing the ignition key. (Prior code § 3348.9)

 

10.40.060 Parallel parking.
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway or street other than parallel with the edge of a roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within eighteen inches of the curbline or edge of the roadway. (Prior code § 3345)

 

10.40.070 Emergency restriction areas.
    A.  No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park or leave standing such vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:

    1.   On any street or highway where the use of such street or highway or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or highway, or the installation of underground utilities; or

    2.   Where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, such as the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions; or

    3.   Where the use of the street or highway or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no-parking are erected or placed at least twelve hours prior to the effective time of such no parking.

    B.   The director of public works shall have power and authority to order temporary no-parking signs to be erected or posted for the aforementioned purposes, provided that such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of the foregoing emergency, and that the director of public works shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. (Prior code § 3350.1)

 

10.40.080 Blocking highways or streets.
    A person shall not stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway where the roadway is bordered by adjacent curbs, or upon any private street which is open to the public, whether bordered by curbs or not, unless not less than eight feet of the width of a paved or improved or main-traveled portion of such highway or private street opposite such stopped, parked or standing vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for the free passage of other vehicles. (Prior code § 3348.5)

 

10.40.090 Parking—Locations where prohibited.
    A.  No person shall park within one hundred feet of an intersection.

    B.   No person shall park along curb within fifty feet of either end of a safety zone.

    C.   No person shall park within fifty feet of the entrance to a sheriff’s station or fire station.

    D.  No person shall park in front of the City Hall.

    E.   No person shall park within one hundred feet of the entrance to school property.

    F.   No person shall park within one hundred feet of any street, alley or driveway that enters onto Rosemead Boulevard. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.100 Parking—State highways.
    The foregoing Section 10.40.090 shall not apply to any state highway until approval has been obtained as provided in the Vehicle Code, nor to utility vehicles under those conditions exempted by state law. (Prior code § 3348.7)

 

10.40.110 Parking—Passenger loading zones.
    No person shall park in a passenger loading zone for more than three minutes. (Prior code § 3348.4)

 

10.40.120 Parking—For repairs or vehicle storage.
    No person shall park or leave standing on any street, alley or public place any vehicle, for the purpose of storing, servicing, dismantling, rebuilding or otherwise working upon any such vehicle, other than a vehicle which temporarily is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping such vehicle on such street, alley or public place, and any such temporarily disabled vehicle shall not be parked or left standing in any such place for more than four hours. (Prior code § 3353)

 

10.40.130 Parking—For selling vehicles.
    A.  No person shall park or leave standing any motor vehicle with a sign, placard, or writing on the vehicle for the purpose of displaying the vehicle for sale or rent in or upon the following thoroughfares within the boundaries of the city of Pico Rivera:

    1.   Beverly Boulevard;

    2.   Mines Avenue;

    3.   Paramount Boulevard;

    4.   Passons Boulevard;

    5.   Rosemead Boulevard;

    6.   San Gabriel River Parkway;

    7.   Slauson Avenue;

    8.   Telegraph Road;

    9.   Washington Boulevard;

    10. Whittier Boulevard;

    11. On any and all streets intersecting with the above thoroughfares for a distance of two hundred feet therefrom.

    B.   Pursuant to Section 22651.9 of the California Vehicle Code, a vehicle in violation of subsection A shall be issued a notice of parking violation by the city’s local authority; the owner/seller of the vehicle shall have a period of twenty-four hours commencing with the issuance of the notice of parking violation to remove the prohibited sign, placard, or writing from their vehicle(s) when parked upon the thoroughfares and intersecting streets specified in subsection A.

    C.   Failure to remove the prohibited sign, placard, or writing on the vehicle, or the presence of the same vehicle(s) with the prohibited sign, placard, or writing parked at a different location on the thoroughfares and intersecting streets specified in subsection A of this section, within the twenty-four hour period, shall subject the vehicle to a fine and/or impoundment pursuant to the procedure set forth in Section 22651.9 of the California Vehicle Code at the owner’s/seller’s expense. (Ord. 1042 § 1, 2008; prior code § 3348.3)

 

10.40.140 Parking—Hour restrictions and signs.
    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle upon that portion of a public street or place where the city council, or some person or agency pursuant to the directions of the city council, shall erect or cause to be erected appropriate signs upon that portion of the public street or place, and such signs shall clearly specify between what hours and for what period of time it shall be unlawful to stand or park vehicles. (Prior code § 3350)

 

10.40.150 Parking—Driveways and red-curb areas.
    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in front of any entrance to any garage, or in front of any driveway, or upon that portion of any public street or place in the city where the city council, or some person or agency pursuant to the direction of the city council, shall erect or cause to be erected a sign or cause to be painted in red a portion of the curbline. (Prior code § 3349)

 

10.40.160 Parking—Signs authorized.
    It is hereby ordered that all existing signs now placed within the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to have been placed there by the city pursuant to the authority given in Sections 10.40.140 and 10.40.150 of this chapter. (Prior code § 3351)

 

10.40.170 Twenty-four minute parking—Green curbs.
    Green curb markings shall mean no standing or parking for a period of time longer than twenty-four minutes at any time between nine a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sunday and holidays or Saturday, if so marked, unless indicated otherwise in any resolution of the city council establishing such limited parking zone. No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday, holidays or Saturday, if so posted, for a period of time longer than that authorized by such posting. (Prior code § 3350.2)

 

10.40.180 One-hour parking.
    One hour or more limited parking shall be indicated by signposting to that effect, unless directed otherwise by any resolution of the city council establishing such a limited parking zone. No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sunday, holidays or Saturday, if so posted, for a period of time longer than that authorized by such posting. (Prior code § 3350.3)

 

10.40.190 Parking—On public property.
    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in, over or upon any public property where the use thereof or access thereto by the public has been withdrawn or restricted by resolution of the city council, and appropriate signs have been erected giving notice of such regulation or restriction. (Prior code § 3355)

 

10.40.200 Parking—On private property.
    No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in a private driveway or on private property without the actual or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful possession of such driveway or property. (Prior code § 3354)

 

10.40.210 Removal of vehicles authorized when.
    Any regularly employed and salaried law enforcement officer of the city may remove or cause to be removed:

    A.  Any vehicle parked or left standing upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours;

    B.   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway where the same has been prohibited by ordinance or resolution, and signs have been posted giving notice of such removal;

    C.   Where a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street or highway in violation of an ordinance forbidding standing or parking, and the use of the highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the highway or for the installation of underground utilities, and signs giving notice that such vehicles may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal;

    D.  Where the use of the highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized by the city council for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic, or for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement, provided signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to removal. (Prior code § 3348.8)

 

10.40.220 Designated parking spaces.
    A.  The city council finds and determines that, upon approval of the city manager, city streets may be marked with designated parking spaces, and vehicles parked on such streets shall be parked only in the designated spaces provided.

    B.   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 22508 of the Vehicle Code, the city council declares that the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code shall apply to all vehicles parked on streets with designated parking spaces. The city council further finds and determines that, as long as such parking spaces are not so designated, parking shall be subject to all the provisions of this code and the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3350.4)

 

10.40.230 Parking enforcement officer powers and duties.
    A.  Employees of the city employed in the classification of parking enforcement officer are authorized and shall, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code, have the duty to issue notices of violation of any statute of the state or any ordinance of the city, or appropriate regulations issued thereunder relating to the standing or parking of a vehicle.

    B.   Parking enforcement officers are designated and authorized to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle from a highway or other public property in accordance with the provision of Section 22669 of the Vehicle Code, when such employees have been duly designated, authorized and assigned to perform such duties by the chief of police.

    C.   Parking enforcement officers are authorized to regulate and direct traffic in accordance with the provisions of Section 21100 of the Vehicle Code when such employees have been duly assigned or appointed to perform such duties.

    D.  Nothing in this section is intended to operate either in addition to or in contravention of Title 3, Chapter 4.5 of the California Penal Code, which expressly designates those persons who are classified as peace officers. Further, nothing in this section is intended to or shall operate to change, or shall have the effect of changing, the status of the officers and employees authorized to act pursuant to this section from public or miscellaneous officers and employees to individual peace officers or safety members for purposes of retirement, workers’ compensation, or similar injury or death benefits, or any other employees’ benefit or benefits to which such officer or employee would not have been entitled as a public or miscellaneous officer or employee prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section. (Ord. 696 § 2, 1985; prior code § 3350.5)

 

10.40.240 Citation by mail.
    In addition, to the circumstances set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 40202(d) for the use of citation by mail, if the vehicle is inaccessible due to the presence of a locked gate; or cannot safely be issued a citation due to the presence of a potentially harmful animal or a belligerent or otherwise threatening owner which threatens the life or limb of the parking enforcement officer, then said officer shall file notice with the city, and the city shall mail, within fifteen calendar days of issuance of the notice of parking violation, a copy of the notice of parking violation, or transmit an electronic facsimile of the notice, to the registered owner. (Ord. 947 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 10.42 LIVING IN MOTOR HOMES OR OTHER RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
10.42.010 Purpose.
    The public streets and other public rights-of-way within the city should be readily accessible and available to the public at large. The use of these areas for human habitation within motor homes and other recreational vehicles interferes with the rights of others to use the public rights-of-way for which they were intended. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public streets and other public rights-of-way within the city in an accessible condition. (Ord. 966 § 1, 2001)

 

10.42.020 Living in motor homes or other recreational vehicles.
    No vehicle, including a truck-camper, motor home, travel home, travel or recreational trailer, or other similar recreational vehicle, shall be used as a place for human habitation, nor shall any person sleep in, inhabit, or live in any such vehicle while the same is parked in the public right-of-way. (Ord. 966 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 10.44 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS
10.44.010 Driving restrictions for designated processions.
    No operator of any vehicle or streetcar shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so designated. (Prior code § 3337)

Chapter 10.48 CRUISING
10.48.010 Control points—Certain driving activities prohibited.
    No person shall be a driver or a passenger of a motor vehicle driven past a traffic-control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic-control point within four hours after the vehicle operator has been given an adequate written notice that further driving past the traffic-control point within this time frame is prohibited. (Ord. 715 § 1, 1986; prior code § 3358(a))

 

10.48.020 Exemptions from chapter application.
    This chapter shall not apply to the drivers, operators or passengers of the following vehicles:

    A.  Any authorized emergency vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the California Vehicle Code;

    B.   Any publicly owned vehicle of any city, county, district, state or federal agency;

    C.   Any vehicle licensed for public transportation, or vehicles which are normally used for business purposes and are engaged in such business use. (Ord. 715 § 1, 1986; prior code § 3358(b))

 

10.48.030 Control points—Establishment authority.
    The ranking peace officer on duty within the affected area shall have the authority to establish a traffic-control point for the purpose of regulating vehicular cruising. (Ord. 715 § 1, 1986; prior code § 3358(c))

 

10.48.040 Violation—Notice restrictions.
    No person is in violation of this chapter unless:

    A.  That person has been given the written notice on a previous driving trip past the traffic-control point and then again passes the control point within the prohibited time frame; and

    B.   The beginning and end of the portion of the street subject to vehicular cruising controls are clearly identified by signs that briefly and clearly state the appropriate provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 715 § 1, 1986; prior code § 3358(d))

 

10.48.050 Violation—Penalty.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, it is a misdemeanor for any person to violate the provisions of Sections 10.48.010 through 10.48.040 of this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, such person shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than five days nor more than six months, or by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars nor more than one thousand dollars, or both. (Ord. 931 § 1, 1999; Ord. 715 § 1, 1986; prior code § 3358.1)

Chapter 10.52 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING REGULATIONS
10.52.010 Prohibited stopping, standing or parking.
    No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle whether attended or unattended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a peace officer or official traffic control devices in any place as set forth in Chapter 9, Section 22500 of the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 768 § 4, 1989; prior code § 3332)

 

10.52.020 Motorcycle restrictions.
    No person shall operate a motorcycle on any sidewalk except at a driveway. No person shall park a motorcycle between the curb and sidewalk. (Prior code § 3348.1)

 

10.52.030 Riding on car fenders or streetcar steps.
    No person shall ride upon the fender or runningboard or the steps of any streetcar or vehicle. (Prior code § 3359)

 

10.52.040 Emerging from alleys.
    The city council finds that to enter or cross a highway from an alley now existing or hereafter created within the city is hazardous, and therefore all alleys now existing or hereafter created within the city shall be within the meaning of California Vehicle Code Section 553. (Prior code § 3333)

 

10.52.050 Driving on wheels with metal rims.
    No person shall tow, propel or operate any motor vehicle designed for operation on rubber-tired wheels, upon or along any surfaced public street so as to permit or cause the metal rim of any wheel thereof to be in contact with the surface of the street, except in cases when, as a direct result of accident or tire failure, it becomes necessary to remove the vehicle to a place of business of the owner, or to clear the vehicle from the public way, in which event the maximum speed at which such vehicle may be so driven shall be six miles per hour. (Prior code § 3340)

 

10.52.060 Intoxicated person in front seat.
    It is unlawful for any person to be in the front seat of a motor vehicle along or upon any city street in an intoxicated condition, whether such vehicle is moving or standing. (Prior code § 3341)

 

10.52.070 Washing or cleaning vehicles.
    No person, except the owner, shall dust, wipe, wash or clean a vehicle on any portion of a public highway. (Prior code § 3348.2)

 

10.52.080 Driving on highways closed for repairs.
    No person shall drive on a highway that has been closed for repairs, if each opening has been signposted. (Prior code § 3348.11)

 

10.52.090 Scattering loads from vehicles.
    It is unlawful to operate any vehicle so loaded that any part of its load is dropped upon the roadway. (Prior code § 3339)

Chapter 10.56 TRUCKS AND WEIGHT LIMITS
10.56.010 Commercial vehicles—Street use restrictions.
    A.  No person shall operate, drive, use, park or place any commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six thousand pounds on any street, road or highway within the city, unless within the following exceptions:

    1.   When such commercial vehicle is being so operated on a state highway or on a designated unrestricted street (truck route) hereinafter set forth in this chapter;

    2.   If such commercial vehicle has a point of destination or a point of origin in the city, the same shall proceed over unrestricted streets as provided in this chapter.

    B.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, such a commercial vehicle may traverse streets restricted in respect to weight limits in order to proceed from a point of origin or a point of destination on a restricted street when such vehicle is kept, stored or maintained, or where the point of origin or destination is the place where goods, wares, merchandise or materials are to be or are picked up or delivered, all in accordance with Section 35703 of the Vehicle Code, but then only by such deviation from the nearest intersection of an unrestricted street or domicile of the operator of such a commercial vehicle used for or intended to be used for the storage or parking of such a vehicle shall not be considered a point of origin or destination for qualification under this exemption unless there is a pickup or delivery of such goods, wares, merchandise or materials to said residence, home or domicile, or unless the same is zoned for C-M, C-G, I-L or I-G uses.

    C.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or any passenger stage corporation or vehicle subject to the terms and provisions of Sections 1031 through 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code, or to any emergency vehicle such as a police, fire, ambulance or private ambulance.

    D.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

    E.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to recreational vehicles or camper-type vehicles, as defined in Section 243 of the California Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 3370)

 

10.56.020 Restricted streets designated.
    All streets other than those designated hereinafter as unrestricted streets are found by the city council to be so con-

structed as to constitute the same restricted streets necessitating the imposition of gross-weight limits in respect to the use of such streets, subject to the exceptions set forth in Section 10.56.010. No provision of this chapter, however, in respect to such gross-weight limits shall be applicable unless and until appropriate signs are erected and maintained indicating those streets which are so restricted. (Prior code § 3371)

 

10.56.030 Unrestricted streets—Truck routes designated.
    A.  The city council finds that the designation of the following streets as unrestricted streets or through-passage truck routes will adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare, and will reasonably provide through truck passage for commercial vehicles in excess of ten thousand pounds through the city. Any legal conforming or non-conforming business shall continue to be allowed the use of the streets formerly designated as a truck route. City vehicles shall be exempt from this provision.

    B.   The city council does therefore designate the following streets as unrestricted or truck routes within the city:

    1.   Telegraph Road;

    2.   Paramount Boulevard from Telegraph Road to Beverly Boulevard;

    3.   Slauson Avenue;

    4.   Bermudez Street east of Rosemead Boulevard;

    5.   Perkins Street;

    6.   Rex Road from Crider Avenue to Paramount Boulevard;

    7.   Canford Street from Crider Avenue to Paramount Boulevard;

    8.   Washington Boulevard;

    9.   Loch Lomond Drive from the westerly city limits to Paramount Boulevard;

    10. Beverly Boulevard;

    11. Crider Avenue from Rex Road to Canford Street;

    12. Bequette Avenue from Slauson Avenue to Perkins Street;

    13. Serapis Avenue from Slauson Avenue to Perkins Street;

    14. Passons Boulevard from Slauson Avenue to Bermudez Street;

    15. San Gabriel Parkway from Beverly Boulevard to the northerly city limit;

    16. Gregg Road;

    17. Industry Avenue;

    18. Hanan Way;

    19. Van Norman Road;

    20. Reeve Road;

    21. Crossway Drive from Slauson Avenue southerly to the Southern Pacific Railroad;

    22. Brasher Street from Gregg Road to five hundred feet westerly of Gregg Road;

    23. Cord Avenue from Telegraph Road to two hundred feet northerly of Telegraph Road;

    24. Beverly Road from Tobias Avenue to the easterly city limits;

    25. Trojan Street between Industry Avenue to Paramount Boulevard;

    26. Warvale Street between Industry Avenue to Paramount Boulevard. (Ord. 1089 § 14, 2014; Ord. 831 § 1, 1993)

 

10.56.040 Parking restrictions.
    The parking of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more is prohibited on both sides of the following streets lying within areas classified as “residence districts” as described in California Vehicle Code Section 515:

    A.  Beverly Road from the westerly city limits to Tobias Avenue;

 

    B.   Paramount Boulevard from Beverly Boulevard to Whittier Boulevard;

    C.   Paramount Boulevard (both sides) from the first alley north of Telegraph Road to approximately one hundred feet northerly of Maxine Street; and on the east side only, from the hours of six a.m. to nine p.m. only from approximately one hundred feet north of Maxine Street to approximately seven hundred feet northerly of Maxine Street;

    D.  Gallatin Road from Paramount Boulevard to Durfee Avenue;

    E.   Paramount Boulevard from two hundred feet north of Washington Boulevard to one hundred feet north of Holbrook Street;

    F.   Rosemead Boulevard from north to south city limits;

    G.  Industry Avenue from Telegraph Road to approximately six hundred fifty feet northerly thereof;

    H.  Durfee Avenue, both sides, from Beverly Boulevard to Olympic Boulevard;

    I.    Durfee Avenue, east side only, from Whittier Boulevard to Walnut Avenue;

    J.    Paramount Boulevard from Whittier Boulevard to Gallatin Road.

    This section shall not be effective with respect to any commercial vehicle making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained. (Ord. 1002 § 1, 2003; Ord. 945 § 1, 2000; Ord. 939 § 1, 2000; Ord. 925 § 1, 1999)

 

10.56.050 Permit for certain commercial or excess weight vehicles.
    A.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 10.56.010 through 10.56.040 of this chapter, upon application in writing, the license and permit hearing board may, in its discretion if good cause appears therefor, issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate the commercial or excess-weight vehicle on restricted streets under such conditions and for such period of time as deemed necessary by the license and permit hearing board, providing the following findings are made:

    1.   There are unusual conditions or hardships which justify the issuance of a permit which do not apply to other or similar vehicles;

    2.   There are no continuing objections to the issuance of a permit from any affected property owner;

    3.   The applicant complies at all times with all terms and provisions of the permit and traverses only over those restricted streets as set forth in the permit.

    B.   The license and permit hearing board may revoke any permit issued under this section, provided there has been deposited in the mail to the applicant, at his or her last known address, written notice of the time and place where the license and permit hearing board will consider revocation of the permit, such notice being so deposited in the mail at least five days prior to the hearing. The permit may be revoked for violation of the terms and provisions thereof, or upon a finding by the license and permit hearing board that the conditions authorizing the original granting of the permit no longer exist, or any one of them. (Ord. 843 § 7, 1993; prior code § 3374)

Chapter 10.60 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL TRANSPORT
10.60.010 City council findings.
    The city council finds and determines as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 3391(part))

 

10.60.020 Definitions and interpretation.
    For purposes of this chapter:

    A.  A motor vehicle is “attended” when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred feet of the vehicle and has it within his or her unobstructed field of view.

    B.   A “qualified representative of a motor carrier” means a person who:

    1.   Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle;

    2.   Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he or she attends;

    3.   Has been instructed on the procedures he or she must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances;

    4.   Is authorized to move the vehicle and has the means and ability to do so. (Prior code § 3391(C))

 

10.60.030 Vehicle operation restrictions.
    A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance, as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone, or within one thousand feet of any school or within three hundred feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation, require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place. (Prior code § 3391(A))

 

10.60.040 Exemptions to chapter application.
    Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel-delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life-support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of Section 10.60.030 of this chapter. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the provider of the service. (Prior code § 3391(B))

 

10.60.050 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
    The rules of this chapter do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor-carrier safety regulations, or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. (Prior code § 3391(D))

Chapter 10.64 VEHICLE REPOSSESSION
10.64.010 Form required when vehicles repossessed—Contents.
    Every person who recovers possession or takes possession of any motor vehicle under the provisions of any conditional sale or lease contract, or chattel mortgage, hereinafter termed “repossessed” or “repossessing,” shall within twenty-four hours after repossessing such vehicle, if repossessed within the city of Pico Rivera, complete and file in person at the sheriff’s station which serves the area within which the repossession occurs, a form furnished by the sheriff setting forth the following information:

    A.  The make, model, year, motor number, serial number and license number of such vehicle;

    B.   The name and address of the registered owner of such vehicle;

    C.   The name and address of the legal owner of such vehicle at the time of repossession;

    D.  The name and address of the person or agency repossessing the vehicle;

    E.   The date, time and exact location of repossession;

    F.   Such other information as the sheriff shall find to be necessary for the identification of vehicles reported to the sheriff as having been stolen, or necessary for the prevention of fraud in the repossession of motor vehicles. (Prior code § 3365)

Chapter 10.68 PEDESTRIANS
10.68.010 Business district restrictions.
    No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a crosswalk in any business district. (Prior code § 3327)

 

10.68.020 Use of crosswalks required where.
    No pedestrian shall cross the following roadways except within a marked crosswalk:

    A.  Rosemead Boulevard between its intersection with Dunlap Crossing Road and its intersection with Coffman & Pico Road. (Prior code § 3327.1)

 

10.68.030 Bridge use restrictions.
    No person shall walk, stop or stand, and pedestrian traffic is prohibited upon the following bridges or portions thereof:

    A.  On the Slauson Avenue Bridge where the same crosses the San Gabriel River, including the safety curb on the north side thereof, except pedestrian traffic is permitted on the sidewalk on the south side of such bridge. (Prior code § 3327.2)

 

10.68.040 Intersections—Obedience to traffic signals.
    At intersections where traffic is directed by an officer of the county sheriff’s department or other traffic officer, or traffic sign or signal, no pedestrian shall cross the roadway other than with released traffic. (Prior code § 3328)

 

10.68.050 Stopping and standing—On sidewalks.
    In any business district, no pedestrian shall stop or stand on a sidewalk, except as near as is physically possible to the building line or curbline. (Prior code § 3329)

 

10.68.060 Stopping and standing—In roadways.
    A.  No pedestrian shall stand in any roadway or street, other than in a safety zone or in a crosswalk, if such action interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.

    B.   This section shall not apply to any police officer, surveyor, street-sweeper or other person when necessarily upon the street in line of duty. (Prior code § 3347)

Chapter 10.72 BICYCLES AND TOY VEHICLES
Article I. Riding Rules
10.72.011 Bicycle defined.
    For the purpose of this chapter, “bicycle” means any device upon which a person may ride which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has either two or three wheels (one of which is at least twenty inches in diameter, in tandem or tricycle arrangement) or a frame size of at least fourteen inches.

    For the purposes of this section motorized bicycles as defined by Section 406 of the California Vehicle Code shall be included within the terms “motor vehicle” as defined in Section 415 of the Vehicle Code and as used in Section 21663 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1067 § 2, 2011)

 

10.72.012 Bicycle use of sidewalks.
    A.  Director of Public Works to Designate Prohibitions. The director may designate and declare certain portions of any sidewalk to be prohibited for bicycle use.

    B.   Director of Public Works to Post Prohibitions. The director is authorized to erect and maintain signs adjacent to sidewalks designating prohibitions on the use of bicycles.

    C.   It is unlawful to ride a bicycle, or to coast in any vehicle upon any public sidewalk except as provided in this section.

    D.  When riding upon a sidewalk, persons riding, using, or propelling bicycles as permitted under this chapter, shall obey the following rules of the road:

    1.   It is unlawful to operate a bicycle on a sidewalk where signage has been posted to prohibit its use on sidewalks.

    2.   No person shall ride, use or propel a bicycle recklessly, or in such a manner as to cause or threaten to cause injury to him or her or herself or others, or to cause or threaten to cause damage to public or private property.

    3.   Bicycles may be ridden on all sidewalks at a speed not to exceed five miles per hour, except where signs are posted prohibiting riding bicycles on sidewalks in the following areas:

    a.   Sidewalks within a business district;

    b.   Sidewalks adjacent to any public school building when school is in session;

    c.   Sidewalks adjacent to any recreation center when in use, or any church during services; and

 

    d.   Any pedestrian overcrossing or other sidewalk where riding a bicycle is prohibited by posted signs.

    E.   Yielding Right-of-Way. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any and all pedestrians. A person riding a bicycle upon entering a roadway or driveway from a sidewalk shall yield to all traffic.

    F.   Entering a Street. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall enter a roadway at a roadway intersection.

    G.  Any person crossing a street within any portion of a crosswalk across such street, and in possession of a bicycle at the time, shall not ride such bicycle within such crosswalk area, but shall dismount therefrom and guide such bicycle by hand while within such crosswalk area. (Ord. 1067 § 2, 2011)

 

10.72.013 Exemptions.
    This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:

    A.  The use of human or motor-propelled devices on any sidewalk, street, public right-of-way, or upon any land, property, or facility owned or controlled by the city of Pico Rivera by any person who is disabled or handicapped, or whose ability to walk is impaired as shown by medical evidence;

    B.   Any device designated, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants; or

    C.   The transportation of goods or merchandise to and from the place of purchase or storage. (Ord. 1067 § 2, 2011)

 

10.72.020 Pedestrian overhead crossings and tunnels.
    No person shall ride or coast upon, or use to ride or coast upon any bicycle or rollerskates, or ride in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device upon any overhead pedestrian crossing or pedestrian tunnel within the city. (Prior code § 3335.1)

 

10.72.030 Riding on handlebars prohibited.
    No operator of any bicycle shall carry any other person upon the bar, handlebars, carrier racks, fenders, or any other portion of such bicycle, and no person shall so ride upon any such bicycle other than the operator thereof. (Prior code § 3336)

 

10.72.040 Clinging to moving vehicles prohibited.
    No person traveling upon any bicycle, coaster, rollerskates, motorcycle or any toy vehicle shall cling to or attach him or her or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle or streetcar. (Prior code § 3338)

 

Article II. Registration and Licensing
10.72.050 Requirements generally.
    A.  No person, firm or corporation shall operate or use, or permit to be operated or used on any street in the city any bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power unless such bicycle shall have been registered and licensed as provided in Article II of this chapter.

    B.   Whenever the words “city clerk” appear herein, the same mean director of finance of the city, and all duties bestowed in this chapter upon the city clerk shall be performed by the director of finance.

    C.   Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the duties herein bestowed upon the director of finance may be performed by the sheriff of Los Angeles County pursuant to contractual arrangement between the city and the county of Los Angeles, and the performance of such duties by the sheriff of Los Angeles County shall constitute compliance with the terms and provisions of Article II of this chapter. (Prior code § 3400)

 

10.72.060 Registration—General requirements.
    A.  Every person, firm or corporation coming within the provisions of Section 10.72.050 shall cause such bicycle to be registered by making application in writing therefor to the director of finance or sheriff upon forms provided by that official. Such form shall show the name and address of the applicant, a description of such bicycle, including the name, serial number, if any, and color thereof, together with such information or description as may be required.

    B.   Upon receipt of such application, said official shall register the bicycle in a permanent register maintained for that purpose and give the bicycle a registration number.

    C.   When the bicycle is so registered, a registration certificate and a license shall be issued to the applicant upon payment of the prescribed fee. Both the registration certificate and license shall bear the registration number assigned.

    D.  Such registration shall continue until the city council shall order re-registration. If the license plate or decal is lost, stolen or mutilated, the person, firm or corporation subject to the provisions of Section 10.72.050 shall make an application to re-register such bicycle. The previous registration shall be cancelled and the bicycle shall be re-registered in the permanent register and, if necessary, a new identifying number shall be given to such bicycle. (Prior code § 3401)

 

10.72.070 Registration—Change of ownership.
    It shall be the duty of any person residing within the incorporated territory of the city, who sells or transfers ownership of any such bicycle, to report such sale or transfer by returning to the sheriff or city clerk the registration card issued to such person, firm or corporation as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within five days of the date of such sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor within such five days of the date of such sale or transfer. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to refuse, fail or neglect to conform to any provisions of this section. (Prior code § 3402)

 

10.72.080 Licensing requirements.
    A.  A license plate, which may be in the form of a decal, shall be numbered and contain the letters “L.A. Co. B.L.” or similar letters, and shall be attached to the frame of the bicycle for which issued.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, mutilate, deface or destroy any such license or decal, or to transfer any such license or decal to any bicycle for which the same was not issued.

    C.   No license shall be issued and no bicycle shall be registered or re-registered except upon payment of the fee of fifty cents for each such license issued, or registration or re-registration, to the director of finance or sheriff. Each such license shall continue without the necessity of renewal or further fee until the city council shall, by ordinance or resolution, direct re-registration, as provided in Section 10.72.060 of this article. Each such license when so issued shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle for which such license shall have been issued upon any of the public highways within the incorporated territory of the city.

    D.  Any person, firm or corporation coming within the provisions of Section 10.72.050 shall at all times keep the license or decal visibly displayed upon the bicycle, with the exception that this article shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation otherwise coming within the provisions of Section 10.72.050 who does not normally keep or store such bicycle within the city, and who has otherwise obtained and kept in full force and effect a bicycle registration and license for such bicycle imposed by the jurisdiction where the bicycle is normally kept or stored. (Prior code § 3404)

 

10.72.090 Dealer reports.
    A.  Every auctioneer, auto wrecker, foundry, pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer or bicycle dealer shall notify the director of finance or the sheriff in writing, on forms prescribed, not less often than once a week, of each bicycle received in the course of business by him or her since his or her last report. In such reports, he or she shall describe each such bicycle received and give the license number thereof, if any. In addition, he or she shall supply such other information as the sheriff or director of finance shall require.

    B.   The dealer shall not sell, transfer, deliver, destroy or alter any such bicycle until fourteen days after its receipt has been reported to the aforementioned official. (Prior code § 3405)

 

10.72.100 Exemptions from licensing.
    Any person residing within the city who has heretofore during the calendar year registered such bicycle as provided for herein and procured a county license for this year, good until December 31, 1958, shall not be required to comply with the sections of this chapter, except upon the sale or transfer or ownership of title, until January 1, 1959. (Prior code § 3406)

 

10.72.110 Licensing—Change of ownership.
    A.  Upon the sale or transfer of title of any such bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter, the purchaser or transferee thereof, upon payment of the sum of fifty cents to the city clerk, shall be entitled to have the existing license issued for such bicycle transferred to the name of the new owner thereof. Each application for any such transfer shall be made to the city clerk in writing, and shall describe such bicycle in sufficient detail to identify the same, and shall include the serial number or other identifying mark existing thereon.

    B.   Provided, however, that no such license shall be transferred unless and until the applicant for such transfer shall present to the city clerk a certificate in writing signed by the sheriff of Los Angeles County, certifying that the registration of such bicycle has been changed to such applicant as transferee or the new owner thereof. (Prior code § 3407)

 

10.72.120 Removing or destroying information prohibited.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation wilfully to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter, or to cause or permit to be removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered the number on any bicycle frame for which any such registration shall have been made pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter.

 

    B.   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter, or to cause or permit to be removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered any license plate issued by or on behalf of the city, for any such bicycle or any seal or registration certificate relating to such bicycle during the time in which such license plate, seal or registration certificate is operative.

    C.   Provided, however, that nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to prohibit the sheriff from stamping any number on the frame of any such bicycle on which no serial number can be found, or on which such serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Prior code § 3403)

Chapter 10.74 SKATEBOARDS, SCOOTERS, IN-LINE SKATES, ROLLERSKATES
10.74.010 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined in this section:

    “In-line skate” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels in a straight line attached to a shoe, or other foot gear, which is designed to be, or can be, propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term “in-line skate” also includes motorized in-line skates.

    “Luge” means any riding of a skateboard or similar contrivance in a supine or prone position.

    “Rollerskate” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels attached to a shoe, or other foot gear, which is designed to be, or can be, propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term “rollerskate” also includes motorized roller skates.

    “Skateboard” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, upon which a person may place one or more feet, and which is designed to be, or can be propelled by human power, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term skateboard also includes motorized skateboards.

    “Scooter” means any vehicle, device, or contrivance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, upon which a person may place one or more feet, and which is designed to be, or can be propelled by human power, has an upright steering handle attached to front or rear, and which is not defined as a bicycle by the California Vehicle Code. The term scooter also includes motorized scooters.

    “Tricks” and or “Stunts” means any singular or repetitive jump, flip, grind, or any other maneuver for performance, demonstration, practice, or display of skill on a skateboard, in-line skate or roller skate, or scooter or similar contrivance. (Ord. 975 § 1, 2002; Ord. 954 § 2, 2000)

 

10.74.020 Riding skateboard, scooter, in-line skates or rollerskates on posted property prohibited.
    The riding of skateboards, scooters, in-line skates, rollerskates, or other similar contrivances, as defined in Section 10.74.010 shall be prohibited upon any private or public property when such property has been posted pursuant to this section. Property owners and/or their managers are authorized to post or erect signs, at their own expense, prohibiting the riding of skateboards, scooters, in-line skates, rollerskates, or similar contrivances in or on those premises for which such a request has been made to, and approved by, the city manager or his/her designee. (Ord. 954 § 2, 2000)

 

 

10.74.030 Warning signs posted.
    The property owner or its manager shall erect authorized signs giving notice of the prohibition set forth in Section 10.74.020. Authorized signs shall be a minimum of seventeen inches by twenty-two inches, with one-inch letters, posted adjacent to the entrances to the subject property. These signs may be erected in such a position to prevent vandalism or theft. The property owner, or manager, shall have on file with the police department a signed consent form authorizing the police department to enforce said ordinance. (Ord. 954 § 2, 2000)

 

10.74.040 Exception—State law.
    Section 10.74.020 shall not be deemed to make punishable an act or acts which are prohibited by a statute of the state of California. (Ord. 954 § 2, 2000)

 

10.74.050 Penalty.
    Any violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided:

    A.  A fine not to exceed fifty dollars;

    B.   On the fifth calendar day following the date indicated on the citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either:

    1.   Payment of bail,

    2.   Payment of a fine imposed by this section,

    3.   The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency; the citation shall be deemed delinquent and a fine of five dollars shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under subsection A of this section;

    C.   On the fortieth calendar day following the date indicated on the citation as the date to appear if no appearance has been made by either:

    1.   Payment of bail,

    2.   Payment of a fine imposed by this section,

    3.   The filing of a notice of contest with the collecting agency; the citation shall be deemed delinquent and an additional fine of fifteen dollars shall be imposed in addition to that imposed under subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. 954 § 2, 2000)

 

10.74.060 Designated areas.
    The city council may, from time to time, designate certain areas for skateboard, skates and/or scooter. Such areas shall be designated by resolution of the city council and posted with appropriate signs.

    A.  The following regulations shall apply within the designated skateboarding and in-line skating areas:

    1.   No person shall skateboard and/or in-line skate at times other than those established as the hours of operation;

    2.   No person shall use the skateboarding and/or in-line skating area for uses other than for skateboarding and/or skating;

    3.   No person shall use the designated skateboarding and/or in-line skating area unless they wear proper safety equipment per manufacturer’s instructions including a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads;

    4.   No person shall cause bicycles, roller skates, scooters, and/or motor driven vehicles to be in the skateboarding and/or in-line skating area;

    5.   No person shall use tobacco, alcohol and/or drugs in the designated skateboarding and/or in-line skating area;

    6.   No person shall carry, consume, hold food and/or beverages in designated skateboarding and/or in-line skating area;

    7.   No person shall cause graffiti, tagging, or placement of stickers in, on, or around designated skateboarding and/or in-line skating area;

    8.   No person shall skateboard, roller skate, in-line skate, and/or scooter or use other contrivances in the performance of tricks or stunts on city-owned or school district-owned curbs, sidewalks, driveways or parking lots surrounding the skateboarding and/or in-line skating area;

    9.   No person shall change, alter, modify, or introduce any apparatuses, wax, lubricants, or other contrivances upon any surface in, on, or around designated skateboarding and/or in-line skating area;

    10. No person shall ride any skateboard or similar contrivance in a supine or prone or “luge” position;

    11. Persons not adhering to posted skateboarding and/or in-line skating rules in designated skateboarding and/or in-line skating area are subject to immediate removal and loss privileges.

    B.   A violation of any section or subsection in this chapter is deemed to be an infraction and is punishable as such according to the provisions of this code and state law. (Ord. 975 § 2, 2002; Ord. 954 § 2, 2000)

Chapter 10.76 RAILROADS
10.76.010 Trains not to block crossings.
    No person shall cause or permit any railway train or railway cars, or similar vehicle on rails, to stop or stand or to be operated in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of time longer than ten minutes; except this provision shall not apply to railway trains, cars or similar vehicles on rails while blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the operator of the train, car or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the scene of the accident. (Prior code § 3380.1)

 

10.76.020 Driving through railway gates prohibited.
    No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. (Prior code § 3380)

Chapter 10.80 OVERSIZED VEHICLE OVERNIGHT PARKING REGULATIONS
10.80.010 Prohibition of parking of oversized vehicles.
    Except as provided in Section 10.80.020 or otherwise expressly provided to the contrary herein, no person shall park, stop, or leave standing on any public street, park road, alley or rights-of-way in the city any oversized vehicle between the hours of two a.m. and four a.m. For purposes of this section, an oversized vehicle that is moved to a location or parking place that is within two hundred feet of its original location or parking place shall be deemed to be parked at the same original location. (Ord. 1106 § 4, 2017)

 

10.80.020 Exemptions to prohibition on parking of oversized vehicles.
    The provisions of Section 10.08.010 of this chapter shall not apply to any of the following:

    A.  Emergency stopping, standing or parking of an oversized vehicle when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device pursuant to Sections 10.40.040, 10.40.070 and 10.52.010 of this code.

    B.   Emergency and official vehicles pursuant to Section 10.04.020 of this code.

    C.   Any vehicle displaying a valid permit issued pursuant to Section 5.61.050 or 15.50.550(B) of this code.

    D.  A vehicle displaying a valid temporary parking permit issued by the city pursuant to Section 10.80.030 of this code.

    E.   A person who is making emergency repairs to an oversized vehicle. (Ord. 1106 § 4, 2017)

 

10.80.030 Forty-eight-hour temporary parking permits.
    A.  The city manager or duly authorized representative has the authority to adopt procedural rules and regulations governing the permit process, and to issue a temporary parking permit for the parking of oversized vehicles on a public street to any resident, tenant or property owner of the city or a bona fide guest for a period of forty-eight hours. The city manager or duly authorized representative, shall issue a temporary parking permit at no cost to any resident of the city, for the parking of an oversized vehicle that belongs to that resident, or a bona fide guest of the household in which such resident resides, provided the following conditions are met:

    1.   The permit is obtained by a resident of the property where the oversized vehicle will be parked in accordance with this section. Proof of residency and proof of over-

sized vehicle ownership or use and control shall be demonstrated in a manner determined by the city manager.

    2.   The permit shall state the address of the resident and the permit shall only be valid within the same block as the resident’s address, on either side of the street.

    3.   Not more than four permits shall be issued for any specific oversized vehicle within any given calendar month. Permits may not be issued for consecutive periods, and there must be a minimum of forty-eight consecutive hours between the issuance of permits for a specific property or a specific oversized vehicle.

    4.   The oversized vehicle shall not be used for overnight camping, lodging, residing in, or any use for accommodation purposes.

    5.   The oversized vehicle shall not visibly block or obscure any existing safety or traffic control device and shall otherwise meet all other parking requirements for the street upon which it is parked.

    6.   The city manager or designee determines that the parking of the oversized vehicle would not create a public safety hazard. Such a determination may be made based on factors, including, without limitation, the size of the oversized vehicle, the configuration of the street or the location of any nearby trees, improvements or structures.

    B.   The city manager or duly authorized representative shall have the authority to extend the duration of the temporary parking permit issued by the city for a reasonable period of time if the city manager finds that there is just cause or is in the furtherance of justice. An extension hereunder shall be in writing. (Ord. 1106 § 4, 2017)

 

10.80.040 Restrictions on temporary parking permit.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to Section 10.80.030 of this chapter to transfer, sell, rent or lease such permit or allow such permit to be used by any person other than a guest of that person, either with or without consideration.

    B.   It is unlawful for any person to borrow, buy or otherwise acquire for value or use or display any parking permit, except as provided for in Section 10.80.030 of this chapter.

    C.   Each permit issued pursuant to Section 10.80.030 of this chapter shall be subject to all of the conditions and restrictions set forth in Section 10.80.030 of this chapter. The issuance of such permit shall not be construed to be a permit for or approval of any violation of any provision of this code or any other law or regulation. (Ord. 1106 § 4, 2017)

 

10.80.050 Violations and penalties.
    A.  First Violation. Upon the first violation of this chapter, a parking enforcement officer or duly authorized representative shall issue a written warning to the responsible party describing the violation requiring correction. If an individual cannot be located, the written notice of violation shall be placed on the offending oversized vehicle.

    B.   Second Violation. If a second violation of this chapter occurs within a twelve-month period, a violator shall be issued a citation.

    C.   Third Violation. If a third violation of this chapter occurs within a twelve-month period, a violator shall be issued a citation and the oversized vehicle may be towed and impounded at the owner’s expense.

    D.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, or fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this chapter, or who fails to comply with any order or notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor offense punishable in accordance with Chapter 1.20.010 of Title 1 of this code.

    E.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city attorney or city prosecutor from prosecuting a violation of this chapter as an infraction, at his or her discretion, as set forth in Chapter 1.20.010 of Title 1 of this code.

    F.   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent any city enforcement officer from the enforcement of this chapter in accordance with Chapter 1.30 of Title 1 of this code or issuing an administrative citation for violations of the provisions of this chapter, as set forth in Chapter 8.16 of Title 8 of this code.

    G.  Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter, or of any law or regulation referenced herein, is allowed, committed, continued, maintained or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable accordingly.

    H.  Notwithstanding the above, at the discretion of the city, a violation of this chapter is subject to civil penalty and shall be governed by the civil administrative procedures set forth in Chapter 1.30 of this code.

    I.    Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties provided by this chapter, any condition or activity caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision, restriction, or requirement of this chapter or any notice, order, or permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city by any and all means (civil, administrative, and/or equitable) as provided by law or in equity. (Ord. 1106 § 4, 2017)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Division I. Street Permit Work
Division II. Other Street Regulations

Division I. Street Permit Work
Chapter 12.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Article I General Provisions
12.04.010 Title for citation.
    Division I of Title 12 of this code shall be known as and may be cited as the “Street Permit Ordinance.” (Prior code § 7101.01)

 

12.04.020 Applicability of provisions.
    Every person, except as otherwise provided in this Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, is required to obtain a permit from the city engineer before he:

    A.  Moves or causes to be moved over, along or across any street any load or vehicle;

    B.   Makes or causes to be made any excavation or encroachment in any street;

    C.   Places, changes or renews an encroachment;

    D.  Places, constructs or repairs any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain, culvert or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or through any street;

    E.   Constructs, reconstructs or repairs any streetlight or street-lighting system in any street or in any privately owned thoroughfare which is open to public travel. This subsection E does not apply if any agreement with the city exists for the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of such installation;

    F.   Constructs, reconstructs, repairs or maintains any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility;

    G.  Places or leaves any impediment to travel upon any street. (Prior code § 7101.02)

 

12.04.030 Delegation of powers.
    Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized, pursuant to law or ordinance, by the officer. (Prior code § 7101.04)

 

12.04.040 Validity of provisions.
    If any provision of this Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (Prior code § 7101.03)

 

Article II Definitions
12.04.050 Interpretation of language.
    For the provisions of this Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, certain words and phrases are defined and certain provisions shall be construed as set forth in this chapter, unless it is apparent from the context a different meaning is intended.

    A.  The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present.

    B.   The masculine gender includes the feminine.

    C.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

    D.  “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive. (Prior code §§ 7102.00, 7102.01 — 1702.03, 7102.08)

 

12.04.060 Base course.
    “Base course” means that portion of the street located between the pavement and the native soil. (Prior code § 7102.15)

 

12.04.070 City.
    “City” means the city of Pico Rivera. (Prior code § 7102.04)

 

12.04.080 City engineer.
    “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city of Pico Rivera, or in his or her absence the director of public works of the city. (Prior code § 7102.05)

 

12.04.090 Driveway.
    “Driveway” means that portion of the street right-of-way between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the street onto adjacent property. (Prior code § 7102.12)

 

12.04.100 Encroachment.
    “Encroachment” means and includes any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, stand or building, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, which is placed in, along, under, over or across the street. This definition does not apply to the temporary use of the street for ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment, nor to the suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cables, wires, transmission lines, conduits or service connections solely for telephone or electric power purposes. (Prior code § 7102.07)

 

12.04.110 Facilities or pipelines.
    “Facilities or pipelines” means pipelines, valves, tanks, mains, service lines, conduits, duct banks, cables, wires, poles, tunnels, obstructions and other apparatus, both aerial and underground. (Prior code § 7102.24)

 

12.04.120 Hazardous substance.
    “Hazardous substance” means one having the potential for an immediate disaster, such as but not limited to gasoline, fuel oil, butane, propane, chemicals, natural gas or chlorine; and, for the purposes of this Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, electrical facilities shall comply with the requirements applicable to hazardous substances. (Prior code § 7102.23)

 

12.04.130 Height.
    “Height” means that dimension, measured from the level surface upon which the vehicle stands, to the highest protrusion, in a vertical line. (Prior code § 7102.10)

 

12.04.140 Load.
    “Load” means any object or thing which, when transported by a vehicle or combination of vehicles over, upon, along or across any street, would be required to have a special permit in accordance with provisions of the Vehicle Code, and includes but is not limited to any house, vessel, machine, equipment, transformer, tree, girder, boat or airplane. (Prior code § 7102.11)

 

12.04.150 Moving contractor.
    “Moving contractor” means any person who, for himself or for another, moves or causes to be moved any load over, upon, along or across any street. (Prior code § 7102.18)

 

12.04.160 Native soil.
    “Native soil” means the compacted native material. (Prior code § 7102.16)

 

12.04.170 Newsrack.
    “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals. (Prior code § 7102.22)

 

12.04.180 One-call notification system or system.
    “One-call notification system” or “system” means an association providing for mutual receipt of notification of construction activities in the incorporated territory of the city of Pico Rivera. (Prior code § 7102.26)

 

12.04.190 Overhead structure.
    “Overhead structure” means any structure, other than franchise utility poles and their facilities, extending over the dedicated portion of a street, including canopies, but excluding such projects from buildings as are enumerated in Chapter 15.04 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, and known as the Uniform Building Code. (Prior code § 7102.21)

 

12.04.200 Pavement.
    “Pavement” means the surfaced portion of the street, which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with Portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds. (Prior code § 7102.14)

 

12.04.210 Person.
    “Person” means and includes any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, any district, any city, including this city, and any county. (Prior code § 7102.13)

 

12.04.220 Public.
    “Public” means any persons, as defined in this chapter, other than the city public works department, and includes the United States and this state. (Prior code § 7102.17)

 

12.04.230 Roadway.
    “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. (Prior code § 7102.25)

 

12.04.240 Street.
    “Street” means any public street, public way or public place in the incorporated area of the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for the purpose of travel. The terms includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such entire area is actually used for street purposes. (Prior code § 7102.06)

 

12.04.250 Vehicle.
    “Vehicle” means a vehicle or combination of vehicles, as described in the Vehicle Code, which:

    A.  Whether laden or unladen is required by the Vehicle Code to have a special permit to be on any street; or

    B.   Is so laden that it is required to have such special permit. (Prior code § 7102.19)

 

12.04.260 Vehicle Code.
    “Vehicle Code” means the state of California Vehicle Code in effect at the time of issuance of the permit. (Prior code § 7102.20)

 

12.04.270 Width.
    “Width” means that dimension, measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the load or portion thereof is, or is to be, loaded or moved, or to the median line of the street over which the same is being or is to be moved. (Prior code § 7102.09)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.08 GENERAL STANDARDS AND ENFORCEMENT
Article I Standards and Specifications
12.08.010 Standards for work performance.
    All work shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction—1991 Edition, or according to the plans referred to in the permit and, in addition, to any special requirements and/or specifications which are made a part of the permit. In case of a conflict between two specifications, the higher specification shall apply. (Ord. 806 § 1, 1992; prior code § 7103.05)

 

12.08.020 Permit—Required.
    Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title without first having obtained a permit therefor shall stop and apply for such permit. (Prior code § 7103.06)

 

12.08.030 Permit—Rights of the city.
    Every permit issued under Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title for activity or work in, along, on, over, across or under the street shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such street may lawfully be used. Proof of the applicant’s right to use the highways for the purposes set forth in the application shall be filed with the city engineer. (Prior code § 7103.04)

 

12.08.040 Compliance with specifications.
    Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title must comply with the provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, the provisions made a part of any permit, and the provisions of the specifications and all codes referred to by said Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40. (Prior code § 7103.09)

 

12.08.050 Liability for actions and costs.
    Whenever Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title require a permittee to perform any work, take any action or be liable for any fees or costs, such requirement also applies to any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by said Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, whether such person obtains such a permit or not. (Prior code § 7103.03)

 

12.08.060 Safeguards and barricades.
    Any person engaged in performing work regulated by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title which interferes with or endangers the safe movement of traffic, shall have the work safeguarded by adequate warning signs, barricades, lights and devices. He or she shall be responsible for placing and maintaining adequate warning signs, lights, barricades and devices during all periods of his or her activity, in order to promote the safe movement of traffic, including but not limited to periods of twilight, nighttime, fog and/or rain. All warning signs, barriers, barricades, flags and other devices shall comply with or exceed the standards required by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7103.01)

 

12.08.070 Permit—Inspection by city.
    The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the city engineer or his or her representative, or by any peace officer or other person having responsibility for safety or maintenance of the street. Each permit for moving must be in or on the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers. (Prior code § 7103.07)

 

12.08.080 Inspection requirements.
    A person shall not obstruct the city engineer or his or her duly authorized representative in making any inspection authorized by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, or in taking any sample or in making any test. (Prior code § 7103.02)

 

12.08.090 Timely completion of work.
    Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title shall safeguard and complete the activity or work within a reasonable time. Any part of the street facility of any nature removed or disturbed shall be repaired, restored and replaced in a condition satisfactory to the city engineer. All surplus material of any kind shall be removed from the street. (Prior code § 7103.08)

 

12.08.100 Compliance with orders of city officers.
    All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or presented by the city engineer in the matters specified on the permit or by attachments, or by any other matter in any way relating to or affecting their use of the street, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents and employees; except, in the case of a public utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission, when such order, decision, direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission applicable to such public utility. (Prior code § 7103.14)

 

12.08.110 Street closure authority.
    The city engineer may restrict the use of or close any city street whenever he or she considers such closing or restriction of use necessary:

    A.  For the protection of the public;

    B.   For the protection of such city street from damage during storms;

    C.   During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon. (Prior code § 7103.15)

 

12.08.120 Existing facilities—Location and relocation.
    The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the streets which are within the limits of his or her activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner, or to the satisfaction of its owner. (Prior code § 7103.12(A))

 

12.08.130 Facilities—Location and relocation costs.
    The cost of locating, exposing, moving or relocating publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee unless he or she makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility or unless the owner is required by his or her franchise or agreement to relocate his or her facility without cost. (Prior code § 7103.12(B))

 

12.08.140 Facilities—Notification to owner.
    A.  Except in emergency work to protect the public and property, any permittee proposing to excavate in any street shall make a search of available records of underground facilities and shall notify owners or operators known to have such facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation by telephone or other acceptable means of communications at least forty-eight hours prior to the time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays.

    B.   At such time as a one-call notification system is operational in the incorporated territory of the city, the permittee shall notify those owners or operators who are members of the system by notifying the system by telephone at least forty-eight hours prior to the time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays. The permit shall not be valid until the permittee receives a “ticket” number from the system acknowledging the notification, which number the permittee shall enter upon the face of the permit. Such notification is an additional method to be used in determining underground facilities, and does not relieve the permittee from the responsibility to assure that owners or operators of such facilities are notified.

    C.   Any permittee shall likewise notify nonmembers of the system who are owners or operators of facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation.

    D.  Any person receiving notice pursuant to this chapter shall, not less than one working day in advance of proposed construction unless otherwise agreed between such person and the permittee, inform the permittee of or field mark the location of any underground facility in the proposed area of excavation. (Prior code § 7103.12(D))

 

12.08.150 Facilities—Records of ownership.
    Each permittee excavating in the street shall notify the public agency maintaining records for that jurisdiction and the owner, if known, whenever previously unidentified or unknown utilities or underground facilities are encountered, so that the location can be accurately established and made part of the permanent substructure records. (Prior code § 7103.12(G))

 

12.08.160 Moving contractors and public utilities.
    No moving contractor, as defined in Chapter 12.04, shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with any property of any public utility. When any load requiring a special permit is moved along or across any street, and it is determined that the height, width or weight of such load exceeds the height, width or weight as stated in the permit and property damage results therefrom, the city engineer is authorized to withhold any other moving permit from the violator until he or she produces evidence satisfactory to the city engineer that each additional permit load complies with all dimensions and weights as shown upon the application, and the load will not interfere with any public utility. The permittee violating this section may also be prosecuted under the provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title. (Prior code § 7103.12(H))

 

12.08.170 Facilities—Protection from damage.
    The permittee shall support and protect all facilities by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner has the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In case any of such facilities should be damaged (and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement of devices should be considered as part of a structure), they may be repaired by the owner at the expense of the permittee or, if authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision of the owner. The expense of repairs to any damaged facilities shall be borne by the permittee. (Prior code § 7103.12(C))

 

12.08.180 Hazardous substance pipelines—Location precautions.
    A.  Any permittee, prior to making any excavation within the construction area where a pipeline known to carry a hazardous substance exists, shall not excavate until the pipeline has been located by potholing or other proven or acceptable method, at intervals sufficient to determine its exact location. The permittee shall arrange with the owner to locate or expose private and public facilities. Abandoned or inoperative pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances shall be considered as carrying a hazardous substance until determined otherwise by the owner.

    B.   In no case shall the intervals between potholes or the location by proven acceptable methods exceed the distance set forth as follows:

    1.   Excavations for Street Construction. The pipelines shall be located at intervals not greater than twenty-five feet for lines less than eight inches in diameter, fifty feet for lines of eight inches through twenty-four inches in diameter, and one hundred feet for lines greater than twenty-four inches in diameter;

    2.   Trench Excavation.

    a.   Longitudinal Pipelines. All longitudinal pipelines in the construction area of the streets shall be located at intervals not greater than five hundred feet. If determined to be within six feet of the excavation, it shall be further located at intervals not greater than twenty-five feet for lines less than eight inches in diameter, fifty feet for lines of eight inches through twenty-four inches in diameter, and one hundred feet for lines greater than twenty-four inches in diameter,

    b.   Transverse Pipelines. If the location of the pipelines is above or less than six inches below the facility being installed, it shall be carefully hand-tool exposed before excavating. If its location is six inches or more below the facility, it need only be located. (Prior code § 7103.12(E))

 

12.08.190 Hazardous substance pipelines—Excavation method.
    A.  After it is determined that the horizontal or vertical clearance between the pipeline known to carry hazardous substances and the construction limits is less than twelve inches (eighteen inches if scarifying), the permittee shall confer with the owner. Unless the owner elects to relocate, abandon or take the pipeline out of service, the permittee shall not excavate until the pipeline has been completely hand-tool exposed within the limits of construction.

    B.   Once the physical location of pipelines known to carry hazardous substances has been determined, as above described, the permittee doing the excavating, in cooperation with and with the concurrence of the owner, shall determine how to protect the pipeline from damage before proceeding with his or her work. (Prior code § 7103.12(F))

 

12.08.200 Restoration of street facilities.
    A.  Upon completion of the permittee’s activity, the city engineer, at his or her option, may require the permittee to restore that portion of the street facilities damaged by the permittee’s activity, or the city engineer may elect to do such restoration himself.

    B.   Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and in no event to a thickness less than two inches.

    C.   The base course removed shall be replaced to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course.

    D.  Where the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired.

    E.   When the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the city engineer may elect to require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements.

    F.   In those instances where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of street to be reconstructed by the city and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement, the city engineer may waive such resurfacing. (Prior code § 7103.10)

 

12.08.210 Completion of work by city when.
    When paving, excavated material, barricades, lights or other devices are not properly placed or maintained; when the work started is not completed; when the work does not comply with the specifications or any special requirement; when the person fails or refuses to remove any obstruction; when any street facility has been damaged and the person fails or refuses to repair or restore; the city engineer, with city forces or otherwise, may cause such to be placed, erected, completed, repaired, restored and/or maintained. The person shall pay for any and all costs. (Prior code § 7103.13)

 

12.08.220 Hold-harmless agreement.
    The permittee shall save harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees of and from any and all liability or responsibility for any property damage or loss, or injury or death to any person arising out of or occurring as the proximate result of the work undertaken. (Prior code § 7103.12(I))

 

Article II Violations and Enforcement
12.08.230 Failure to obtain permit—Misdemeanor.
    Every person who performs any work regulated by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, either without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city engineer or, having a permit, fails or refuses to comply with any applicable provisions of said Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, or with any conditions of the permit, or performs work contrary to any of the general or special requirements or specifications of the permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any part of which such violation occurs. (Prior code § 7103.16)

 

12.08.240 Violation—Penalty.
    Violation of any provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 7103.17)

 

12.08.250 Notice of violation—Required when.
    The city engineer shall notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee or other persons having possession of the premises where any person has constructed, reconstructed or repaired curbs, gutters, driveways, culverts, streetlights or lighting systems, or other appurtenant structures, with or without a permit, in violation of the standards established by the city engineer, that the continued maintenance or existence of such violation will constitute a hazardous condition for pedestrians and motorists, and in some instances endanger the public health, safety and welfare, and that such person or persons must remove, replace or otherwise correct such violation within thirty days, and if not so removed, replaced or otherwise corrected within such thirty days, that the same will be removed, replaced or otherwise corrected by the city engineer and the expense thereof charged to such person or persons. (Prior code § 7103.18)

 

12.08.260 Abatement of violation—Hearing.
    If the violation is not so abated by the person within such thirty days, the city engineer shall file with the city council a written report setting forth the facts of the violation, the giving of such notice, and the work needed to be done to remove, replace or otherwise correct the violation. The city clerk shall then give a written notice of hearing before the city council, setting forth, among other things, the following:

    A.  The street address and legal description sufficient for identification of the premises where the violation is located;

    B.   The conditions because of which the city engineer believes such violation is a hazard, or endangers the public health, safety and welfare;

    C.   The date, hour and place of hearing;

    D.  The necessary work or act to be performed;

    E.   A general statement that all interested parties who desire to be heard may appear before the city council to show cause why the violation should not be abated. (Prior code § 7103.19)

 

12.08.270 Hearing—Notice requirements.
    The city clerk shall cause one copy of the notice of hearing to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises where the violation exists and shall, in addition, not less than ten days prior to the hearing, cause one copy of the notice to be served, either in the manner required by law for the service of summons or by first class mail, postage prepaid, upon the owner of the premises as well as upon the possessor or occupant or any person in apparent charge or control of such premises. (Prior code § 7103.20)

 

12.08.280 Hearing—City council authority.
    A.  The city council shall:

    1.   Hear and consider all competent evidence offered by any person pertaining to the matter set forth in the report of the city engineer;

    2.   Make a finding of fact as to whether or not the violation is a public hazard or endangers the public health, safety and welfare;

    3.   Make an order based upon such finding that the violation is:

    a.   Not a hazard or endangers the public health, safety and welfare requiring abatement, or

    b.   Is a hazard or endangers the public health, safety and welfare requiring abatement.

    B.   If the finding and order is that the violation is a hazard or endangers the public health, safety and welfare, requiring abatement, the order shall state the street address of the property involved as well as a legal description of the premises sufficient for identification, the particulars which render the violation a hazard or endangers the public health, safety and welfare, the work required to be done, and the time within which the work must be commenced, which shall not be less than ten days nor later than thirty days after the service of the order, and a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed, as established by the city council in such order.

    C.   The city clerk shall post the order in a conspicuous place on the premises involved and serve a copy thereof in the manner prescribed herein for service of the notice of hearing upon the person upon whom this chapter requires the notice of hearing to be served. (Prior code § 7103.21)

 

12.08.290 Failure to comply with council order.
    A.  The owner or other person having charge and control of the property where the violation found to be a hazard or endangering the public safety, health and welfare exists, who fails to comply with any order of the city council to abate the violation is guilty of a misdemeanor.

    B.   Any person who removes any notice or order posted as required by this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 7103.22)

 

12.08.300 City to abate violation when—Costs.
    A.  The city council finds and determines that if the owner of the premises fails to comply with such order within the time specified by the city council, or any extension thereof, that the city engineer shall cause the work of abatement to be performed as ordered previously. In such an event, the city engineer or his or her duly authorized agent shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in the abatement of the violation.

    B.   Upon completion of the work, the city engineer shall cause to be posted on the property where the work was performed a verified statement showing the cost of the abatement as well as a notice of the time and place when and where the verified statement of cost will be submitted to the city council for approval and confirmation, and at which time the city council shall consider any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such work, and any other interested person. A copy of the statement and notice shall be mailed in the same manner prescribed in this chapter for mailing of notice of hearing, and an affidavit of such posting and mailing shall be filed with the city clerk. (Prior code § 7103.23)

 

12.08.310 Abatement costs—Hearing.
    A.  The posting and giving notice of the statement of cost of the work shall be within ten days from the completion of the work as ordered, and the hearing on the statement shall be not less than ten days nor more than thirty days from the date of giving of the notice.

    B.   At the time fixed for the hearing of the statement of expense, the city council shall consider the statement together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable to be assessed for doing the work, and any other interested person, and thereupon the city council may make such revision, correction or modification of the statement as it may deem just, after which, by motion or resolution, the report as submitted (or in the event any revisions, corrections or modifications have been ordered by the city council, then the statement as revised, corrected or modified), shall be confirmed. (Prior code § 7103.24)

 

12.08.320 Abatement costs—Lien on property.
    A.  The cost of the work and the expense of abatement of the violation shall be a lien against the property on which it was maintained, “Cost,” as used in this section, means the cost after deducting therefrom any consideration or price received, if any, for materials removed in the abatement of the violation. In the event the cost is not paid within five days after the decision of the city council confirming the statement, such shall constitute a lien upon the real property upon which the violation was abated, which lien shall continue until the amount thereof and interest thereon at the rate of six percent per year, computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until paid, has been paid, or until it is discharged of record.

    B.   In the event of nonpayment, the city council shall, at any time within sixty days after the decision of the city council on the statement, cause to be filed in the office of the county recorder of the county in which the property is located, a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

 

Pursuant to the authority vested in the undersigned by Division I of Title 12 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, the undersigned did on the ________ day of ________, 19___, cause a violation to be abated on the real property hereinafter described and the undersigned did on the ________ day of ________, 19___, by action duly recorded in its official minutes as of said date, assess the cost of such abatement, less the amount received from the sale of any materials removed in the course of said abatement, upon the real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid nor any part thereof and the said undersigned does hereby claim a lien on said real property for the net expenses for the doing of said work in the sum of $___________, and the work shall be a lien upon said real property until the said sum, with interest at the rate of 6% per annum, from the said day of ________, 19___, (insert day of confirmation of statement), has been paid in full and discharged of record, as well as a personal obligation against (insert name of property owner).

 

  The real property hereinbefore mentioned, upon which a lien is claimed, is that certain place or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Pico Rivera, County of Los Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows:

 

  DATED this _____ day of _____, 19_____.

 

 

CITY OF PICO RIVERA

  By __________________________

City Engineer

 

(Prior code § 7103.25)

 

12.08.330 Abatement costs—Special assessment.
    A.  The cost of the abatement shall also constitute a special assessment against the parcel. Confirmation of the statement or report shall be a confirmation of the assessment, and shall be a lien on the property or parcel where the abatement was performed.

    B.   After confirmation of the statement, a certified copy of the claim shall be filed with the county auditor on or before August 10th. The description of the parcel or parcels reporting shall be those used for the parcels on the county assessor’s map book for the current year. The county auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. As an alternative method, the county tax collector, in his or her discretion, may collect the assessment without reference to the general taxes, by issuing separate bills and receipts for the assessment. Law relating to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to such special assessment taxes.

    C.   The city engineer may receive the amount due on the abatement cost and issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the statement, prior to August 1st of that current year.

    D.  The city council may order refunded all or part of a tax paid pursuant to the provisions of this section if it finds that all or part of the taxes have been erroneously levied. A tax or part shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the city clerk on or before March 1st after taxes become due and payable. The claim shall be verified by the person who pays the tax or is guardian, executor or administrator. (Prior code § 7103.26)

 

12.08.340 Violation—Cumulative remedies.
    A.  The remedies herein set forth are cumulative. Violations on publicly dedicated rights-of-way may be abated in accordance with the terms and provisions of Division I of this title. Any failure hereunder to record the lien under the provisions of this division shall not bar collection for the cost of the abatement of the violation by either special assessment proceedings, or by other means.

    B.   The provisions of this division constituting the cost of the abatement of the violation a lien against the property may be modified by the city council as it deems necessary in confirming the report of the city engineer in those cases where the city council should find that a proportionate share or all of the share of the cost of the work should be borne by the city in the best public interest. (Prior code § 7103.27)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.12 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Article I Application for Permit
12.12.010 Application—Forms.
    Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the city engineer, on the forms provided by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7104.01)

 

12.12.020 Application—Contents.
    An applicant for a permit shall state in his or her application: Name and address, such other information as is required by Division I of this title, and such other information as the city engineer may require. (Prior code § 7104.02)

 

12.12.030 Permit—Period of validity—Extensions.
    Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall become null and void, and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified unless the city engineer extends the time. The city engineer may extend the time if in his or her opinion the work for which the permit was issued was delayed in completion because of inclement weather, strikes, an act of God, or other causes not within the control of the permittee. (Prior code § 7104.06)

 

12.12.040 Blanket permits.
    Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued subject to the compliance with all applicable provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title. The city engineer may revoke any such blanket permit if the permittee fails to comply with any of the provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40. The issuance of a blanket permit does not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the blanket permit as may be required by the city engineer and for paying for inspection, repairs and other costs incurred by the city engineer due to the permittee’s activity. (Prior code § 7104.07)

 

12.12.050 Hold-harmless agreement.
    On each application, the applicant or his or her agent shall sign a statement that he or she agrees to preserve and save harmless the city, and each officer and employee thereof, from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of his or her activities pursuant to the permit applied for. (Prior code § 7104.03)

 

12.12.060 Changes and additions.
    The city engineer may make such changes or additions in any application for a permit as, in his or her opinion, are necessary:

    A.  For the protection of the streets;

    B.   For the prevention of undue interference with traffic;

    C.   For the safety of persons using such streets;

    D.  As to the route over which to move any over-height, width, length or weight load;

    E.   As to the location, depth, dimensions, character and number of excavations;

    F.   As to encroachments made or placed; and

    G.  As to other permits issued pursuant to Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title. (Prior code § 7104.04)

 

12.12.070 Additional requirements.
    The city engineer may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under the permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill, compaction, paving, traffic regulations, hours of work, flagmen, lights, inspection, and other similar requirements. He or she also may require whatever advance notice he or she deems proper for requests for inspection. The city engineer may add these requirements and conditions by rubber stamp or attachments to the permit, or both, and they shall be an integral part thereof. If any of the requirements of the permit are violated, the city engineer may revoke the permit and require that a new permit be secured before further work is done. (Prior code § 7104.05)

 

12.12.080 Evidence of no hazards.
    The city engineer may require that evidence be submitted with the application to satisfy him or her that the proposed overhead structure or encroachment will not, insofar as he or she can foresee, create a hazard of any kind. (Prior code § 7104.13)

 

12.12.090 Relocation cost arrangements.
    The city engineer may require the permittee to make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of the relocation of any structure, publicly owned facility, tree or shrub, where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The city engineer may elect to do the necessary relocation at the permittee’s expense. (Prior code § 7104.08)

 

12.12.100 Permit—Issuance conditions.
    If the applicant complies with every applicable provision of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title and all applicable provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the city engineer may issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application. The city engineer may refuse to issue a permit if he or she finds that it is not in the best interest of the general public to do so. (Prior code § 7104.09)

 

12.12.110 Permit—Denial or revocation conditions.
    The city engineer may refuse to issue permits or may revoke any outstanding permit heretofore or hereafter issued, or any portion thereof, when the work has not been started, when the work authorized by the permits or such portions thereof is included in the work to be done by any proposed assessment district for which proceedings have been instituted by the city council. (Prior code § 7104.11)

 

12.12.120 Permit—Not transferable.
    Permits issued under the authority of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title are nontransferable. (Prior code § 7104.12)

 

12.12.130 Permit—Cancellation or removal.
    The city engineer, or his or her representative, for cause may cancel the privilege granted by the permit and may remove the permit from the job location. If removed or cancelled by other means by anyone other than the city engineer, it shall be delivered to the office of the city engineer within twenty-four hours, accompanied by a written report regarding the incident. (Prior code § 7104.10)

 

Article II Fees and Costs
12.12.140 Payment of fees and costs.
    All persons, except as otherwise specified in Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, shall pay an issuance fee and all other costs and charges as established by resolution of the city council for the work covered in Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.150 Exemptions—Governmental entities.
    The following shall be exempt from paying the issuance fee: The United States, this state, this county, any municipal corporation, any school district, and any special district organized under state law. (Prior code § 7104.16)

 

12.12.160 Exemptions—Work done for city.
    The city engineer may grant a permit without issuance fee if he or she finds that the work to be done has been requested by the city in connection with proposed public works. (Prior code § 7104.18)

 

12.12.170 Exemptions—Work inspected by other agencies.
    A.  The city engineer may issue a permit without any inspection fee or deposit for work which will be inspected by a qualified governmental agency which will furnish evidence to the effect that the work will be inspected and will comply with minimum standards required by the city.

    B.   If an applicant receives a permit pursuant to this provision and the governmental agency fails to make the inspection or fails to file evidence as required, the city engineer may inspect the work and the permittee shall pay the actual cost of such inspection to the city engineer. (Prior code § 7104.29)

 

12.12.180 Permit issuance—Fee schedule.
    A.  The issuance fees shall be as defined in the fee schedule set forth in resolution adopted by the city council.

    B.   The issuance fees required by this provision are nonrefundable. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.190 Permit issuance—Engineer’s costs.
    The permittee is liable for and shall pay for all the city engineer’s costs related to the permit, including but not restricted to the following:

    A.  The permit issuance fee, if that has not otherwise been paid;

    B.   Engineering, which includes design, inspection, survey and tests;

    C.   The cost of any inspection, transportation or test made;

    D.  The cost of repairing or restoring the streets and all appurtenant facilities to the same or equal condition that they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee’s activities;

    E.   The cost of furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices;

    F.   The cost of alteration, removal, replacement and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic stripes, and any other expense for traffic control;

    G.  The cost of removing or remedying any hazardous condition;

    H.  The cost of tree trimming;

    I.    Any other cost to the city caused by the permittee’s activity. (Prior code § 7104.19)

 

12.12.200 Engineering review and inspection fees.
    A.  In addition to the issuance fee as described in Section 12.12.100, applicants for a construction permit as described in Chapter 12.16 of this division, shall pay fees for engineering review and construction inspection as established by resolution of the city council.

    B.   A refund of fees collected under this provision shall not be made unless the permittee does not submit plans and proceed with the proposed work. In such cases, the permittee may apply to the city engineer for a return of the fee paid, less ten percent for processing. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.210 Excavation permit—Deposit required.
    In addition to the issuance fee, applicants for an excavation permit, as described in Chapter 12.20 of this division, shall deposit with the city engineer a sum of money which is twice the estimated cost of restoring the pavement and base which may be damaged or destroyed by the proposed excavation or obstruction. The cost shall be determined by the city engineer using accepted methods of estimating costs for the work involved, using current square foot unit costs. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.220 Moving permit—Deposit required.
    In addition to the issuance fee, applicants for a moving permit, as described in Chapter 12.24 of this division, who do not maintain a sufficient general deposit with the city engineer, shall deposit with the city engineer such amounts as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.230 Moving permit—Alternate security.
    In lieu of making the deposit required by Section 12.12.220, the moving contractor may make and maintain with the city engineer a general deposit in a sum equal to the amount of the deposit for the highest class of permit he or she desires, expects or intends to use. (Prior code § 7104.23)

 

12.12.240 Overhead structure permit deposit.
    In addition to the issuance fee, applicants for an overhead structure permit, as described in Chapter 12.28 of this division, shall deposit with the city engineer an amount estimated by the city engineer to be equal to twice the actual cost of all necessary engineering, inspection, removal of overhead structures, and repair of any sidewalk or street which may be injured by such construction. (Prior code § 7104.24)

 

12.12.250 Temporary encroachment permit deposit.
    In addition to the issuance fee, applicants for a temporary encroachment permit, as described in Chapter 12.32 of this division, shall make a special deposit with the city engineer as established by resolution of the city council, to cover any costs incurred by the city engineer in providing barricades, or to remove the temporary encroachment, if such are not provided, maintained or removed by the permittee in accordance with the terms of the permit. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.260 Computation of costs.
    Whenever in the provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs, including overhead and depreciation, in accordance with current practice in charging for work performed for the public. (Prior code § 7104.26)

 

12.12.270 Deposit of collected funds.
    Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspection or engineering collected under the provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title shall be deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements are made. (Prior code § 7104.15)

 

12.12.280 Street restoration costs—Authorization.
    In order to promote the welfare, well-being and safety of the public traveling along or across any street, the city engineer may do any work within the streets of whatever nature is required, in his or her opinion, to reestablish conditions as they existed prior to commencement of work done by any person within the streets and for which a permit has not been obtained. The city engineer shall charge the cost of the rehabilitation to the person doing the unauthorized work. (Prior code § 7104.27)

 

12.12.290 Street restoration costs—Computation.
    The city engineer’s costs of repairing and restoring the street pavement and base course shall be based on the actual cost basis. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

12.12.300 Street restoration costs—For city work.
    Whenever a permittee fails to comply with the conditions established for the exercise of a privilege granted under a permit, the city engineer may revoke the privilege. Upon such revocation, the permittee shall immediately restore the street to the city engineer’s satisfaction. If the permittee fails to do so, the city engineer may restore the street at the expense of the permittee, or charge the permittee a fee of three hundred dollars a day for each day of failure to restore the street. (Ord. 775 § 1, 1990)

 

Article III Deposits and Other Sureties
12.12.310 Deposits—General requirements.
    A.  Every applicant for a permit, unless exempt by law, other than the United States, this state, this county, municipalities and special districts, shall be required to provide a cash deposit or other adequate security, as determined by the city engineer, to guarantee payment of charges due under Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title. The amount of the deposit or security shall be sufficient to recover all costs of any nature which the city engineer estimates he or she will incur if the permittee does not fulfill his or her permit requirements.

    B.   A cash deposit or other adequate security is not required in the case of construction under contract with the city, where a faithful performance bond is posted or other surety is deposited and assigned to the city which guarantees to the city the repair of the street, including construction financed in whole or in part by special assessments. (Prior code § 7104.31)

 

12.12.320 Types of deposits.
    A cash deposit may be in the form of a special deposit for each permit or in the form of a general deposit to be maintained as security for all the permits issued to an applicant. If an applicant maintains a general cash deposit, it shall be with the understanding that he or she will pay all bills sent him or her by the city engineer for work covered by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title. (Prior code § 7104.32)

 

12.12.330 Alternatives to cash deposits.
    In lieu of a general cash deposit, the city engineer may accept from an applicant other types of security, as specified below:

    A.  Surety Bond. The city engineer may accept a surety bond in a sum of not less than one thousand dollars on a form supplied by the city engineer and executed by a corporation incorporated for the purpose of making, guaranteeing or becoming a surety upon bonds complying with Section 1056 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It shall guarantee the payment of all fees and other charges required by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title which may become due because of any permits issued during the life of the surety bond.

    B.   Savings and Loan Association Shares. The city engineer may accept the assignment of savings and loan certificates or shares.

    C.   Insurance. As security on moving permits only, the city engineer may accept a certificate of insurance and endorsement on the standard forms provided by the city engineer. Such certificate and endorsement shall show that an insurance policy of not less than ten thousand dollars has been issued to the applicant and is in full force and effect, and in which policy the insurer directly agrees to reimburse the city for all sums due it from the permittee for damage to street facilities.

    D.  Additional Securities. The city engineer may require any type of security that has, in his or her opinion, become insufficient for protection of the public interest, to be increased to such an amount as he or she has determined will be sufficient to protect the public interest. He or she may require special deposits or other security. (Prior code § 7104.33)

 

Article IV Billing and Collection
12.12.340 Billing of costs.
    The city engineer shall bill the permittee or deduct from the deposit made or maintained by the permittee for all fees and costs chargeable under Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title. (Prior code § 7104.34)

 

12.12.350 Billing of issuance fees.
    At the request of a permittee who maintains with the city engineer adequate security as provided in Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, and to whom ten or more permits have been issued monthly for three consecutive months, the city engineer may waive the requirement covering prepayment of the issuance fees and bill the permittee for issuance fees covering permits issued subsequent to such request. The city engineer may revoke such waiver at any time. (Prior code § 7104.36)

 

12.12.360 Additional repairs—Payment requirements.
    If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a street damaged or destroyed by any excavation, encroachment or moving operation in such street, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation, encroachment or moving operation, the permittee shall pay to the city engineer the cost of such additional repair; provided, however, that the city engineer shall have the option of either making the repair or requiring the permittee to make the repair. (Prior code § 7104.37)

 

12.12.370 Failure to pay—Deduction from deposit.
    If, within thirty days after a bill has been sent, the permittee does not pay the same in full, such amount may be deducted from his or her general deposit, or the city engineer may recover the amount due from any security the permittee has filed under Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40. If the deposit or security is insufficient to pay the amount due, the city may enforce collection by legal means. (Prior code § 7104.35)

 

12.12.380 Failure to pay—Holding of deposits.
    The city engineer may elect not to issue further permits to the permittee, and may hold any deposits, guarantees or bonds of the permittee, as long as any bill remains unpaid. (Prior code § 7104.38)

 

Article V Refunds
12.12.390 Issuance fee refunded when.
    An issuance fee may be refunded when a permit has been issued as the result of an error not made by the permittee. (Prior code § 7104.40)

 

12.12.400 Other unit fee refunds.
    The fee deposited for driveway inspection or any other unit fee established may be refunded if it was erroneously collected or if the work was not constructed by the permittee. (Prior code § 7104.41)

 

12.12.410 Refund of remainder of deposit.
    The remainder of any deposit, if there is any remainder, shall be refunded to the person making such deposit, or to his or her assigns, within sixty days of completion of the permit requirements. (Prior code § 7104.39)

 

 

Chapter 12.16 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
12.16.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, street surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, streetlights or lighting systems, or other appurtenant structures. (Prior code § 7105.01)

 

12.16.020 Grades and lines required.
    Before a permittee performs any work covered by this chapter, he or she shall obtain from the city engineer the approved lines and grades therefor. (Prior code § 7105.03)

 

12.16.030 Plans and setting of stakes.
    If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the city engineer may require the application be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. (Prior code § 7105.02)

 

12.16.040 Construction standards.
    The city engineer shall establish the standards for construction, reconstruction or repairing of curbs, gutters, driveways, street surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, streetlights or lighting systems, or other appurtenant structures. (Prior code § 7105.04)

 

12.16.050 Driveways—Location restrictions.
    A.  A driveway shall not be constructed or maintained where fences, buildings, natural grade, or any other obstacle will prevent a vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way after entering such driveway.

    B.   A driveway shall not be constructed unless all other driveways which have been abandoned or cause a violation of subsection A of this section have been removed and replaced with full-height curb and gutter, and the sidewalk repaired to city standards. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.060 Driveways—Width specifications.
    The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or centerline of the highway. The width of an individual driveway shall be not less than ten feet and shall not exceed in width:

    A.  Thirty feet, if the driveway serves only residences or apartments;

    B.   Thirty feet for lots or parcels of land less than one hundred feet wide;

    C.   Thirty feet or twenty percent of the front frontage of the lot or parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed sixty feet, when the driveway serves other than residences or apartments on a lot or parcel of land not less than one hundred feet wide. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.070 Driveways—Aggregate width.
    The aggregate width of the total number of driveways serving any single lot or parcel of land from any one highway shall not exceed:

    A.  Fifty percent of the frontage, if the driveway serves only residences and apartments;

    B.   Sixty percent of the frontage in other cases. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.080 Driveways—Side slope restrictions.
    A.  The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or returns of adjacent driveways servicing the same lot or parcel shall be twenty-two feet. In the case of adjacent driveways serving two adjoining lots or parcels, the intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be at least two feet; otherwise a common or continuous driveway will be required.

    B.   A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed:

    1.   Between the prolonged intersecting property lines of any streets; or

    2.   Between the points of curvature of any curb return having a radius of twenty-five feet or less.

    C.   In applying the provisions of subsection B of this section, the condition producing the greater length of curb between the specified control points in the particular case shall govern. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.090 Driveways—Curb return restrictions.
    A.  A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed between the points of curvature of any curb return except in the case of a curb return having a radius of twenty-five feet or more. Then driveways may encroach at each end thereof for a distance not greater than one-eighth of the total arc length of return, leaving in the clear at least three-quarters of such arc length, if such encroachment does not conflict with other requirements of this section.

    B.   Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, a driveway shall not encroach on any curb return beyond or ahead of any traffic-regulating device located on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.100 Modification of provisions.
    Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a modification of these provisions is necessary for the promotion of traffic safety, and the city engineer so finds, he or she may permit a deviation from the provisions to the extent which he or she finds necessary. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.110 Resetting of stakes—Costs.
    If any stakes set by the city engineer for any work covered by these provisions are disturbed or destroyed by cause directly attributable to the permittee’s delay in making use of the stakes, the city engineer shall set the additional stakes and shall charge the cost thereof to the permittee. (Ord. 838 § 1, 1993)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.20 EXCAVATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
12.20.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to permits for the making or causing to be made in any street, of excavations, and for the placing, constructing, testing, repairing, changing, monitoring, removing or abandoning of facilities or encroachments. The provisions of this chapter also apply to written emergency plans for owners or operators of pipelines used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids and mandatory membership in a one-call notification system. (Prior code § 7106.01)

 

12.20.020 Hazardous substance pipelines—System membership.
    When a one-call notification system is operational in the incorporated territory of the city, no person shall maintain and operate a pipeline designed to carry hazardous substances below the surface of a street unless such person is a member of the system. Such person shall provide to the city engineer such proof as required that the person is a member of the system in the city. For the purpose of this section, electrical facilities shall not be considered hazardous. (Prior code § 7106.02)

 

12.20.030 Plat filing requirements.
    A.  Each application for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application a plat in quintuplicate showing the streets in which the proposed excavation, facility or encroachment will be placed, together with the exact location and dimensions of the proposed excavations, or the specifications and characteristics of the facility or encroachment, together with any other details which the city engineer requires.

    B.   When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable or pipe, or for making repairs thereto, the city engineer may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public records. (Prior code § 7106.03)

 

12.20.040 Undergrounding of installations.
    The city engineer shall require all the lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in streets when all power and telephone lines are underground, and shall also require underground installation in all instances except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof of permission to use existing pole lines or where the city engineer finds that the remoteness of the area or other conditions render underground installation impractical or infeasible. (Prior code § 7106.14)

 

12.20.050 Pipelines—Depth of cover.
    The following minimum depths of cover below existing, finished or proposed grade shall be required for all underground pipelines within the roadway area:

    A.  Twenty-four inches for service pipelines;

    B.   Thirty-six inches for all pipelines in streets, except pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances and service pipelines;

    C.   Forty-two inches in streets for pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances such as, but not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, butane, propane or chemicals;

    D.  Forty-two inches for electric and natural gas facilities in streets. (Prior code § 7106.04)

 

12.20.060 Pipelines—Block valves.
    Block valves shall be installed on each new main line at locations along the pipeline system that will minimize damage from accidental product discharge. Such location shall be appropriate for the terrain and the population density of the area. (Prior code § 7106.06)

 

12.20.070 Pipelines—Cathodic protection.
    A.  As provided in the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision, a cathodic protection system shall be installed for all new ferrous pipelines used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable substances other than utility gases, in order to mitigate corrosion deterioration that might result in structural failure. The cathodic protection system for all new ferrous pipelines carrying utility gases shall be installed in accordance with General Order No. 112-C of the State Public Utilities Commission.

    B.   A test procedure shall be developed by the owner or operator to determine whether adequate cathodic protection has been achieved, and submitted to the city engineer for approval. Reports of cathodic protection evaluation in accordance with the approval procedure shall be made available annually for review by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7106.07)

 

12.20.080 Hazardous substance pipelines—Pressure testing.
    A.  After initial installation under this chapter of any pipeline used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, such pipelines shall be subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before it is placed in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall not be less than twenty-four hours.

    B.   After repair or replacement of any pipeline used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, made necessary to repair leaks or breaks, or replacements made necessary for changes required by improvements within the roadway, the affected portion of the pipeline shall be subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before being placed in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall be not less than twenty-four hours. However, no such test is required for a minor repair which does not require removal of the pipeline from operation. If the affected section is isolated and tested hydrostatically, pressure test of the tie-in welds is not required; however, tie-in welds shall be examined by radiographic means.

    C.   No pipeline subject to Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids and over ten years of age, shall be operated beyond the successive ensuing twelve-month period of time unless retested annually by a hydrostatic pressure test or other test means acceptable to the city engineer. The duration of the periodic test for this purpose shall not be less than four hours.

    D.  Each pressure test, either initial or retest, shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4), in its latest revision. The city engineer may authorize the use of a liquid petroleum that does not vaporize rapidly (i.e., flashpoint over one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit or sixty-six degrees Centigrade) as a test medium. Pressure tests after initial installation of pipelines and before they are placed in operation shall show no unexplained loss. Annual or retest pressure tests shall not show an hourly loss, for each section of the pipeline under test at the time, in excess of either ten gallons or the sum of one gallon and an amount computed at a rate in gallons per mile equivalent to one-tenth of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe.

    E.   The city engineer may grant administrative waiver or other relief to an owner or operator under Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title as to the periodic pressure testing of any pipelines, as herein provided, if the owner or operator can demonstrate that such testing will cause the unreasonable unscheduled shutdown of plants, terminals, refineries or other facilities of which such pipelines constitute an integral part.

    F.   In addition to the foregoing requirements, any pipeline authorized by Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 and subject to pressure testing shall be subject to a pressure test by the owner or operator at any time as may be required by the city engineer in the interest of public safety.

    G.  Within thirty days after completion of any test made pursuant to the provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 of this title, the owner or operator shall submit a certified report of such test for the city engineer’s review. The report shall show the date of test, description of the pipeline tested identified with respect to city streets, and the test data. The report shall be sufficient in detail to permit analysis of test results and determination of compliance with the applicable provisions of Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40, or any other applicable ordinance, rule or regulation. The report shall also contain any other test information as may be specifically requested by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7106.05)

 

12.20.090 Emergency plan required when.
    A.  Each owner or operator of a pipe-line used or to be used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids shall have a written emergency plan approved and on file with the city’s fire marshal. The plan shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4), in its latest revision.

    B.   The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following elements:

    1.   A “liaison” element for intercommunications between public agencies and pipeline owners or operators, to provide for prompt, coordinated remedial action, and the dissemination of information as to the location and ownership identification of pipelines, based on the best available records and plans;

    2.   A “spill contingency” element, to limit the extent of accidental product discharge, by which pipeline owners or operators shall involve themselves in a cooperative pipeline leak-notification emergency action system;

    3.   A “leak detection” element by which the pipeline owners or operators can monitor the flow of their product and can divert, reduce or stop the flow of such product at the first indication of a product leak;

    4.   A “first-on-the-scene emergency containment” element, in cooperation with other pipeline owners or operators, to be utilized until arrival of the affected pipeline owner’s or operator’s personnel. First-on-the-scene cost shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility, and shall be reimbursed to the organization effecting the emergency containment. (Prior code § 7106.08)

 

12.20.100 Refilling of excavations.
    A permittee shall refill an excavation in the manner which is satisfactory to the city engineer, and is most effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the street to be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. (Prior code § 7106.10)

 

12.20.110 Restoration of work area.
    Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation, facility or encroachment permitted by any permit issued, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner restore the area affected by his or her activity to a condition satisfactory to the city engineer. (Prior code § 7106.09)

 

12.20.120 As-built plat required.
    Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, or completion of the cut or fill, the permittee shall so notify the city engineer in writing on a form prescribed by the city engineer. Whenever a plat was required by Section 12.20.030 and there were substantial deviations approved during the work from the dimensions or locations as shown on the plat, the permittee shall transmit to the city engineer a concise as-built plat upon completion of his or her work, showing the accurate location, depth and size of the facility or encroachment so laid, removed or abandoned. (Prior code § 7106.11)

 

12.20.130 Removal or relocation statement.
    Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that if any facility or encroachment placed in the excavation, or the facility or encroachment for which a permit is issued, interferes with the future use of the street by the general public, then the applicant and his or her successors or assigns will, at his or her own expense, remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the city engineer such facility or encroachment. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases when the applicant has an easement superior to the street easement at the time of application and can furnish evidence, when required, of such superior easement. (Prior code § 7106.12)

 

12.20.140 Abandonment in place or removal.
    A.  Each applicant for a permit to abandon in place or remove any facility or encroachment in the street shall do so under terms and conditions prescribed by the city engineer. The permit application shall include a plat or other suitable means describing the facility or encroachment to be abandoned or removed, and indicating its exact location. Permission to abandon a facility or encroachment without removing shall be subject to removal within one year after the effective date of the abandonment if the facility or encroachment may interfere with a present or future public improvement. If it is determined that the facility or encroachment should be removed, the permittee or its successor in interest shall remove it at its expense, or pay the city for the cost of such removal. The permittee shall leave any abandoned facility or encroachment in a safe condition.

    B.   In addition to the foregoing, abandonment in place of a pipeline used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids will be subject to the following requirements. The pipeline shall be thoroughly purged of liquids and vapors and filled with an inert material that will remain in a solid or semisolid state if any portion of the pipeline is cut or removed in the future. The permittee shall file a certificate with the city engineer that the requirements of this section have been met, and the facility has been left in a safe condition. (Ord. 699 § 2, 1985; prior code § 7106.16)

 

12.20.150 No interference with street use.
    The city engineer may establish such requirements as he or she may find necessary to apply to the work to be done by any person in order to prevent interference with users of the street and with holders of other permits. (Prior code § 7106.15)

 

12.20.160 Time for obtaining permit.
    Nothing in Division I and Chapters 12.36 and 12.40 prohibits any person from maintaining, by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any facility or encroachment in any street, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property if the person making such excavation applies for a permit not later than the next business day. (Prior code § 7106.13)

 

 

Chapter 12.24 MOVING BUILDINGS
12.24.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    The provisions of this chapter apply to the use of the street by a vehicle or load, or to any combination. (Prior code § 7107.01)

 

12.24.020 Permit issuance and use conditions.
    The city engineer is authorized to issue or withhold the permit, at his or her discretion; or, if the permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicle or vehicles described may be operated on the streets indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle, when necessary to assure against undue interference with traffic or damage to the road foundations, surface or structures, and may require the undertaking of other security measures as may be deemed necessary to protect the streets and bridges from injury, or to provide indemnity for any injury resulting from the operation of the vehicle. (Prior code § 7107.07)

 

12.24.030 Relocation permit required when.
    In all cases where this code requires the owner of any premises to which it is proposed to move any building or structure to obtain a relocation permit, the city engineer shall not grant a permit to move such building or structure until the applicant furnishes to the city engineer evidence that such owner has such relocation permit. (Prior code § 7107.03)

 

12.24.040 Weight limitations.
    The city engineer shall not issue a permit to move any load when the weight of the load, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code; except that, if it appears to the city engineer that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the load or portion thereof to be moved make it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the city engineer may issue a permit to move a load on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires, where the city engineer has determined that such movement will not cause injury to the streets, bridges, and appurtenances installed therein or thereunder. (Prior code § 7107.04)

 

12.24.050 Planking required when.
    When so required by the city engineer, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving a building or structure, or under each wheel of a vehicle, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along or across any portion of any street which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface except upon such board, plank or runway. (Prior code § 7107.02)

 

12.24.060 Buildings moved in several sections.
    If a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more than one of such sections is moved at the same time, the moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times, in conspicuous places on each section on which the original permit is not affixed, true copies of such permit. (Prior code § 7107.05)

 

12.24.070 Changes to overhead facilities.
    Any person lawfully operating or maintaining overhead facilities across any highway in the city who desires information pertaining to any moving permits issued for the moving of a building of eighteen feet or more in height shall file a written request with the city engineer. The city engineer shall not allow the moving of a building for a period of forty-eight hours after the filing of a permit application in order to allow such person time to inspect the route the permittee intends to take. In the event the permittee needs to make any change in the route set forth on the permit, the permit shall be void until the moving contractor has obtained an approved change in the route. (Prior code § 7107.08)

 

12.24.080 Supervision of operations.
    The city engineer may require that the moving of any load or vehicle be under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7107.06)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.28 OVERHEAD STRUCTURES
12.28.010 Minimum height designated.
    Each overhead structure which extends over the portion of the street used by vehicles shall be not less than fifteen feet above the highest portion of the street surface. If the city engineer finds that traffic conditions are such that it is necessary for street safety for such structure to be at a greater height, then such structure shall be at such greater height as specified by the city engineer. (Prior code § 7108.01)

 

12.28.020 Doorway shelter specifications.
    Each overhead structure used primarily for a covered shelter for ingress and egress into a doorway shall not exceed ten feet in width and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than eight feet at every point. Each structure shall be supported by metal posts on a line two feet back from the face of the curb, if any, otherwise from the edge of the portion of the street designed for use by motor vehicles, and shall be constructed in such a manner that no portion thereof shall extend toward the roadway more than six inches beyond the metal posts. (Prior code § 7108.02)

 

12.28.030 Permit—Period of validity.
    Any permit to erect or maintain an overhead structure shall be treated as and deemed to be a permit to maintain such structure until expiration or revocation of the permit. This section does not apply to agencies operating under approved franchises. (Prior code § 7108.03)

 

12.28.040 Removal and restoration of facilities.
    Upon the effective date of the expiration or revocation of the permit, the person maintaining the overhead structure shall remove same, and restore any street facility damaged or removed. (Prior code § 7108.04)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.32 TEMPORARY ENCROACHMENTS AND NEWSRACKS
Article I. Temporary Encroachment Permits
12.32.010 Storage of construction materials.
    The provisions of this article apply to any temporary encroachment within the street right-of-way for storage of construction materials which is limited to a period not to exceed thirty consecutive calendar days. (Prior code § 7109.01)

 

12.32.020 Swimming pool permit requirements.
    When a building permit is required under Title 15 of this code for the construction of a swimming pool, the applicant shall first apply for a temporary encroachment permit. The city engineer shall notify the chief building official when the temporary encroachment permit has been issued. (Prior code § 7109.02)

 

12.32.030 Restrictions and safety measures.
    The temporary encroachment permit shall specify the time and manner in which encroachments will be allowed and all restrictions and safety measures required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Prior code § 7109.03)

 

12.32.040 Permit violation—Remedy costs and procedures.
    If any of the provisions of the permit are violated, the city engineer shall immediately take all actions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. The city engineer shall keep an accurate record of the cost of such actions, and such costs shall be deducted from the deposit required in Section 12.12.250 of this title. If such costs are in excess of the required deposit, the city engineer shall notify the permittee, in writing, of such amounts that are required, and the permit shall be suspended until the permittee has deposited with the city engineer the required amount to once again establish the deposit required by Section 12.12.250. The city engineer shall also notify the chief building official of the city of any suspension of the temporary encroachment permit. (Prior code § 7109.04)

 

Article II. Newsracks
Note
*   Prior code history: Prior code §§ 7109.05—7109.20.

 

12.32.050 Purpose and intent.
    A.  Findings. The city council of the city of Pico Rivera finds and declares that:

    1.   The uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks in the public right-of-way can constitute a threat to public health, safety and welfare by interfering with and obstructing the use of the public rights-of-way and by offending community aesthetic sensibilities and adversely affecting tourism which is one of the major sources of economic viability of the community.

    2.   The city council recognizes, however, that the use of such rights-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspapers and news periodicals that access to those areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The city council further finds that these strong and competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which can be satisfactorily achieved only through the means of this article, which is designed to accommodate such interests by regulating the place and manner of using such newsracks.

    B.   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and welfare through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size and servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-way so as to:

    1.   Protect the right to distribute information protected by the United States and California Constitutions, through the use of newsracks.

    2.   Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.

    3.   Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, ingress into or egress from any place of business or residence, from the street to the sidewalk, or from parked vehicles to the sidewalk.

    4.   Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mail boxes, and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes.

    5.   Minimize and repair the damage done to sidewalks or streets resulting from newsracks encroaching within the public rights-of-way.

    6.   Allow trees and other landscaping to grow without disturbance.

    7.   Protect Minors. It is necessary to protect minors from viewing harmful matter that may be located in the city’s public right-of-way, sidewalks or other public property.

    8.   Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way, encourage well-designed and aesthetically compatible newsracks and protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding properties.

    9.   Reduce exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims and litigation.

    10. The regulation of the distribution of newspapers and other publications dispensed in newsracks as set forth in this article provides the least intrusive and burdensome means for ensuring the purposes stated in this section are carried out while still providing ample opportunities for the distribution of news and other printed matter to the residents of the city.

    C.   Preservation of Constitutional Rights. It is not the intent of this article to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.060 Definitions.
    For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, unless the context or the provision clearly requires otherwise:

    A.  “Abandoned newsrack” shall mean any newsrack which contains no printed material supplied by the newsrack permittee for fourteen consecutive calendar days, except that a newsrack remaining empty due to a labor strike or any temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution or publication by the newspaper or other publication distributed from that newsrack shall not be deemed abandoned.

    B.   “City manager” shall mean the city manager or his or her designee.

    C.   “Director” shall mean the director of public works.

    D.  “Newsrack” has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 12.04.170 of this code.

    E.   “Newsrack encasement” means a city owned and maintained, modular receptacle inside which one or more privately owned newsracks may be placed. The newsrack encasement shall be large enough to accommodate a newsrack, which complies with the standards of this article, be permanently affixed to the ground or the side of a wall or other structure and be of a design which is architecturally compatible with the surrounding area.

    F.   “Public right-of-way,” for purposes of this article, means a right-of-way owned by the city or any other public entity or public utility.

    G.  “Roadway” has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 12.04.230 of this code.

    H.  “Sidewalk,” for purposes of this article, means that portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.

    I.    “Street” has the same meaning as that term is defined in Section 12.04.240 of this code. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.070 Newsrack permit.
    No person shall place or cause to be placed a newsrack on public right-of-way unless such person obtains a newsrack permit and complies with all requirements of this article. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.080 Newsrack permit requirements.
    A.  General. A newsrack permit is applicable only for the newsrack(s) and location(s) described in the permit.

    B.   Duration. A newsrack permit shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance.

    C.   Permit Application. Applications shall be filed with the director or designee, upon a form provided by the director and shall include the following information:

    1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

    2.   The address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any reasonable time concerning the applicant’s newsracks. Contact information must be updated by the applicant within ten days of any change;

    3.   The number of proposed newsracks and the names and frequency of publications to be contained in each newsrack, including any existing newsracks;

    4.   Type model and design of newsrack, including a photograph and a description of the newsrack and supporting structure that complies with Section 12.32.100;

    5.   A site plan showing the exact locations of each newsrack and supporting structure, and sufficient information to determine that the locations complies with Section 12.32.110;

    6.   A copy of the policy or a certificate of the comprehensive general liability insurance policy pursuant to Section 12.32.090(B); and

    7.   A written statement that the applicant will indemnify the city pursuant to Section 12.32.090(A).

    D.  Review of Permit Application. The director or designee, shall review each application to determine whether each proposed newsrack complies with the requirements of this article. The director or designee, shall, within thirty days of receipt of the permit application, either issue a newsrack permit or deny the application, in whole or in part, and notify the applicant in writing of the decision. If the application is denied, this notification shall include an explanation of the reasons for denial. A denial may be appealed in accordance with this article. The authorization for any newsrack included in a newsrack permit shall be of no further force and effect if that newsrack becomes an abandoned newsrack. In issuing a permit for a particular site, the director or designee, shall be guided solely by the standards and criteria set for in this article. In any case where the director or designee, disapproves of a particular site, such disapproval shall be without prejudice to the applicant who may designate a different location or locations and resubmit an application.

    E.   Newsrack Permit Renewal. Applications for renewal shall be filed with the director or designee, upon a form provided by the director and shall include the following information:

    1.   The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

    2.   The address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any reasonable time concerning the applicant’s newsrack(s). Contact information must be updated by the applicant within ten days of any change;

    3.   The number and location of all newsracks and the names and frequency of publications to be contained in each newsrack;

    4.   A copy of the policy or a certificate of the comprehensive general liability insurance policy pursuant to Section 12.32.090(B); and

    5.   A written statement that the applicant will indemnify the city pursuant to Section 12.32.090(A).

    F.   Amendments. A newsrack permit may be amended from time to time upon application for an amendment containing the information described in subsection C, for each additional newsrack or location to be the subject of the permit. The director or designee, shall review such applications in accordance with subsection D.

    G.  Encroachment Permits. A newsrack permit issued pursuant to this article shall operate as an encroachment permit and no separate permit pursuant to Section 12.04.020 of this code shall be required.

    H.  Fees. No newsrack permit shall take effect until payment by the applicant of a newsrack permit fee as adopted by the city council. The fee adopted by the city council shall include the costs of processing the permit applications, amendments and renewals, as well as the costs of maintaining newsrack encasements and enforcing this article. The director or designee, shall also require a bond or other form of security in an amount reasonably necessary to ensure removal of each newsrack authorized by the newsrack permit in the manner required by this article.

    I.    Permit Not a Bar to Enforcement. The issuance of a newsrack permit under this article shall not prevent the city from subsequently enforcing this article, if a violation is later found to exist.

    J.    Where two or more publications seek the same location for a newsrack and there is insufficient space at the location to accommodate all such publications, the director shall allocate newsrack permits in accordance with Section 12.32.110(B)(3) and (4).

    K.  Applications for a new newsrack location may be denied if there is a vacant and available newsrack space within an existing group of newsracks within five hundred feet.

    L.   If a permit for a newsrack is not renewed or a permit has been revoked by the city because of a failure to comply with the provisions of this article, the city shall send a written notice to those applicants who have requested, in writing, to be notified of any locations for which permits are available, and the date by which any applications for such permit should be submitted.

    M.  In addition to obtaining a newsrack permit under this article, permit applicants shall also be required to obtain a separate business license as required under Chapter 5.08 of this code. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.090 Indemnification and insurance requirements.
    A.  Indemnification. Every newsrack permit holder shall agree, prior to the effectiveness of the newsrack permit, to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, elected and appointed officials, employees, affiliated public agencies and volunteers from and against any and all claims, demands, lawsuits, causes of action, losses, costs or expenses for any damage due to death or injury to any person and injury to any property, arising from the installation, operation or use of such newsrack; provided, however, that such obligation to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees shall not extend to any loss, liability damage or cost resulting from the acts or property of another.

    B.   Liability Insurance. Each newsrack permit holder shall also include a copy of the policy or a certificate of the comprehensive general liability insurance with coverage limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement as an additional insured the city of Pico Rivera, its officers, employees and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of the newsrack placement. Proof of insurance coverage as specified in this subsection must be verified by the city prior to issuance of a newsrack permit. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.100 Design standards for newsracks.
    A.  Newsrack Models. Newsracks shall be substantially equivalent to the KJ50/KJ55F, KJ125/150 (as manufactured by “K-Jack”), or similar make or model as determined by the director, or designee, consistent with the provisions of this section.

    B.   Size Requirements. No newsrack shall be installed in a public right-of-way that does not meet the approved newsrack dimensions of not more than fifty-four inches high including the pedestal measured from the ground to the top surface of the newsrack including any coin mechanism, not more than two feet deep and not more than thirty inches wide.

    C.   Dangerous Design Prohibited. The design of a newsrack shall not create a danger to the persons using the newsrack in a reasonably foreseeable manner.

    D.  Installation Standards. All newsracks shall be pedestal mounted and shall be permanently affixed to the ground, except as permitted under this article. Newsracks shall not be chained or otherwise attached to a bus shelter, bench, street light, utility pole or sign pole, to any other single or modular newsrack, or to any tree, shrub or other plant.

    E.   Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. It is intended that the provisions of this article shall be interpreted and applied consistent with accessibility standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, P.L. 101-336, as amended.

    F.   Color Requirements. The color of all newsracks shall be black.

    G.  Advertising. A newsrack may display the logo or name of the publication it offers for distribution. A newsrack must also display the identification label required by Section 12.32.120(D) of this article. No other advertising or displays are allowed on the exterior of a newsrack. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.110 Newsrack placement standards.
    A.  Location Standards. Newsracks shall comply with the following standards:

    1.   Permissible Locations. Newsracks shall only be placed near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. The back of newsracks placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen inches nor more than twenty-four inches from the edge of the curb. The back of newsracks placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall. No newsrack shall be placed or maintained on a sidewalk or parkway opposite another newsrack or a kiosk which distributes primarily newspapers, periodicals, or other publications.

    2.   Roadways and Streets. No person shall install, stock, or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway or street of any public right-of-way, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway or street.

    3.   Prohibited Locations. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

    a.   Within ten feet of any marked or unmarked crosswalk as measured from the curb return;

    b.   Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire callbox, police callbox, or other emergency facility;

    c.   Within five feet of any driveway;

    d.   Within five feet of any bus bench;

    e.   Within five feet of any red curb of a bus stop zone;

    f.    Within five feet of any blue curb or a disabled parking zone;

    g.   In such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian or driver views of traffic signs or oncoming traffic;

    h.   At any location where the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;

    i.    In such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of any commercial window display;

    j.    Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any wheelchair curb ramp not in a marked crosswalk;

    k.   Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping, art or monument;

    l.    In such a manner as to unreasonably obstruct or interfere with access to or the use and enjoyment of abutting property;

    m.  Facing another newsrack across the width of a public sidewalk or pedestrian way; and

    n.   Placed or maintained on a sidewalk or parkway directly opposite to any door or entry of any building.

    4.   Other Prohibited Locations. No person shall install, stock, or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk, when such installation, use or maintenance results in any of the following: (a) endangers the safety of persons or property; (b) is in a location used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other government use; or (c) unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including handicapped access, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, postal service collection boxes or other objects permitted at or near such location.

    5.   The director or designee, may identify the location within the city, typically identified as a block or blocks of a particular street, requiring additional controls for newsracks, beyond the requirements set forth in this section, including, but not limited to, the following: (a) visual blight, clutter and litter problems associated with poorly maintained, improperly located or abandoned newsracks; and (b) the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of a particular area.

    6.   Newsracks may only be permitted on the following major thoroughfares within the city:

    a.   Beverly Boulevard.

    b.   Whittier Boulevard.

    c.   Washington Boulevard.

    d.   Slauson Avenue.

    e.   Telegraph Road.

    f.    Paramount Boulevard.

    g.   Rosemead Boulevard.

    B.   Limitations on the Number of Permitted Newsracks Per Block.

    1.   Newsracks shall be placed next to each other in groups. A newsrack group shall consist of not more than three newsracks and the newsrack group shall not measure more than nine linear feet measured between the outer most edges of the newsracks. The director or designee shall determine, consistent with the purposes of this article and the standards herein, the particular location of the newsrack group within a particular block on a location-by-location basis.

    2.   No more than one newsrack group consisting of not more than three newsracks shall be permitted on each side of the street per block. For purposes of this section, “block” shall have the same meaning as Section 18.04.124 of this code.

    3.   In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to be located or remain at a specific location, the director or designee, shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

    a.   First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of daily publications (those published for five or more days in a calendar week).

    b.   Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week).

    c.   All other newsracks shall be given lowest priority.

    4.   In the event that there is a conflict between publications within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsrack spaces remaining to accommodate the conflicting publications after first filling as many spaces as possible utilizing the criteria set forth in subsection (B)(3), then the director or designee, shall assign the space or spaces at random by placing names of all applicants for the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be drawn, one at a time until the particular location’s remaining number of unfilled newsracks spaces have been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time and date designated by the director or designee.

    5.   Any existing newsracks in excess of the allowable number of spaces per block that were not selected via the drawing described in subsection (B)(3) or (4) of this section shall be removed from the public right-of-way within thirty days of the date of the drawing described in subsection (B)(4).

    C.   Use of Newsrack Encasements. Where a newsrack encasement has been provided by the city at a given location, and there is available space in that newsrack encasement, no newsracks may be installed outside of the newsrack encasement on the same block as the encasement. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.120 Newsrack maintenance.
    A.  Regular Maintenance Required. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. For example, without limitation, the newsrack shall be reasonably free of dirt and grease, be reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling or cracked paint, be reasonably free of rust and corrosion, have no broken or cracked plastic or glass parts, free of graffiti and have no broken structural parts.

    B.   Adhesive Labels Prohibited. Adhesive labels, other than city issued identification/approval labels and advertising permitted pursuant to Section 12.32.100(G) of this article shall not be displayed on newsracks.

    C.   Coin-Return Mechanisms. Each newsrack which requires the deposit of money to obtain the publication shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit persons using the machine to secure a refund in the event they are unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.

    D.  Contact Information. Every permit holder shall have his or her name, current address, and telephone number updated within ten days of any changes and permit number affixed to it in a place where such information will be readily visible and shall include, with such identification, instructions on how to receive a refund in the event of coin-return malfunctions.

    E.   Upon the removal of a newsrack, the public right-of-way shall be returned to its original condition including, but not limited to, the refilling of holes installed for purposes of securing the newsrack within forty-eight hours of removal. Any bond or security furnished to the city in connection with a newsrack permit shall be returned to the newsrack owner upon removal of a newsrack in accordance with this section. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.130 Notice of violation.
    Notice Required. Before any newsrack is removed, the owner shall be provided notice of the violation and intent to remove the newsrack. Written notice by first class mail to the address shown on the newsrack permit shall constitute adequate notice. If no newsrack permit can be found for the newsrack, posting of the notice on the newsrack alone shall be sufficient. The notice shall list the code sections violated and shall provide the owner fourteen days from the date of the notice to remedy the violation or file a request for reconsideration. The notice shall state the address and location to file an appeal of the notice of violation. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.140 Removal and recovery of newsracks.
    A.  Removal of newsracks is permitted under the following:

    1.   Following the issuance of the notice of violation, the person responsible for the newsrack has: (a) not timely filed a request for hearing pursuant to Section 12.32.190(A); and (b) has not timely remedied the violation within the time specified in the notice of violation.

    2.   In accordance with a decision of the director of community and economic development or designee issued pursuant to Section 12.32.190(B) and no timely request for appeal was filed pursuant to Section 12.32.190(C).

    3.   In accordance with a decision of the city manager or designee issued pursuant to Section 12.32.190(C). The city may remove the subject newsrack fourteen days after the date of the decision.

    4.   Summary Removal for Dangerous Newsracks. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 12.32.130, prior notice of removal is not required where the newsrack is deemed to pose a dangerous and hazardous condition to pedestrians or vehicles. The city shall, within five days of removing said newsrack, provide notice and an opportunity to request a hearing pursuant to Section 12.32.190(A) regarding the removal of the newsrack.

    B.   Recovery of Removed Newsracks. Removed newsracks shall be retained and may be recovered by the owner within thirty days of their removal. The owner shall pay an impound fee covering the actual cost to the city of removing, transporting, and costs to repair the public right-of-way. The city shall also be entitled to a separate storage fee for storing said newsrack. Newsracks which are not claimed after thirty days shall be deemed permanently abandoned and shall be disposed of by the city in any lawful manner. If a bond or other security has been filed with the city in connection with a newsrack that has been removed, said bond or security shall be paid to the city of Pico Rivera for the cost of removal and repair of the public right-of-way, if applicable. No recovery fee shall be required of an owner of a newsrack for which the city has recovered a bond or other security; however, the city shall be entitled to a separate storage fee as established by the city.

    C.   City Recovery of Costs. The cost of investigating, removing and storing newsracks under this section shall be chargeable as a civil debt to the owner thereof and may be collected by the city in the same manner as it collects other civil debts or obligations, provided, however, that no costs shall be chargeable for any amount recovered by the city pursuant to a bond or other security filed in connection with a newsrack.

    D.  Remedies Cumulative. The enforcement and abatement provisions provided in this section are a cumulative remedy and supplement the city’s ability to enforce this provision under other procedures specified in this code. Abatement under this section does not constitute a defense to any proceedings which may be employed simultaneously pursuant to the general provisions of this code. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit any right or remedy otherwise available in law or equity to any party harmed by a newsrack, nor shall this article in any way limit the city’s right to enforcement under any other provision of this code or create a duty or obligation on the part of the city to enforce this article. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

12.32.150 Amortization of existing newsracks.
    Provided they are not determined to be a danger or hazard to the public safety, health or general welfare, every newsrack within the city which does not comply with the provisions of this article, shall be removed or otherwise brought into conformance within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.160 Display of adult material or material harmful to minors unlawful.
    A.  Adult material and material which is harmful to minors, as defined in Part 1, Title 9, Chapter 7.6 of the Penal Code (commencing at Section 313), shall not be displayed in a public place other than a public place where minors are excluded, unless a device commonly known as a “blinder rack,” or its functional equivalent is placed in front of the material in such a manner that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to public view. For purposes of this section, “adult material” shall mean any material that:

    1.   Contains statements or words describing explicit sexual actions, sexual organs, or excrement, where such statement or words have as their purpose or effect, sexual arousal, gratification, or affront; or

    2.   Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anuses, or anal regions of any person; or

    3.   Any picture or illustration depicting sexual acts. Explicit sexual acts means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of the genitals, where any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between multiple persons or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genital, pubic region, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anus, or anal region or breasts.

    B.   Newsracks containing adult material or material which is harmful to minors shall not be placed or maintained within five hundred feet of any public or private educational facilities, parks, or religious institutions. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.170 Abandoned and unpermitted newsracks.
    Abandoned newsracks or any newsrack not authorized by a newsrack permit are deemed to be in violation of this article and may be removed by the city as provided in Section 12.32.140. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.180 Declaration of public nuisance.
    Any newsrack in violation of this article shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.190 Hearing and appeal.
    A.  Any person maintaining a newsrack found in violation of this article, or any applicant for a newsrack permit that was denied by the director or designee, may request a hearing before the director of community and economic development, or designee, within ten days from the date of the notice of violation, a notice of summary removal, or notice that a newsrack permit application was denied. The request shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof, and shall be filed with the director of community and economic development.

    B.   The hearing shall be held within fourteen days of the filing of the request. At the hearing the parties may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack has been placed, maintained or operated in violation of this article. Within fourteen days after the close of the hearing, the director of community and economic development or designee, shall render a decision in writing and shall give such written decision to the party requesting the hearing.

    C.   The owner of the newsrack may, within ten days after the date of the director of community and economic development’s or designee’s written decision, appeal such decision to the city manager or designee. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the basis upon which the appeal is made, shall be accompanied by an appeal fee, to be established by the city council from time to time, and shall be filed with the city manager. The city manager or designee shall schedule an appeal hearing within thirty days from the date of the written request for appeal. At the appeal hearing, the parties may present evidence or argument as to whether the newsrack was placed, maintained or operated in violation of this article. Within ten days after the close of the appeal hearing, the city manager or designee shall give written notice of the decision to the newsrack owner. The decision of the city manager or designee on the appeal shall be final. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

 

12.32.200 Violation and penalty.
    Any person who violates any provision of this article, or fails to comply with any obligation or requirement of this article, or who fails to comply with any order or notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with Section 1.20.010 of this code. (Ord. 1109 § 2, 2017)

Division II. Other Street Regulations
Chapter 12.36 ENCROACHMENTS
12.36.010 Purpose of provisions.
    It is the purpose of the provisions in this chapter to provide a just, equitable and practicable method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law or under any other provision of state law, whereby encroachments on public rights-of-way may be abated in order to protect the public convenience in the use of such rights-of-way, as well as the public health, safety and welfare. (Prior code § 7300.00)

 

12.36.020 Encroachments deemed nuisance when.
    A.  The city council finds that there exist within the city encroachments on public dedicated rights-of-way which interfere with the public use of such rights-of-way and often create a nuisance and hazardous condition for pedestrians and motorists, and in some instances endanger the public health, safety and welfare.

    B.   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 38771 of the Government Code of the state, the city council finds that the existence of the following encroachments on any public dedicated or acquired sidewalk, street, alley, lane, court, park or other public place, is a public nuisance which must be abated:

    1.   Fences;

    2.   Hedges;

    3.   Excavations below the top of curb elevation, where without permit;

    4.   Sprinkler system pipes above ground elevation;

    5.   Cover growth, such as ivy, ice plant and other similar type of vegetation, where the same interferes with the public use of the right-of-way;

    6.   Retaining walls;

    7.   Shrubs, signs and trees, as well as buildings or fences where the same interfere with the use of the public rights-of-way;

    8.   Loose gravel, broken blacktop and paving;

    9.   Gates swinging out or over public rights-of-way. (Prior code § 7300.01)

 

12.36.030 Abatement of encroachment as nuisance.
    In accordance with California Government Code § 38775, encroachments described in this chapter may be abated as nuisances by following the procedures contained in Chapter 8.16 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 946 § 3, 2000)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.40 TREES
12.40.010 Definitions.
    Unless expressly stated otherwise, or where the context implies a different meaning, the following definitions shall apply in this chapter:

    A.  “Permittee” means the person to whom a permit pertaining to roadside trees has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

    B.   “Roadside tree area” means that area of dedicated roadway, street or highway within the city, set apart and designated for the use of the public as a thoroughfare for traffic, whether or not improved, from easement line to easement line, and includes the sidewalks, center and side plots thereof.

    C.   “Roadside trees” means those trees located in the roadside tree area.

    D.  “Tree” or “trees” means and includes all varieties of trees, shrubs and other ornamental or woody vegetation. (Prior code §§ 7201.01 — 7201.04, 7202.01)

 

12.40.020 Permit required for certain activities.
    No person, other than a city officer or contractual agent of the city, shall plant, cut down, pull up, burn, destroy, remove, trim, skin, deface or remove the outer trunk surface or bark of any roadside tree, or trim or prune such roadside tree so as to deface, injure, destroy or endanger the life or uniform growth of such roadside tree, without a permit therefor issued by the director of public works, or his or her authorized agent. (Prior code § 7202.02)

 

12.40.030 Tree growth and development conditions.
    The director of public works or his or her authorized agent shall impose all necessary and reasonable conditions to provide for the uniform growth and development of roadside trees and may, in addition, and impose time limits in respect to the performance of such work, as well as cash deposits to guarantee the faithful performance of the work. (Prior code § 7202.03)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.44 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
12.44.010 Council findings.
    A.  The city council finds that there are areas within the city where public sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street trees, street lighting, street paving to the centerline of the street and necessary drainage structures are lacking.

    B.   The city council further finds that new construction, where the aforementioned are lacking, is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, by creation of pedestrian and vehicular hazards, poor drainage, and difficulty in street cleaning and maintenance.

    C.   The city council therefore finds that the public health, safety and welfare will be best protected by requiring construction of such improvements. (Prior code § 8900(part))

 

12.44.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Centerline” means the established centerline of the streets, as shown on the official house-numbering map, or such other street centerline alignment as has been adopted by the city council.

    B.   “One-half of street” means the distance from the centerline of the highway or street to a line which is one-half the entire street width, as set forth in the General Plan, or such supplementary plan as has been adopted by the city council.

    C.   “Street” means any thoroughfare or public space which has been dedicated or deeded for public use, and shall include public alleys and privately owned and maintained rights-of-way where the same are held open for use without restriction, generally, in respect to vehicular and/or pedestrian use thereof. (Prior code § 8900(part))

 

12.44.030 Installation—Required when.
    Any person, owner, lessee or agent constructing or arranging for the construction of any parking lot or commercial, residential or industrial building, or building addition or alteration, shall also provide for the construction or installation, to city standards, of adequate sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street trees, street lighting, street paving to the centerline of the street and necessary drainage structures, unless such improvements already exist along all street frontage adjoining the lot on which the building or parking lot is to be constructed, enlarged or altered. (Prior code § 8901(part))

 

12.44.040 Installation—Exceptions.
    A.  All or part of the above required improvements in connection with commercial, industrial or multiple-family property may be waived by the city manager or his or her authorized representative when the cost of construction of required improvements, as estimated by the city manager or his or her designee, exceeds the valuation of the proposed building construction, alteration or addition, as determined by the provisions of the building code.

    B.   This section and Sections 12.44.030 and 12.44.050 shall not apply to additions made to a single-family residence where the square-foot area of such additions does not exceed seventy-five percent of the area of the residential portion of the building existing prior to addition.

    C.   Improvements required by this section and Sections 12.44.030 and 12.44.050 need not be provided for construction of or alteration or addition to garages, carports, storage buildings and similar nonresidential buildings accessory to single-family residences where such construction, alteration or addition does not exceed seven hundred fifty square feet in area.

    D.  Upon written application to the city council, the city council may modify or waive the requirements of this section and Sections 12.44.030 and 12.44.050 for one or more of the following reasons:

    1.   The construction of such improvements in the area involved is included in a budgeted city project or within an approved assessment district;

    2.   Because of the location of the property, the terrain, or condition of the property or other similar reasons, the construction of such improvements would be unnecessary;

    3.   Where large undivided parcels are partially developed, such improvements may be waived on undeveloped portions of the property.

    E.   Sidewalk improvements required by Section 12.44.030 for residential buildings, additions or alterations need not be provided as a consequence of the development of properties that are zoned residential estate (RE) or in other zones, where sidewalks do not exist at the properties immediately adjacent to the property undergoing construction, addition or alteration.

    F.   Improvements such as curbs, rolled curbs and gutters; street trees, street lighting, street paving to the centerline of the street; and necessary drainage structures shall be required if, in the opinion of the city engineer, such improvements are necessary to assure proper drainage of the street; flow of traffic; or the preservation of the street or the public health, welfare and safety. (Ord. 1028 §§ 1—3, 2007; Ord. 1003 § 1, 2003; Ord. 936 § 1, 1999; Ord. 901 § 1, 1997; prior code § 8901(part))

 

12.44.050 Waiver or modification conditions.
    In any waiver or modification of requirements for improvements, due consideration shall be given to the effect of omission of such improvements upon adjoining or neighboring properties, to drainage of public property and to flow of traffic. (Prior code § 8901(part))

 

12.44.060 Construction prerequisite to utility connections.
    Unless subject to the provisions of Section 12.44.090, the building official shall deny final approval and acceptance for final public utility connections to any building or parking lot until required street improvements exist or are constructed, or their construction is guaranteed with an executed agreement and cash money deposited with the city in a sum approved by the city manager or his or her designee, based upon one and one-half times the estimated cost of construction. (Prior code § 8902(a))

 

12.44.070 Agreement for installation—Terms.
    The term of agreement shall begin on the date of the deposit of cash, and shall end upon the date of completion, to the satisfaction of the city manager or his or her designee, of all improvements required to be made. The fact of such completion shall be endorsed by a statement thereof signed by the city manager or his or her designee, and the deposit shall be returned to the owner. (Prior code § 8902(b))

 

12.44.080 Default of agreement—Work done by city.
    The city is authorized, in the event of any default on the owner’s part, to use any or all of the deposit money to cause all of the required work to be done or completed, and for payment of all costs and expenses therefor. Any money remaining shall be refunded to the owner. (Prior code § 8902(c))

 

12.44.090 Deferment of construction.
    A.  Where construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalk and/or street pavement would cause a drainage obstruction, differential grades at the juncture with existing improvements, traffic restriction or similar condition, to the extent that a hazard or nuisance would result or where public works projects are pending that would be affected by such construction, all or part of the required improvements may be delayed, provided that the property owner pays to the city an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five percent of the estimated cost of remaining construction, such money to be set aside for future construction of required improvements by the city at such time when to do so would not constitute a nuisance or hazard. Any money remaining after construction shall be refunded to the owner. A surety bond acceptable to the city manager or his or her designee may be provided in lieu of the cash payment required by this section.

    B.   In the event such cash or surety bond has been deposited with the city, or in effect for a period of five years, and where subject improvements have not been required or installed, the city council shall, upon written request from the depositor of cash or bonder, or his or her designee, review the subject bonding requirement. (Prior code § 8903)

 

12.44.100 Streets and highways—Dedication required when.
    A.  No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged or altered, and no property shall hereafter be improved for parking purposes, and no building or paving permit shall be issued therefor, unless the one-half of the street which is located on the same side of the centerline of the street as such lot has been dedicated for the full width of the lot so as to meet the standards for such street, or such dedication has been assured to the satisfaction of the city manager or his or her designee. In addition to required dedication for street purposes, additional dedication for storm drain, sewer, water or other utility purposes may also be required in connection with building or paving permits where failure to establish such dedication of easement would subject adjacent or nearby properties to flooding or lack of connection to required utilities.

    B.   Exceptions.

    1.   The maximum area of land required to be so dedicated shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the area of any such lot.

    2.   No such dedication shall be required with respect to those portions of such a lot occupied by a portion of a main building which was lawfully constructed and which was existing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

    C.   No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on any such lot within the dedication required by this section. (Prior code § 8904(a))

 

12.44.110 Streets and highways—Procedure for dedication.
    A.  Any person required to dedicate land by the provisions of this chapter shall make an offer to dedicate property, executed by all parties of interest, including beneficiaries and trustees in deeds of trust as shown by a current preliminary title report prepared by a title company approved by the city manager or his or her designee for that purpose. Such report shall be furnished by the applicant. Such offer shall:

    1.   Be on a form approved by the city attorney and the city manager or his or her designee;

    2.   Be in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his or her heirs, assigns or successors in interest; and

    3.   Continue until the city council accepts or rejects such offer.

    B.   For purposes of this section, dedication shall be considered as satisfactorily assured when the city manager or his or her designee accepts for recordation the offer to dedicate provided for herein. (Prior code § 8904(b))

 

12.44.120 City may share certain costs.
    Upon application to the city council, the city may accept and provide for contribution toward the cost of making any improvement required by the provisions of this chapter when the improvements will cost an amount greatly in excess of the cost to other property owners who may be required to make improvements under the provisions of this chapter in the immediate vicinity of the improvement. (Prior code § 8905)

 

12.44.130 Street alignment determination.
    Whenever uncertainty exists as to the proper application of the provisions of this chapter in the matter of street alignment, the director of public works shall determine their application in conformity with the spirit and intent of this chapter. (Prior code § 8906)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.48 PARKWAYS
12.48.010 Parkways defined.
    “Parkways” means those areas located in that portion of dedicated roadways, streets or highways, whether located in divided islands in the center of street, roadways or highways, or located in divided parkway panels, between streets, roadways and highways and safety streets. (Prior code § 4240.1)

 

12.48.020 Unlawful activities on parkways.
    It is unlawful for any person to do or commit, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be done or committed, within or upon any such parkway, any of the following:

    A.  To pick, dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion thereof growing therein;

    B.   To cut, break, injure, deface or destroy any equipment or property therein, or sign, bench or monument placed thereon, or to make or place thereon or any portion thereof any sign, card, mark, writing or printing, display or other similar device; provided, however, the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit the placing of benches on such panels when approved by the city manager;

    C.   To throw, place or dispose of any garbage, refuse or can on or upon such area. (Prior code § 4240.2)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.52 PARADES
12.52.010 Permit—Required when.
    No person shall hold manage, conduct, carry on or participate in any parade, march or procession of any kind, or any other similar activity, or bear or play any musical instrument upon any public street or alley in the city without first having applied for and obtained a permit therefor from the sheriff, with the approval of the city clerk, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 694 § 13, 1985; prior code § 4247)

 

12.52.020 Permit—Application—Contents.
    Any person desiring to do any of the acts specified in Section 12.52.010 of this chapter shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city without charge to the applicant, setting forth the following information in regard to the proposed event:

    A.  The name and address of the applicant;

    B.   The purpose;

    C.   The date and time;

    D.  The place and/or route. (Prior code § 4247.1)

 

12.52.030 Permit—Issuance conditions.
    A.  All applications filed pursuant to Section 12.52.020 shall be acted upon by the city clerk within a reasonable time from the date of filing.

    B.   Should the clerk, after an investigation of the applicant and the facts contained in the application, determine that the applicant has stated true facts in his or her application and the event as proposed will not interfere unduly with the use of the streets and will not tend to cause a breach of the public peace, he or she shall issue a permit, with the approval of the sheriff endorsed thereon, designating the time, place and route of such event. (Prior code § 4247.2)

 

12.52.040 Permit—Denial—Appeal procedure.
    In the event the application is denied, the applicant may file with the clerk a statement and the reasons why it is believed the clerk or sheriff acted improperly. The city council, at its next regular meeting held after the date on which such appeal is filed with the city clerk, shall hear the appeal, and determination of the city council thereon shall be final. (Prior code § 4247.3)

 

 

 

Chapter 12.56 STREET AND SIDEWALK USE RESTRICTIONS
12.56.010 Leaving materials on sidewalk.
    No person shall leave or cause to be left any property or material upon any public sidewalk for a longer period of time than ten minutes. (Prior code § 3330)

 

12.56.020 Flowing oil, mud or water on highways.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, drain, wash, allow to run or divert into or upon any public road, highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain or flood-control channel owned or controlled by any public agency within the city, any water, mud, sand, oil or petroleum. (Prior code § 4231)

Title 13 WATER AND SEWERS
Division I. Water
Division II. Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste
Division III. Additional Regulations
Division IV. Water Conservation

Division I. Water
Chapter 13.04 DEFINITIONS
13.04.010 Definitions generally.
    Definitions in this chapter shall govern the construction of the provisions of Division I of Title 13 of this code unless otherwise apparent from the context. (Prior code § 5420)

 

13.04.020 Applicant.
    “Applicant” means the person or persons, firm, association, corporation or governmental agency of record applying for water service. (Prior code § 5420.1)

 

13.04.030 Approved water supply.
    “Approved water supply” means a potable water supply of safe, sanitary quality which is approved for human consumption by the authorities having jurisdiction thereof. (Prior code § 5420.2)

 

13.04.040 Billing period.
    “Billing period” means the time interval between two consecutive meter-reading dates used for billing purposes. (Prior code § 5420.3)

 

13.04.050 City manager.
    “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Pico Rivera. (Prior code § 5420.4)

 

13.04.060 Commercial service.
    “Commercial service” means water service for premises devoted primarily to business or professional activities. (Prior code § 5420.5)

 

13.04.070 Cost.
    “Cost” means the actual cost to the city, including all labor, material, supplies, equipment and miscellaneous items, together with any applicable indirect overhead and general charges, in accordance with the accounting practices of the department. (Prior code § 5420.6)

 

13.04.080 Cross-connection.
    “Cross-connection” means any actual or potential connection, arrangement or installation of piping, structures or devices whereby it is possible for any used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixture, gas or substance to enter any portion of any approved water supply. (Prior code § 5420.7)

 

13.04.090 Customer.
    “Customer” means any person, persons, firms, associations, corporations or governmental agencies of record supplied or entitled to be supplied with water service by the city in accordance with established rates and charges of the city. (Prior code § 5420.8)

 

13.04.100 Date of presentation.
    “Date of presentation” means the date on which a bill or notice is mailed or delivered by the department to the customer. (Prior code § 5420.9)

 

13.04.110 Department.
    “Department” means the water public works department of the city responsible for operating the city’s water system. (Ord. 694 § 18, 1985; prior code § 5420.10)

 

13.04.120 Distribution mains.
    “Distribution mains” means distribution pipelines located in streets, highways, public ways or private rights-of-way, exclusive of service connections, which are used to serve the general public with water. (Prior code § 5420.11)

 

13.04.130 Distribution system.
    “Distribution system” means the network of conduits used for the delivery of water by the city to the customer’s connection. (Prior code § 5420.12)

 

13.04.140 Domestic service.
    “Domestic service” means single-family or multiple-family dwellings predominantly for residential household and related purposes, as distinguished from commercial and industrial purposes. (Prior code § 5420.13)

 

13.04.150 Easement.
    “Easement” means a right-of-way in which the water service has the right to install and maintain water mains or waterworks, or both. (Prior code § 5420.14)

 

13.04.160 Employee.
    “Employee” means any person designated by the city manager to perform work and labor for provision of water service by the city. (Prior code § 5420.15)

 

13.04.170 Flat-rate service.
    “Flat-rate service” means unmetered service for which the charges are based on the type of service or number of units served. (Prior code § 5420.16)

 

13.04.180 Highway.
    “Highway” means any public highway, street, road, alley, lane, court or walk, or other public easement, and above and below the same, which now exists or which may hereafter exist in any incorporated territory of the city. (Prior code § 5420.17)

 

13.04.190 Industrial service.
    “Industrial service” means water service for premises where the use is primarily in manufacturing or processing activities. (Prior code § 5420.18)

 

13.04.200 Main extension.
    “Main extension” means the extension of water mains beyond existing facilities, exclusive of service connections. (Prior code § 5420.19)

 

13.04.210 Main line valve.
    “Main line valve” means any valve used to control the flow of water in a distribution water main, or to a fire hydrant, but does not include the valve to a service connection. (Prior code § 5420.20)

 

13.04.220 Manager.
    “Manager” means the city manager of the city of Pico Rivera, or his or her authorized representative. (Prior code § 5420.21)

 

13.04.230 Metered service.
    “Metered service” means water service for which charges are based on measured quantities of water. (Prior code § 5420.22)

 

13.04.240 Metered service connection.
    “Metered service connection” means service connection including meter and meter box. (Prior code § 5420.23)

 

13.04.250 Minimum charge.
    “Minimum charge” means a charge for all types and classes of meters. (Prior code § 5420.24)

 

13.04.260 Person.
    “Person” means any individual, person, firm, partnership or public or private corporation. (Prior code § 5420.25)

 

13.04.270 Potable.
    “Potable” means suitable water for drinking purposes. (Prior code § 5420.26)

 

13.04.280 Premises.
    “Premises” means integrated land area, including improvements thereon, undivided by public thoroughfares or water distribution mains of the department, and where all parts of the premises are operated under the same management and for the same purpose. (Prior code § 5420.27)

 

13.04.290 Private fire-protection service.
    “Private fire-protection service” means water service to premises solely for fire-protection service. (Prior code § 5420.28)

 

13.04.300 Quantitative charge.
    “Quantitative charge” means a charge based on the amount of water used, measured in cubic feet. (Prior code § 5420.29)

 

13.04.310 Rates.
    “Rates” means the rates or amount established by resolution to be charged for water service supplied to customers. (Prior code § 5420.30)

 

13.04.320 Service connection.
    “Service connection” means the pipeline or conduit, including valves and other equipment installed in place, necessary for conducting water from the city’s water main to the meter or meter location installed on or near the property line, but does not include the meter box. (Prior code § 5420.31)

 

13.04.330 Temporary service.
    “Temporary service” means water service for construction work and other uses where service is required only for a limited time, generally not to exceed six months. (Prior code § 5420.32)

 

13.04.340 Transmission water mains.
    “Transmission water mains” means those lines from source facilities to the distribution facility and may be either pressure or gravity mains. (Prior code § 5420.33)

 

13.04.350 Water division.
    “Water division” means that certain division, branch or function of the city within the department of public works which cares for, maintains and operates pumps, plants, mains and all necessary facilities for the acquiring, distributing and selling of water within the city. (Prior code § 5420.34)

 

13.04.360 Water mains.
    “Water mains” means any pipeline or conduit laid along or approximately parallel with and in any highway, easement, or within the grantee’s property, for the transmission or distribution of water, but does not include service connections or service laterals. (Prior code § 5420.35)

 

13.04.370 Water service.
    “Water service” means the availability of water to a premises through facilities of the city and any water supplied through such facilities. (Prior code § 5420.37)

 

13.04.380 Water system.
    “Water system” means all facilities under administration and control of the city, whether located within or beyond the boundaries of the city, to provide water service, including but not limited to the following facilities: Fire hydrants, main extensions, main line valves, meters, meter boxes, motors, pumps, reservoirs, service connections, transmission water mains, water mains, wells, and any and all appurtenant devices. (Prior code § 5420.36)

 

13.04.390 Water utility.
    “Water utility” means any person, firm, private, quasi-public or public agency of record, supplying or purporting to supply, other than at wholesale, water for any purpose other than irrigation or water replenishment to more than one retail customer or stockholder. The term “water utility” includes a corporation delivering water only to its stockholders, whether such corporation or such stockholders own the water delivered. This Division I does not apply to the supply of water:

    A.  At wholesale;

    B.   To water utilities; or

    C.   For underground water replenishment; or

    D.  For underground water conservation. (Prior code § 5420.38)

 

 

 

Chapter 13.08 ADMINISTRATION—RULES AND REGULATIONS
13.08.010 Title for citation.
    Division I of Title 13 of this code shall be known as the “Water Works System of the City of Pico Rivera,” and may be cited as such. (Prior code § 5410)

 

13.08.020 Waterworks system described.
    The waterworks system of the city shall consist of the entire waterworks system of the city, whether located within the city or beyond the boundaries of the city, which has been acquired, constructed and financed by the city, together with all improvements and extensions to the system later constructed or acquired. (Prior code § 5410.1)

 

13.08.030 Management and operation authority.
    A.  The management and operation of the waterworks system shall remain vested in the city council, and the city council shall, in the exercise of its legislative, discretionary and police powers:

    1.   Fix the level and type of services to be supplied to consumers;

    2.   Provide for the collection of charges for the same;

    3.   Provide rules and regulations in respect to the use of the service;

    4.   Determine and fix water rates; and

    5.   Do all things necessary and proper to maintain and preserve the waterworks system in good repair and working order.

    B.   The administration of the city council policy in respect to the waterworks system and for the management and operation of the same, shall be under the direction and subject to the control of the city manager or duly authorized representative. (Prior code § 5410.2)

 

13.08.040 Rules and regulations.
    A.  It is unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of Division I of this title, or any of the provisions of the hereinafter set forth rules and regulations, as well as any of the provisions of any rules and regulations hereinafter adopted or amended by resolution.

    B.   Any person, firm or corporation applying for the service of the waterworks system shall agree in writing to comply with the terms and provisions of Division I of this title, the rules and regulations herein enacted, as well as any rules and regulations hereinafter enacted by resolution, as well as with any amendment or addition to any of the foregoing. Such rules and regulations are as set forth in Chapters 13.04 through 13.24 of this title. (Prior code § 5430)

 

13.08.050 Ownership of the system.
    All portions and parts of the waterworks system used in supplying water to the consumer shall remain the property of the city, and may be only repaired, replaced or removed as the city shall so direct. Property herein mentioned includes all meters and appliances, service pipe, and lines and mains installed by the city, whether on public property or property of the consumer. (Prior code § 5430.4)

 

13.08.060 Protection of the water supply.
    A.  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the department unless the public water supply is protected as required by state regulations and this section. Backflow preventive devices required hereunder shall be approved by the manager, and shall be installed by and at the expense of the customer. The customer shall regularly test and service such devices to maintain them in satisfactory operating condition, and shall overhaul or replace such devices if they are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and overhauling shall be kept by the customer and made available to the department on request.

    B.   Service to any premises may be discontinued by the department after notice if a backflow-preventive device required by this regulation is not installed, tested and maintained, or if any defect is found in an installed backflow-preventive device, or if it is found that a backflow-preventive device has been removed or bypassed, or if unprotected cross-connections exist on the premises, and service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.

    C.   A customer shall not install any quick-closing valve or other equipment or devices which will cause excessive pressure surges in the city’s water system. (Prior code § 5430.10)

 

13.08.070 Meter specifications.
    A.  All meters shall be installed by the city and shall be only removed, repaired or replaced by the city. No rent or other charge whatsoever shall be made by the consumer for the placing of any meter or appliance upon the consumer’s premises. No person shall move, repair, tamper with, injure or destroy any of such meters or appliances other than a representative of the city. The city shall have the right to remove any and all of its facilities installed on a consumer’s premises at the termination of service.

 

    B.   Meters, wherever practicable, shall be placed in a meter box in the roadside area, and if not so practicable shall be placed in some other convenient place upon the consumer’s premises so that the same, at all times, are accessible for inspection, reading and testing. No person, other than a representative of the city, shall make or maintain any bypass or other connection between the meter and the main, and shall not tamper with the meter in any way. (Prior code § 5430.6)

 

13.08.080 Additional rules and regulations.
    A.  The city council may from time to time amend, alter or add additional rules and regulations pertaining to the maintenance and operation and use of the water system. In addition, the city council may, by resolution, adopt such additional rules and regulations pertaining to the maintenance and operation and use of the water system as it deems necessary, including as well charges for the use of the service, which such rules and regulations may be amended, altered, repealed or added to by the city council from time to time as it deems necessary in its discretion. Such resolution shall be adopted in the form and manner that any other resolution of the city council would be adopted.

    B.   The manager, with the advice and assistance of the city attorney, is hereby given power and authority to interpret and apply such rules and regulations. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the manager may appeal the decision to the city council, and the decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive thereon. (Ord. 1076 § 10, 2013; prior code § 5430.16)

 

13.08.090 Unsafe practices—Liability limitations.
    A.  Every consumer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and maintain, in good and safe condition, all apparatus and appliances which may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing water furnished by the city. Where any part of the consumer’s installation is found to be unsafe or hazardous, or where the consumer wilfully wastes water in any manner, the water may be shut off without notice until such unsafe or hazardous or wasteful practices have been discontinued, or until such repairs or modifications have been made to the satisfaction of the city.

    B.   Any damage occurring to the meters or other pipes or appliances owned by the city which is caused by carelessness, neglect or unsafe apparatus of the consumer shall be paid for by the consumer on presentation of a bill therefor. The city does not assume the responsibility of inspection of the consumer’s installation, and assumes no liability; nor shall the city be responsible for any damage occurring on the premises or elsewhere by reason of open faucets, faulty fixtures, broken pipe or for any other unsafe condition or apparatus at or after the service is turned on, nor for any damage resulting from the turning off of water service. (Prior code § 5430.2)

 

13.08.100 Noncompliance—Disconnection and other remedies.
    A.  If any person fails to comply with the provisions of Section 13.08.040, the water operations manager shall be advised of such failure. If the person thereafter does not correct such noncompliance within a reasonable time after notification from the city manager to do so, the city manager shall have the right, after giving notice, to discontinue service to such person.

    B.   Except in case of emergency, the city manager shall not discontinue the service of any persons except on written five-day notice thereof advising such person in what particular there has been a violation or noncompliance for which service will be discontinued if the violation or noncompliance has not been remedied. This notice, however, may be dispensed with by the city manager, in his or her discretion, in the event of an emergency demanding immediate curtailment of the service in order to protect public life or property. (Prior code § 5430.1)

 

13.08.110 Right of ingress and egress.
    The city or its duly authorized agents or contractual agent shall at all times have the right of ingress to and egress from the consumer’s premises at all reasonable hours for any purpose reasonably connected with the furnishing of water and the exercise of any and all rights secured to it by law or the rules and regulations enacted under Division I of this title. A customer shall provide and maintain reasonable access for city representatives to all service connections, meters, backflow-prevention devices, or other facilities pertinent to water service installed on the consumer’s premises. (Prior code § 5430.11)

 

13.08.120 Identification of city employees.
    An official identification card shall be carried or worn by all employees who, in line of duty, may be required to enter upon private premises. Every employee, upon ceasing to be employed in the department, shall surrender and deliver to the proper official all identification cards and credentials of the department. (Ord. 694 § 19, 1985; prior code § 5430.13)

 

13.08.130 Refusing right of entry.
    No person, as owner or occupant of any premises supplied with city water, shall refuse admittance to or hinder or prevent inspection by an authorized employee of the division when on official business, and if any person, as owner or occupant of such premises does so refuse, hinder or prevent, the water to such premises may be shut off. (Prior code § 5430.14)

 

13.08.140 Obstructing meters or other equipment.
    It is unlawful to damage or interfere with or to place any object, material, dirt or debris, garbage or rubbish cans or accumulation of any kind upon or about any fire hydrant, gate valve, manhole, meter or meter box, shutoff valve or valve box so as to prevent free and immediate access to same at all times. (Prior code § 5430.12)

 

13.08.150 Tampering with equipment.
    It is unlawful for any person, other than those designated and authorized by proper authority, to tap, open, connect with, operate or otherwise tamper with any main, pipe, valve, meter or fire hydrant, or any other equipment which forms a part of the water system of the city. (Prior code § 5430.5)

 

13.08.160 Illegal connections.
    No person shall install or maintain, or permit to be installed or maintained, any connection or cross-connection between the water supply system of the city and any other source of water supply whatsoever, without the approval of the city manager. Water service may be discontinued to any premises upon which there is found to be another source of water supply or a possible cross-connection. Such service shall not be restored until such cross-connection has been eliminated or backflow devices satisfactory to the city have been installed. The expense and maintenance of backflow devices and the cost of eliminating cross-connections shall be paid by the consumer or owner of the premises. (Prior code § 5430.9)

 

13.08.170 Service discontinuance conditions.
    The manager shall direct that the continuance of service to any consumer having apparatus or appliances, the operation of which in the judgment of the manager would be detrimental to the water service being furnished by the city to its other consumers in the immediate vicinity, or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, be terminated. (Prior code § 5430.3)

 

13.08.180 Waste or wrong use of water.
    No consumer shall provide water regularly to any person, company or corporation other than the occupant or occupants of the premises of such consumer, nor shall any consumer knowingly permit leaks or waste of water. (Prior code § 5430.8)

 

13.08.190 Resale of water.
    No person may re-sell any of the water received by him or her from the city to any other person, or for any other purpose, or on other premises than specified in his or her application for service. (Prior code § 5430.7)

 

13.08.200 Fraud or abuse of service.
    The city may refuse water service or may discontinue service at any time if found necessary in order to protect the city against abuse or fraud. (Prior code § 5430.15)

 

 

 

Chapter 13.12 CONNECTIONS AND SERVICE
13.12.010 Water supply provisions.
    The city will endeavor to deliver a dependable supply of potable water from available sources, in quantities adequate to meet the reasonable needs of its customers. The delivery of such supply will be at the service connection. The city may suspend temporarily the delivery of water, for the purpose of making repairs or improvements to its system. Such repairs or improvements will be made as rapidly as practicable. Customers dependent on a continuous water supply should provide adequate storage for emergencies. During any emergency, the city may apportion the available water supply among its customers in the manner that appears most equitable under the circumstances prevailing, and with due consideration for public health and safety. (Prior code § 5441.1)

 

13.12.020 Acceptance of service—Conditions.
    Service provided by the city shall at all times be subject to the regulations promulgated by the city council. All persons applying for or receiving water service shall be required to accept and shall be deemed to have consented to accept water service subject to such regulations, conditions or pressure, and service as may be provided from time to time by the distribution system at the location served, and to hold the city harmless from any damages arising from low pressure or high pressure, fluctuations of pressure, interruptions of service, shortage, insufficiency of supply, or conditions not within the city’s control. (Prior code § 5441.2)

 

13.12.030 Water pressure—Protection of other users.
    Where the use of water is unusually intermittent or is subject to violent fluctuations of a character that may impair service to other customers, the city may require that the customer provide, at his or her own expense, suitable equipment to reasonably limit fluctuations in use and pressure caused by the customer’s equipment or operations. (Prior code § 5441.3)

 

13.12.040 Water pressure—Responsibility.
    A.  The city will endeavor to maintain such pressure as recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters.

    B.   In the event any consumer deems that pressures are inadequate, the consumer shall furnish at his or her own expense whatever devices are necessary to boost the pressure for his or her own premises. In the event water pressures are in excess of any consumer’s normal requirements, it shall be the responsibility of such water consumer to install such devices on his or her own premises to protect his or her plumbing and/or to reduce the pressure for his or her normal needs.

    C.   The consumer shall obtain approval of any devices installed to insure protection of the public water supply. (Prior code § 5441.4)

 

13.12.050 Connections—Installation regulations.
    Service connections will be installed by the city subject to the provisions of Sections 13.12.050 through 13.12.070, and 13.12.200, except as otherwise provided in Sections 13.12.170, 13.12.180, 13.12.190 and Chapter 13.26 on distribution system extensions. (Prior code § 5442.1(a))

 

13.12.060 Connections—Size and location.
    The city may determine the size and number of the service connections and their locations in relation to boundaries of the premises to be served and the point of connection to the customer’s facilities. The city shall determine in all cases the adequacy of the then-existing water system to supply any proposed service. Should the city determine that the system is inadequate for such service, application shall not be approved until the applicant has provided additional facilities, at his or her cost, in accordance with the regulations for distribution system extensions. The customer’s piping to the service connection location should not be laid until the service connection is installed; in the event the customer’s pipe is installed and its location does not correspond to that of the service connection, the customer must provide for connecting to the service connection. (Prior code § 5442.1(b))

 

13.12.070 Connections—Ownership.
    All service connections, meters, valves and housings installed by the city or conveyed to the city, however provided for, shall be the sole property of the city, under the control of the city, and will be maintained at the city’s expense except as otherwise provided in these regulations. No rent or charge will be paid by the city where such facilities are located on a customer’s premises. The city may relocate its facilities as required by operating conditions and may remove any and all of its facilities from the customer’s premises at the termination of service. In the event property is vacant or the city’s equipment installed is not longer needed, such equipment may be removed at any time upon order of the manager. (Prior code § 5442.1(c))

 

13.12.080 Connections—Type, number and installation.
    A.  Each house, building, condominium, townhouse, and commercial or industrial business shall be supplied through a separate service connection or service connections. Two or more houses or buildings under one ownership and on the same lot or parcel of land may be supplied through one service connection, or a separate service connection may be installed for each building.

    B.   The city may limit the number of houses or buildings or the area of the land under one ownership to be supplied by one service connection.

    C.   The city may limit the number of service connections to any residential or other structure, whether under separate or multiple ownership.

    D.  When property provided with a service connection is subdivided, the service connection shall be considered as supplying the lot or parcel of land which it directly enters.

    E.   A service connection to a premises shall not be used to supply the premises of the same owner for which proper application for service connection was not made.

    F.   Whenever any service connection is authorized to be abandoned or removed, any reestablishment of service shall be considered a new service connection.

    G.  Extension of Service Through Basement Wall. Where conditions require that the service connection be extended through a basement wall, the applicant shall, at his or her own expense, provide and seal the entranceway for such pipe, and shall assume all responsibility for damage by leakage through such entranceway or by leaking pipes, fittings or meters. (Prior code § 5442.2(b))

 

13.12.090 Application—Form and fees.
    A.  An application for a service connection shall be made on a form furnished or approved by the city. This application shall specify the size of the service connection desired, the property to be served, and the purpose for which the water is to be used. The information supplied by the applicant shall be considered as authoritative and final. The city shall install the service connection at such location as the applicant requests, subject to approval by the manager. The service shall be installed from the nearest water distribution main to a point as close to the property line as is reasonable, depending upon all applicable conditions, whether such nearest water distribution main is located in a public street, utility right-of-way, or easement. If any error in the application shall cause the installation of a service connection that is improper either in type, size or location, the cost of all charges required shall be paid by the applicant.

    B.   The applicant shall make proper application for service in accordance with subsection A of this section, and make payment of fees or deposits as set forth in resolution of the city council before water service connection will be provided. If the application has been made and the applicant requests the water turned on, the billing for water service shall begin when the service connection is installed and the meter is set.

    C.   The rates set forth by resolution are for normal connections where there is a main adjacent to the property. For all extensions required between the nearest distribution main and the curbline or property line for installations over two inches, or, on long runs, where the actual cost is charged, a deposit in the amount of the estimated cost shall be made with the city prior to any installation. (Prior code § 5442.2(a))

 

13.12.100 Application—Credit and other conditions.
    A.  The city may require a prospective customer to sign, as applicant, or his or her agent to sign as such, an application for the service desired and also to establish his or her credit. Application may be made at the business office of the department or to a duly authorized employee.

    B.   The city’s requirements for the type of service desired must be met before an application will be approved. If main, service connection and meter required for service to the premises have not been installed, the applicant will be informed of the terms and conditions which must be met before an application for service will be approved.

    C.   When an application for service is made by a former customer who has failed to pay charges owed by him or her to the city, service may be refused until such charges are paid. (Prior code § 5443.1(a))

 

13.12.110 Application—New owners or tenants.
    A.  Each new user, owner or tenant of any premises served by the city shall make a written application for water service on forms furnished by the city, in the collections office of the city; provided, however, if an existing service user seeks a change of service address within the city system, such application may be made by telephone with the applicable fees deposited by mail or transferred on the accounts of the city.

    B.   The application shall include the name and address of the applicant, the legal description or street number of the property, and an agreement by the applicant to pay the stipulated rate at the time and in the manner provided by any applicable resolution or provision of this chapter, and to abide by all the service rules and regulations of the city.

    C.   Concurrently with the filing of the application, there shall be deposited with the city a “new service fee” in the amount set forth in resolution adopted by the city council. At the termination of any service, such fee shall be returned after there has been deducted therefrom any amount due the city for water services. The council may adopt by resolution rules and procedures for the refund of such fees prior to the termination of services. (Prior code § 5443.1(c))

 

13.12.120 Application—Notice of changes.
    A.  The consumer shall notify the city of any change in the status of or the information shown on the application for service, and shall be responsible for the water service furnished until the city is notified to discontinue service.

    B.   The city shall make no adjustments or waive any charges or penalties resulting from the consumer’s failure to provide current information.

    C.   All conditions of service contained herein, together with the current water rates and charges, shall apply to each and every service, regardless of whether the premises served is occupied or vacant, excepting if the water has been turned off by the city upon request of the consumer or the owner of the property, any fixed or minimum charge shall not apply. (Prior code § 5443.1(d))

 

13.12.130 Application—Deposits.
    A.  Where the applicant is required to make a deposit or guaranty, either for guaranteeing payment of charges for service or for reestablishment of credit, the amount thereof shall be as set forth in resolution of the city council for new service fee.

    B.   When the city holds a deposit guaranteeing payment for water service that has been discontinued, such deposit will be refunded without interest, with the following exceptions: Any unpaid final charges or any other indebtedness to the department shall be deducted from the deposit and any remaining portion of the deposit returned.

    C.   Deposits or guarantees made pursuant to this section may be refunded without interest to the customer when credit satisfactory to the department has been established. (Prior code § 5443.2)

 

13.12.140 Use of water without application.
    Any person who takes possession of a premises where water supply has been shut off by the city and uses water without making application for water service shall be responsible for all charges for the water service. The amount of such charges shall be at a rate to be determined by the city, whether by meter readings or on the basis of the estimated consumption for the time water was used. When water is being used without application for service, the service may be disconnected without notice. (Prior code § 5443.1(b))

 

13.12.150 Private fire-protection service.
    A.  Whenever a service is installed for private fire protection, a charge shall be made for installation of a fire-detector check valve and meter and appurtenances. Such service may be used only in case of fire or other purposes expressly provided in Division I of this title. Use of fire-protection service for any other purpose than set out in this division shall be prohibited.

    B.   Should it be necessary to use water through a fire-detector check meter for the purpose of testing or maintaining a private fire-suppression system or fire department apparatus, the city shall authorize such use, upon the receipt of a written request stating:

    1.   Date and time of use;

    2.   Purpose;

    3.   Estimated quantity of water to be used;

    4.   Estimated maximum flow.

    C.   The city may restrict such nonemergency flows which may be detrimental to or tend to dewater the system. (Prior code § 5442.2(c))

 

13.12.160 Fire hydrants—Installation.
    The fire chief having jurisdiction shall designate the size and location of all public fire hydrants to be installed. The cost of all public fire hydrant installations or changes shall be paid by the applicant. (Prior code § 5442.2(d))

 

13.12.170 Fire hydrants—Water for other uses.
    A.  Temporary supply of water for purposes other than extinguishing fires may be secured from existing fire hydrants on application in accordance with the provisions of this section. The applicant shall designate the period of time and purpose for which water is to be used. The city may discontinue the supply and remove its equipment at the expiration of the period so designated or if the supply is used for any purpose other than designated by the applicant.

    B.   The supply is subject to limitations as to rate of flow of water and on time of use. The city may require that a meter be installed and charge the applicable rate for the service provided, as set forth by resolution of city council.

    C.   The city will install all equipment necessary to furnish a temporary water supply, and no water shall be used until such equipment is installed and arrangements have been made for payment of water to be used. A backflow-prevention device may be required.

    D.  If equipment furnished by the city is damaged through carelessness or abuse of an applicant, the cost of repairing it shall be charged to the applicant. If any such equipment is removed from the fire hydrant by others and not recovered by the city, the value thereof shall be charged to the applicant.

    E.   The applicant shall establish credit, as provided by Sections 13.12.090 and 13.12.100, to secure payment of the city’s charges for furnishing, installation, removal, inspection and rental of the equipment installed on a fire hydrant for such securing of water and charges for the water used. If credit is established by making a deposit, the amount thereof shall be sufficient to secure payment for water used and the other charges by the city.

    F.   No permit for temporary supply from fire hydrants shall be issued to any person who has violated any of the provisions of Division I of this title, or whose indebtedness to the city for water used or damage to hydrants is delinquent.

    G.  Only approved spanner wrenches may be used when operating fire hydrants. The applicant shall not operate the main fire hydrant valve except in an emergency. (Prior code § 5443.1(f))

 

13.12.180 Temporary service connections.
    A.  Establishment of Temporary Service.

    1.   The city shall, if no hardship will result to its existing customers, furnish temporary service for construction and miscellaneous uses when the applicant has requested service on this basis, or where the city reasonably expects the service to be temporary.

    2.   A temporary service may be disconnected at any time after expiration of the period for which the applicant stated it was required, or when, in the opinion of the manager, the service is no longer temporary in nature, or when the use of such temporary service is detrimental. Applicants shall make in advance the payments provided in this section and Sections 13.12.080 and 13.12.090.

    B.   Temporary Service From Existing Connections. An existing inactive connection which is not being used may be used for temporary service, but if it is required at any time to service the property which it enters, its use for temporary service shall be discontinued. A charge, as set forth by resolution of the city council, will be made for arranging such temporary use.

    C.   Installation of Temporary Service Connections. Where installation of a temporary service connection is required, the applicant shall pay the estimated cost to the city.

    D.  Meter May Be Required. The city may require that a meter be installed on any temporary service connection, and charge the applicable rate for the service provided. The charge for a meter shall be provided in Chapter 13.20 of this division.

    E.   Service Connection Installation Charges. The charges for installation of the several kinds and sizes of service connections shall be as set forth in resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 5442.2(e))

 

13.12.190 Contractors and miscellaneous uses.
    A.  Water for construction and miscellaneous uses normally shall be furnished through a temporary service connection. The applicant shall designate the period of time and purpose for which the water is to be used. The city may discontinue the supply and remove its equipment at the expiration of the period so designated. Water supply shall be subject to limitations as to the rate of flow and time of use.

    B.   The city initially will install all the equipment necessary to furnish a temporary water supply and, upon payment of the charges provided for in this chapter, will move equipment for any subsequent changes in location as requested by the applicant, except when the applicant is being furnished water on a flat-rate basis and is supplying his or her own eddy valve. (Prior code § 5443.1(e))

 

13.12.200 Liability for loss or damages.
    A.  The customer will be held responsible for loss or damage to the city’s meters or other facilities resulting from the use or operation of appliances and facilities on the customer’s premises, including but not limited to damage caused by steam, hot water, or chemicals. The city’s control and responsibility end at its shutoff valve or meter, and the city will in no case be liable for loss or damage on the premises served, or elsewhere, caused by or in any way arising out of the running or escape of water from open faucets, burst pipes, or faulty fixtures or appliances on the premises.

    B.   Each customer shall be responsible for the cost of any water lost through leaks or defective lines between the meter and the point of use. Shutoff valves on the inlet side of the meter shall be operated only by the city. For convenience and safety, the consumer shall install a valve between the meter and the building or first outlet. Damages resulting from violations of this rule shall be charged to the customer. (Prior code § 5442.1(d))

 

 

 

Chapter 13.16 DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM EXTENSIONS
13.16.010 Application of chapter provisions.
    All extensions of the water system or distribution system from the city’s existing distribution system, required for water service to an applicant, shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 5444.1(a))

 

13.16.020 Location for facilities.
    The city generally will install distribution system facilities only in public streets, alleys, roads and highways, and on other public and private property where satisfactory rights-of-way can be obtained essentially without involving direct purchase or lease of land by the city. (Prior code § 5444.1(b))

 

13.16.030 Installations in nondedicated streets.
    The city will install a water main in a private street or thoroughfare to provide service to premises along such street or thoroughfare only under the following conditions:

    A.  Approval by the city council;

    B.   The street or thoroughfare conforms to applicable ordinances of the city or other applicable laws;

    C.   Rights-of-way are provided which are satisfactory to the city;

    D.  The applicant or applicants shall pay the full cost of the installation;

    E.   The city shall have no obligation for maintenance or repair of the surface of such street or thoroughfare, except for the repair or replacement of surfacing required to be cut or removed by the city for the purposes of maintaining, repairing, replacing or removing such mains or attachments. (Prior code § 5444.1(c))

 

13.16.040 Street condition prerequisites.
    A.  In order to expedite the installation of mains, service connections and fire hydrants, each applicant for extension of the distribution system shall provide the city with street plans approved by the city engineer showing established sewers, paving, curbs and other features.

    B.   It is preferable to install water mains, fire hydrants, water service and related facilities after curbs have been constructed. If curbs are not to be constructed at the time or in the near future, the applicant must obtain from the city engineer’s office and furnish to the city the approved location of curbs.

    C.   The city will not install mains, service connections and fire hydrants or related services in new tracts unless streets are well-defined by lot stakes, curb stakes or visible centerline stakes properly set at the applicant’s expense.

    D.  Such streets must be down to a subgrade approved by the city engineer before mains, services, fire hydrants or related services are installed. If such facilities are installed and thereafter have to be raised or lowered or otherwise relocated because of failure of the applicant to supply correct information as to location or grade of curbs, property lines, etc., all costs of making such changes must be paid by the applicant.

    E.   If an applicant permits streets to be paved before mains, fire hydrants, service connections or related facilities are installed, he or she shall pay the costs of cutting and replacing pavement necessitated by installation of such facilities. (Prior code § 5444.1(d))

 

13.16.050 Special, additional facilities.
    When facilities in addition to those required for extension under the city’s normal design standards are required especially to provide capacity, pressure or storage exclusively for the requested service, the applicant shall pay the added cost of such facilities in addition to other regularly applicable charges under these regulations. (Prior code § 5444.1(f))

 

13.16.060 Enlargement of facilities.
    When service required by an applicant requires replacing an existing main with one of larger size, the applicant may be required to pay the full cost of such replacement. (Prior code § 5444.1(g))

 

13.16.070 Payment of charges in advance.
    A.  All charges provided by these regulations applicable to an extension or enlargement of water distribution facilities shall be paid in advance by the applicant therefor before such extensions or enlargements are made by the city, except where arrangements for payments have otherwise been made with the city.

    B.   If, upon completion of such installation, the actual cost is greater than the amount deposited, the applicant shall pay the difference to the city. If, however, the actual cost is less than the amount deposited, the difference shall be refunded by the city to the applicant. (Prior code § 5444.1(h))

 

13.16.080 Payment for oversize facilities.
    If the city should elect to construct facilities of greater capacity than required by the service requested, the city shall assume any additional cost involved, as determined by the manager. (Prior code § 5444.1(i))

 

13.16.090 Ownership of extensions.
    A.  All extensions of the city’s water distribution system, however provided for, shall become property of the city and under control of the city.

    B.   Title to any facilities constructed by others shall be transferred to the city upon acceptance of such facilities by the city. (Prior code § 5444.1(e))

 

13.16.100 Main extensions—Charges generally.
    The following charges for main extensions, set out in Sections 13.16.110 through 13.16.150, shall be paid in addition to all other applicable charges under the regulations of the city, including charges for service connections, meter installation, etc. (Prior code § 5444.2(part))

 

13.16.110 Main extensions—Individual customers.
    An applicant for a main extension, other than in a new subdivision or development, from an existing main to a premises to be served, shall pay the current cost to the city of a main of a size determined by the city to be adequate to serve the premises. (Prior code § 5444.2(a))

 

13.16.120 Main extensions—New subdivisions.
    A.  Applicants for main extensions to serve a new subdivision or development shall pay the full installed cost of mains of adequate size to serve the subdivision or development, as determined by the city, and in addition may be required to pay the full cost of any extension from the nearest main of adequate size of the city’s distribution system.

    B.   Any and all service connections, including fire hydrant connections installed or required to be installed within the new subdivision, shall be installed only in the manner, under the circumstances and upon the payment of any charges therefor, as provided in these regulations. (Prior code § 5444.2(b))

 

13.16.130 Main extensions—Installations under private contract.
    A.  An applicant for service requiring main extensions may have the extensions and service connections installed by him or her under private contract, where authorized by the city. Such facilities installed by an applicant must be installed in accordance with the terms and conditions of an agreement between the applicant and the city. All costs of the city in connection with such facilities installed under private contract shall be paid by the applicant.

    B.   The material installed and the work performed must comply with the plans and specifications furnished by the city, and shall be subject to city inspection at all times. The applicant shall pay in advance the charges for engineering and inspection services, materials, and general and administrative expenses and other costs, in accordance with the accounting practices of the city.

    C.   Upon completion of the installation in accordance with the agreement, title to the facilities shall be transferred to the city by the applicant upon acceptance of such facilities by the city. (Prior code § 5444.2(c))

 

13.16.140 Main extensions—Connection charges.
    A.  Before approving an application for water service connection to any water main which has been constructed at no cost to the property to be served thereby, the manager shall require payment of the connection charge or fees established by the city council for the lot or parcel to be connected. If the shape of the lot or parcel is other than the usual rectangular shape, or unusual in area, the manager may modify the connection charge or frontage charge to require a payment commensurate with the benefits to be received.

    B.   The city council shall establish and determine the connection charges required by this chapter pursuant to resolution, or per refund agreement establishing that such charge or fee approximates or equals the applicant’s share of the cost of constructing the water main and is necessary for the purpose of reimbursing the city or others pursuant to refund agreement with the city. (Prior code § 5444.2(e))

 

13.16.150 Main extensions—Refund agreement.
    When, by reason of remoteness from the city’s water distribution system, an applicant is requested by the city to pay an amount of money in excess of that required to cover water main installation charges or connection charges for the applicant’s property, the city may enter into a refund agreement providing for the refund of that money which the city may collect as water main connection charges from subsequent consumers connecting to the water main. Such refund agreement shall be in effect for a period of ten years from the date the main is placed in service, after which time the city shall be released of any further obligations to make refunds to the applicant. (Prior code § 5444.2(d))

 

 

 

Chapter 13.20 METERS AND BILLING
13.20.010 Application for service—Fee.
    A.  All applications for a new water service shall be made on the forms furnished by the city and shall be signed by the applicant.

    B.   In addition to any other information required, such application shall show the true name of the applicant, the address of the property to be served, a true and accurate description of the area to be served, and the size of the service requested.

    C.   Each application shall be accompanied by an installation fee in the amount as estimated to be the approximate cost of such installation, together with any additional fees or charges provided for herein. (Prior code § 5443.3(a)(part))

 

13.20.020 Service through meter required—Installation.
    A.  Except as otherwise specifically provided in Division I of this title, all water delivered by the city shall be delivered through approved meters installed by the city. Meters installed for new services shall be no smaller in size than three-fourths inch by three-fourths inch.

    B.   Service pipes will be installed from the main to a point inside the curbline where a meter and appurtenances will be installed. However, all service pipes from main located in easements will have meters and appurtenances located adjacent to the mains except where other arrangements are provided by the customer. Installation and maintenance of all pipes on the property on the customer side of the meter shall be the responsibility of the customer. (Prior code § 5443.3(a)(part))

 

13.20.030 Installation and maintenance costs.
    Charges collected for installation of services and meters shall constitute a service fee, and the service pipe, water meter and appurtenances installed shall remain at all times the property of the city. Such facilities shall be maintained, repaired and renewed by the city when rendered unserviceable through ordinary wear and tear; provided that, where replacements, repairs or adjustments are rendered necessary by an act, negligence or carelessness of the consumer or his or her representative, any expense caused to the city thereby shall be charged against and be collected from the consumer. (Prior code § 5443.3(a)(part))

 

13.20.040 Separate consumers on same premises.
    A.  In all cases in which water is being served to premises occupied by two or more different and independent consumers of water, which premises are held under the same ownership, the owner of such premises shall provide independent service to the service connection for each such independent consumer; provided, however, if the owner of such premises so served with water shall agree in writing to be responsible for and pay all money due for water used upon such premises, such independent service shall not be required.

    B.   Should the owner fail or refuse to assume responsibility for money due for water used upon such premises, the city shall, after thirty days’ notice to the consumer so served and to the owner of such premises or the person in charge thereof, cut off water from such premises until the independent services herein required are installed, or the agreement assuming responsibility for the money due for water served to the premises is made as herein provided. (Prior code § 5443.8)

 

13.20.050 Meters—Change of location or size.
    Any customer desiring to change the location or size of a service that has already been installed shall make application to the city, and upon payment in advance of the cost as determined by the city, the city may cause such change to be made. No such change shall be made if, in the opinion of the city, the same is not required or in the best interest of the city. (Prior code § 5443.6)

 

13.20.060 Meters—Removal and reinstallation.
    A.  Meters will be removed and service discontinued upon request of the owner of the property served, or, if any inactive service is unlikely to be used in the reasonably near future, as determined by the city, the meter may be removed.

    B.   Services one and one-half inches in diameter and smaller may be reactivated and the meter reinstalled upon proper application and payment of a reinstallation charge, as set forth by resolution, provided that the service pipe is at proper size and is good and in a usable condition. Services of two-inch diameter and larger may be reinstalled upon proper application and payment of a reinstallation charge, as determined by the city.

    C.   Service which has been discontinued as a result of a violation of any rule and regulation, or for delinquent payment of charges or penalties, shall not be reactivated until such violation has been remedied and all charges and penalties have been paid.

    D.  Any inactive or discontinued service which the city determines is unlikely to be used, or is found to interfere with the use of the public right-of-way or the facilities therein may, at the discretion of the city, be disconnected at the main and the service abandoned. Unusable and abandoned service lines shall not be reactivated, and upon any application for same, the full charges and conditions for a new installation shall apply. (Prior code § 5443.5)

 

13.20.070 Meters—Testing.
    A.  When the accuracy of a water meter is questioned by a customer, the city will, upon request, cause an official test to be made. A customer shall have the right to require the city to conduct the test in his or her presence or, if he or she so desires, in the presence of an expert or other representative appointed by him.

    B.   A customer requiring such a test shall first deposit with the city a sum based on the size of the meter, as stated in the resolution adopted by the city council. Should the meter be found by test to be more than two percent fast, the city shall refund the customer’s deposit; otherwise, the deposit shall be forfeited to compensate for the cost of such testing. (Prior code § 5443.10(part))

 

13.20.080 Meters—Adjustment of bills for errors.
    A.  Fast Meters. When, as a result of any test, a meter is found to be more than two percent fast, the department will render a corrected bill for the current period, and the meter shall be adjusted or replaced.

    B.   Slow Meters. When, as a result of any test, a meter is found to be more than five percent slow, the city will render a corrected bill for the period in which the meter was in use, not exceeding four months, unless it can be shown that the error occurred on a date which can be fixed, in which case the billing may be corrected to that date. (Prior code § 5443.10(a))

 

13.20.090 Discontinuance of service—Customer’s request.
    A.  A customer may have service discontinued by giving not less than forty-eight hours’ advance notice thereof to the city. Charges for service may be required to be paid until the requested date of discontinuance, or such later date as will provide not less than the required two-day advance notice.

    B.   When such notice is not given, the customer will be required to pay for service until one day after the city has knowledge that the customer has vacated the premises or otherwise had discontinued water service. (Prior code § 5443.4(a))

 

13.20.100 Discontinuance of service—City authority.
    A.  A customer’s water service may be discontinued for the nonpayment of a bill for water service rendered, if the bill has not been paid within the time prescribed herein, or as may be modified by resolution.

    B.   Water charges shall be due and payable upon presentation and shall become delinquent if not paid before the twentieth day after the date of mailing. If any account becomes delinquent, the city may shut off the water to the premises concerned. There shall be, as set forth by resolution, a charge for turning on any water service after shutoff by reason of delinquency.

    C.   If any fire service account becomes delinquent, the city may shut off and discontinue the domestic water service to the premises. Water service shall not be restored until all provisions have been complied with. (Ord. 896 § 1, 1997; prior code § 5443.4(b)(1))

 

13.20.110 Discontinuance of service—Vacant premises.
    In case any premises become vacant, the regular minimum rates shall be charged, and no refund or discount shall be made unless the water has been shut off by the city upon the written request of the one in whose name the water service is rendered, or the written request of the owner. (Prior code § 5443.4(b)(2))

 

13.20.120 Meters—Reading and billing.
    A.  Regular bills shall be rendered at intervals of one month or multiples thereof, as may be established from time to time by the council. Except as provided in the water rate schedule, the quantitative charge for water will be based upon delivery as indicated upon the meter register.

    B.   Combined meter readings shall not be used for billing purposes in those cases where a customer is served by more than one meter.

    C.   Insofar as practicable, meters will be read as nearly as possible at regular intervals for the preparation of regular bills, and meters will be read as required for the preparation of opening, closing, and special bills.

    D.  If for any reason service is unmetered, except as provided in the water rate schedule, or if the meter is inaccessible and cannot be read, or if the meter fails to register correctly, the water consumption will be estimated by the city as follows:

    1.   Previous consumption by metered service to the premises, for a like period of time; or

    2.   The average consumption of similar metered services of the area during the period in question; or

    3.   By giving consideration to the nature of the use, volume of business, seasonal demand, and any other factors that may assist in determining such consumption. (Prior code § 5443.7(a))

 

13.20.130 Bills—Computation and prorating.
    Rate schedules stated on a monthly basis are related to a thirty-day consumption interval as a standard month. Whenever actual meter-read intervals differ from the standard thirty-day period, bills related thereto computed from monthly schedules are subject to proration on a thirty-day basis. However, at the discretion of the city, in computing and rendering regular bills, minor variances between actual read intervals and any established regular-read interval need not be considered, in accordance with the following:

    A.  Where bills are regularly rendered monthly, computation from monthly rate schedules may be made directly whenever actual read intervals do not vary by more than three days (lesser or greater) from the standard thirty-day interval;

    B.   Where bills are regularly rendered for multiples of a month, computation from monthly rate schedules may be made on the basis of similar multiples of the stated rate schedules whenever actual read intervals do not vary by more than six days (greater or lesser) from the established regular-read interval. (Prior code § 5443.7(b))

 

13.20.140 Bills—Payment and delinquency.
    All bills for water service hereunder are due and payable upon presentation; bills shall become delinquent twenty days after date of presentation. If bills are not paid upon becoming delinquent, the water service may be discontinued as provided in the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. Payment shall be made in person, or by mail at the office of the finance department, or, at the option of the city, to its authorized collectors. (Prior code § 5443.7(c))

 

13.20.150 Bills—Errors or disputes.
    A.  Whenever the correctness of any bill for water service is questioned, the city will cause an investigation to be made.

    B.   Inaccurate recording of water use or clerical or meter errors shall be adjusted to a correct basis as determined by the city’s investigation, and in the case of a slow or fast meter in accordance with this chapter.

    C.   In cases where the amount of water used, dates, or other factors required for application of rate schedules or other provisions are not subject to exact determination or are in question, or in case of dispute relative to service rate application, the city shall establish such factors by tests, analyses and investigations to determine the proper basis for making an adjustment, if any. Adjustments in the billing shall then be authorized by the city, as shown to be proper. When requested by the customer, such adjustments shall be subject to review by the city manager.

    D.  Each customer shall have the right of appeal to the city council, as provided in the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Prior code § 5443.9)

 

13.20.160 Notice service procedures.
    A.  Except for emergencies, notices from the city to a customer shall be given in writing, either delivered to him or her or mailed to him or her at his or her last known address, in the manner prescribed by this code.

    B.   Notice from any customer to the city pursuant to adopted regulations may be given in person or by his or her authorized agent, at the city office or by written notice enclosed in a sealed envelope and addressed to the city, deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid. (Prior code § 5443.7(d))

 

 

 

Chapter 13.24 RATES AND CHARGES
13.24.010 Average cost used when.
    Where these regulations provide that the charge to be made by the city is the cost to the city, such charge may be an average determined by the city manager from time to time, based on cost experienced by the city for the size and type of facility to be installed or changed, and according to conditions of installation or change. (Prior code § 5443.14)

 

13.24.020 Schedule I—General water service.
    A.  Applicability. Applicable to domestic, commercial and industrial water service and to water service for any other purpose.

    B.   Territory. All areas to which water is served by the city.

    C.   Water Rates. As established by adopted resolution.

    1.   Minimum Charge. Rate established by adopted resolution of city council for:

    a.   Domestic service;

    b.   Commercial and/or industrial service;

    2.   Quantitative Charge. The quantitative rate for all water delivered shall be as established by adopted resolution. (Prior code § 5443.11(a))

 

13.24.030 Schedule II—Private fire-protection service.
    A.  Applicability. Applicable to water service solely for private fire-protection purposes.

    B.   Territory. All areas to which water is served by the city.

    C.   Monthly Rates.

    1.   Minimum Charge. Rate established by adopted resolution of city council.

    2.   Discontinuance. Service under this schedule shall be discontinued by the department if water supplied under this schedule is used for any purpose other than fire extinguishing and for filling or refilling the facilities of the customer which have been drained in connection with tests and repairs. Service shall thereafter be restored only after a meter satisfactory to the city has been installed, and thereafter service shall be supplied at rates applicable to such service as metered. (Prior code § 5443.11(b))

 

13.24.040 Schedule III—Public fire hydrant service.
    A.  Applicability. Applicable to public fire hydrant service.

    B.   Territory. All areas to which water is served by the city.

    C.   Rates. Amount per hydrant per month, as established by resolution. (Prior code § 5443.11(c))

 

13.24.050 Changes or adjustments—Costs.
    Any person, firm, agency or corporation, public or private, requesting or otherwise necessitating adjustments to any water system facilities or any other service, shall pay the city the costs of making such changes or adjustments. (Prior code § 5443.12))

 

13.24.060 Customer responsibilities.
    A.  The customer shall, at his or her own risk and expense, furnish, install and keep in good and safe condition all apparatus and appliances which may be required for receiving, controlling, applying and utilizing such water, and the city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage caused by the improper installation of such apparatus and appliances, negligence, want of proper care, or wrongful act of the customer or any of his or her agents, employees or licensees in the installation, maintenance, use or operation of such apparatus or appliance.

    B.   A customer making any material change in the size, character or extent of the equipment or operations for which the department’s service is utilized shall immediately give the department written notice of the extent and nature of the change.

    C.   Each customer shall at all times maintain in good repair all water pipes, faucets, plumbing fixtures and other water appliances, to prevent the waste of water. Where any customer wilfully wastes water in any manner, the water may be shut off until wasteful practices have been discontinued, or until repairs have been made to the satisfaction of the city. (Prior code § 5443.15)

 

13.24.070 Deferred payment authorized when.
    A.  Payments may be deferred when required installations, adjustments, replacements or enlargements of water facilities are to be performed at a future time. Such deferred payment shall be secured by a corporate surety bond. The city’s charges for these facilities shall be paid prior to any investment by the city for any such installation, adjustment, replacement or enlargement.

    B.   The form of all bonds, contracts and notes shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney. All bonds shall be executed by the applicant as principal and a surety company, acceptable to the city, authorized to write surety bonds in the state of California as surety, and shall provide for full force and effect to continue until the terms are performed. (Prior code § 5443.13)

 

13.24.080 Unpaid deposits and charges.
    In accordance with the provisions of Sections 5435 and 5437 of the Government Code, the city’s rights hereunder are cumulative, and the city may, in addition to discontinuing services and imposing the other penalties provided in Division I of this title, bring action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the person or persons who occupy the property when the service was rendered or the deposit became due, or against the person guaranteeing payment of the bill, or against any or all of such persons for the collection of the amount of the deposit or the collection of the delinquent charges and penalties thereon. (Prior code § 5443.16)

 

13.24.090 Returned-check charges.
    Customers of the city’s water system who pay any water bill with a check which is returned to the city for any reason will be charged a fee for each returned check. Such fee will be established by resolution of the city council. The fee will be added to the customer’s water bill. (Prior code § 5443.18)

 

13.24.100 Restoration of service charge.
    Water service which has been shut off for failure to comply with any of the rules and regulations, or to pay any rates, charges or penalties as herein provided, shall not be restored until such rules and regulations and penalties have been complied with to the satisfaction of the city, and payment is made of the amount due, if any, and in addition thereto, a charge shall be assessed for the expense of turning the water off and on in accordance with resolution of the city council. (Prior code § 5443.17)

Division II. Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste
Chapter 13.28 SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
13.28.010 Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste Ordinance adopted by reference.
    There is adopted as the Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste Ordinance of the city, except as it is hereinafter amended, Los Angeles County Code, Title 20, Utilities, Division 2, Sanitary Sewers and Industrial Waste (Los Angeles County Ordinance 89-0101 adopted July 27, 1989).

    Three copies of Los Angeles County Code, Title 20, Utilities, Division 2, have been deposited with the city clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public. Whenever in said code reference is made to the unincorporated area of the county of Los Angeles, such area shall be deemed to include in its true geographical location the area of the city. (Ord. 861 § 2, 1994)

 

13.28.020 Definitions.
    Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in Title 20 of Los Angeles County Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in the section as follows:

    A.  “Board” means the city council;

    B.   “County Engineer” means the city engineer;

    C.   “County Health Officer” means the city health officer;

    D.  “County of Los Angeles” means the city, except in such instances where the County of Los Angeles is a correct notation due to circumstances;

    E.   “County Sewer Maintenance District” means the county sewer maintenance district, except in the instance where the territory concerned either is not within or has been withdrawn from a county sewer maintenance district. In any such instance “County Sewer Maintenance District” means the city;

    F.   “Ordinance” means an ordinance of the city, except in such instances where the reference is to a stated ordinance of the county of Los Angeles;

    G.  “Public Sewer” means all sanitary sewers and appurtenances thereto, lying within streets or easements dedicated to the city, which are under the sole jurisdiction of the city;

    H.  “Trunk Sewer” means a sewer under the jurisdiction of a public entity other than the city;

    I.    “County Treasurer” means city treasurer. (Ord. 861 § 2, 1994)

 

13.28.030 Section 20.32.690—Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance.
    Section 20.32.690 of Los Angeles County Code, Title 20, is amended to read as follows:

  20.32.690—Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance following violations. Whenever an industrial sewer connection permittee by reason of violation of Section 20.36.400 of this Code, or any other person by reason of violation of Section 20.32.640, causes obstruction, damage or destruction of a public sewer, or any appurtenances thereto, or pumping plants or water pollution control plants in connection therewith, he or she shall reimburse the County Sewer Maintenance District in which damage occurred for the cost of flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconstruction of such sewer or facility, made necessary by such violation, within 30 days after the County Engineer has rendered an invoice for the same. The amount when paid shall be deposited in to the fund of the said maintenance district.

 

  In the event the damaged public sewer is not in a sewer maintenance district, the violator shall reimburse the City within thirty (30) days after the City Engineer shall render an invoice for the same. The amount when paid shall be deposited in the City Treasury.

 

(Ord. 861 § 2, 1994)

 

13.28.040 Section 20.36.250—Annual inspection fee—Schedule and billing.
    Section 20.36.250 of Los Angeles County Code, Title 20, is amended by increasing the fees to two times the amount set forth in Section 20.36.250 of Los Angeles County Code, Title 20. (Ord. 861 § 2, 1994)

 

13.28.050 Section 20.36.270—Miscellaneous service fee schedule.
    Section 20.36.270 of the Los Angeles County Code, Title 20, is amended by increasing the fees to two times the amount set forth in Section 20.36.270 of Los Angeles County Code, Title 20. (Ord. 861 § 2, 1994)

 

 

 

Chapter 13.56 SEWER RECONSTRUCTION
13.56.010 Title for citation.
    This chapter shall be known as the “Sewer Reconstruction Fund,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as “this ordinance” or “this chapter.” (Prior code § 5081.1)

 

13.56.020 Purpose of provisions.
    A.  Most of the existing sewers in the city were constructed many years ago and were designed to serve single-family residential and agricultural properties at a time when the city was of low population density. Because of the erection of many multifamily dwelling units, apartment houses, and the growth of commercial and industrial establishments, the population density of the city has greatly increased, with the result that the city sewerage system is no longer adequate to accommodate the increased volume of sewage generated by such development. Detailed studies and findings of this fact are contained in the Sanitary Sewer System Study prepared by the city engineer and on file in the office of the city engineer.

    B.   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a charge to be collected from the owners of such properties proposing to discharge, to the public sewer, quantities of sewage in excess of the quantity for which the existing sewerage system was designed, and to establish a fund into which these charges may be deposited and from which money will be available for the city sewer reconstruction program. (Prior code § 5081.2)

 

13.56.030 Definitions.
    “Public sewer,” or “city sewerage system” or “city sewers,” as used in this chapter, mean a main line sanitary sewer, dedicated to public use, but excepting therefrom sewers under the jurisdiction of a public entity other than the city of Pico Rivera. (Prior code § 5081.4)

 

13.56.040 Enforcement authority.
    The city engineer shall enforce and administer all of the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5082.2)

 

13.56.050 Compliance with chapter provisions.
    No person shall, within the city, erect, construct, enlarge or alter any building or structure, or cause the same to be done, without first having complied with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 5082.1)

 

13.56.060 Reconstruction plan requirements.
    A.  The sewer reconstruction program shall be carried out basically in accordance with the City of Pico Rivera Sewer Reconstruction Plan contained in the report of the city engineer entitled “Sanitary Sewer System Study,” on file in the office of the city engineer.

    B.   If compliance with the reconstruction plan is impossible or impractical because of peculiar or unforeseen conditions, and the purposes of this chapter may be accomplished and the public health and safety assured by alternate construction, the city council may from time to time grant exceptions to the reconstruction plan by motion permitting such alternate construction.

    C.   In addition, the city engineer is directed to periodically review the sewer reconstruction plan and report to the city council any proposed changes in the plan which may hereafter be adopted and approved by the city council by motion. (Prior code § 5081.3)

 

13.56.070 Sewer capacity determination—Specific uses.
    The size and grade of each public sewer must be such as to provide at all times sufficient capacity for peak-flow rates of discharge. In order to establish estimates of sanitary sewage at peak flow, each applicant for a building permit shall submit plans of intended construction, and such information as the city engineer may require, on printed forms provided for that purpose. The following Table 13.56.070 is established as the peak flows for the various occupancies, and shall be used as a basis for computing the discharge rate to the public sanitary sewer. (See Table 13.56.070, following this section.)

 

 

Table 13.56.070

Determination Of Capacity

Occupancy

Peak Flow

Apartment or multiple dwelling

600 gal/day/dwelling unit

Assembly areas

15 gal/day/person

Auditorium

15 gal/day/seat

Bars and cocktail lounges

60 gal/day/seat

Churches

600 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

Hospitals

1,500 gal/day/bed

Hotels

600 gal/day/room

Industry, heavy

Actual gallons per day, as stated in industrial waste permit

Industry, light (no water processes)

600 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

Laundry, automatic (public)

225 gal/day/machine

Medical office

900 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

Mobile homes and/or trailer courts

400 gal/day/unit

Motels

600 gal/day/unit

Motor vehicle, automatic carwash, self-service

86,400 gal/day/lane, 2,500 gal/day/stall

Office

600 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

Restaurant

150 gal/day/seat

Schools

 

1. Elementary

27 gal/day/capita

2. Other

75 gal/day/capita

Stand or drive-in for sale of lunches, ice cream, beverages and similar items

900 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

Storage garages and warehouses

75 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

Stores, commercial and display

300 gal/day/ 1,000 square feet of floor area

 

 

 

    B.   Any occupancy not contained within the aforementioned classification shall be rated by the city engineer at a peak flow based upon any aforementioned classified occupancy it most nearly resembles. Until the city council, based upon further engineering studies, determines excessive peak-flow discharge for single-family residential property, all single-family residential property shall be classified at six hundred gallons per day per dwelling unit; provided, however, any single-family classification having in addition to a single-family use on each five thousand square feet of lot area an accessory use discharging sewage to the public sewer, shall be classified for the purpose of this chapter as a multiple dwelling.

    C.   The peak flow to the sanitary sewer for a building containing mixed occupancies shall be determined by adding the peak flow characteristics of the various occupancies as set forth in Table 13.56.070. (Prior code § 5083.1)

 

13.56.080 Charges—Basis and computation.
    A.  The aforementioned table of peak flows is based upon the Sanitary Sewer System Study prepared by the city engineer using engineering criteria and mathematical formulae in determining existing sewer capacity, needed sewer reconstruction by discharge over and above existing sewer capacity, and the cost and scheduling thereof.

    B.   As a result of such study, the city council finds and determines that the total cost of reconstruction, as set forth in said sewer plan, will be at the rate of ninety-two cents per gallon of peak flow in excess of six hundred gallons, which rate shall be modified periodically to reflect any changes in construction costs.

    C.   In order to pay for such reconstruction, a reconstruction charge shall be imposed in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section. The applicant for any permit required under Chapter 15.08 of this code shall declare all information necessary, as determined by the city engineer, to comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall pay to the city at the time of issuance of such a permit, a charge based upon the total peak flow resulting from such building or structure, as determined from the aforementioned schedule, times ninety-two cents per gallon thereof.

    D.  In determining such charge, each five thousand square feet of lot area shall be given a credit of six hundred gallons. The amount of gallons of peak flow over and above said six hundred gallons per five thousand square feet of lot area shall be used in determining the charge to be imposed for the purpose of this chapter at the rate of ninety-two cents per gallon thereof. (Ord. 982 §§ 1-3, 2002; Prior code § 5083.2)

 

13.56.090 Credit for private reconstruction.
    A.  In accordance with the Sanitary Sewer System Study, aforementioned, the city council finds and determines that there are certain critical areas within the sewerage system which are overloaded, as set forth on Appendix C of that certain study entitled “Sanitary Sewer System Study,” of the city engineer. Where the city engineer hereafter determines in any such critical area that further construction will result in sewage being disposed in the sewer lines of such area in excess of the capacity available to handle such sewage, to the point that the sewage may back up or overflow, creating a hazard to the public health, the city engineer shall so certify in writing such a determination and finding to the chief building official, and thereafter no building permit shall be issued for any building or structure within such area until the city engineer has certified a sufficient capacity is available in the public sewer, or can be made available before the building is occupied.

    B.   If any owner, in order to obtain sufficient capacity for a sewer, shall with the approval of the city engineer reconstruct public sewers as herein defined, said owner shall receive as a credit against the payment of any sewer reconstruction charges, an amount equal to the cost of such reconstruction not subject to reimbursement pursuant to the terms and provisions of Section 13.40.200 of this code. (Prior code § 5083.5)

 

13.56.100 Sewer reconstruction fund.
    A.  The charges collected under this chapter shall be credited to the sewer reconstruction fund. Money deposited in the sewer reconstruction fund shall be expended for the purpose of reconstructing the public sewer system, as set forth in the Sanitary Sewer System Study on file in the office of the city engineer, or as hereafter modified or amended by the city council. All engineering costs, refunds as provided in Section 13.56.110, mileage, overhead, incidental and construction costs necessarily incurred in the reconstruction of sewers shall be charged to the fund, to the extent allowed by law.

    B.   “Reconstruction,” as used in this chapter, shall include the acquisition and construction of public sewers, as defined in Section 13.56.030, or as authorized and subject to Section 5471 of the Health and Safety Code. (Prior code § 5083.3)

 

13.56.110 Refunds.
    In the event any person shall have paid the applicable sewer reconstruction charge based on the additional peak flow created by new construction, as provided herein, and no portion of the new construction shall have been commenced, and the permit for such construction shall have been cancelled or expired, such person shall be entitled, upon written request, to a refund in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the sewer reconstruction charge paid by such person, minus one percent of the charge for administrative handling. However, the amount retained shall not exceed ten dollars. (Prior code § 5083.4)

Division III. Additional Regulations
Chapter 13.60 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
13.60.010 Purpose of provisions—Statutory authority.
    A.  The purpose of this chapter is:

    1.   To protect the public water supply against actual or potential cross-connection by isolating within the premises contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on the premises;

    2.   To eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption;

    3.   To eliminate cross-connections between drinking water systems and sources of contamination;

    4.   To prevent the making of cross-connections in the future.

    B.   These regulations are adopted pursuant to the State Administrative Code, Title 17, Public Health, entitled “Regulations Relating to Cross-Connections.” (Ord. 748 § 1, 1988)

 

13.60.020 Definitions.
    As used in this chapter:

    A.  “Air-gap separation” means a physical break between a supply pipe and a receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe, measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no case less than one inch.

    B.   “Approved backflow prevention device” means devices which have passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California Department of Health Services.

    C.   “Approved water supply” means any water supply whose potability is regulated by a state or local health agency.

    D.  “Auxiliary supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises, other than the approved water supply.

    E.   “AWWA Standard” means an official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works Association (“AWWA”).

    F.   “Backflow” means a flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure, that causes the flow of water or other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources other than an approved water supply source. Backsiphonage is one cause of backflow. Back pressure is the other cause.

    G.  “Contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which creates a hazard to the public health, or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.

    H.  “Cross-connection” means any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system used to supply water for drinking purposes, and any source or system containing unapproved water, or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome and potable. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, or other devices through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross-connections.

    I.    “Double check valve assembly” means an assembly of at least two independently acting check valves including tightly closing shutoff valves on each side of the check valve assembly, and test cocks available for testing the watertightness of each check valve.

    J.    “Health agency” means the California Department of Health Services, or the local health agency with respect to a small water system.

    K.  “Local health agency” means the county or city health agency.

    L.   “Person” means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, municipality, public utility or other public body or institution.

    M.  “Premises” means any and all areas on a customer’s property which are served or have the potential to be served by the public water system.

    N.  “Public water system” means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, which has five or more service connections, or regularly serves an average of twenty-five individuals daily at least sixty days out of the year.

    O.  “Reclaimed water” means a wastewater which, as a result of treatment, is suitable for uses other than potable use.

    P.   “Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device” means a device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two checks, a tightly-closing shutoff valve on each side of the check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.

    Q.  “Service connection” means and refers to the point of connection of a user’s piping to the water supplier’s facilities.

    R.   “Water supplier” means the person who owns or operates the approved water supply system.

    S.   “Water user” means any person obtaining water from an approved water supply system. (Ord. 748 § 2, 1988)

 

13.60.030 Cross-connections prohibited when.
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation at any time to make or maintain, or cause to be made or maintained, temporarily or permanently, for any period of time whatsoever, any cross-connection between plumbing pipes or water fixtures being served with water by the city of Pico Rivera (hereinafter in this chapter referred to as “city”), and any other source of water supply, or to maintain any sanitary fixture or other appurtenances or fixtures which by reason of their construction may cause or allow backflow of water or other substances into the water supply system of the city and/or the service water pipes or fixtures of any consumer of the city. (Ord. 748 § 1, 1988)

 

13.60.040 Backflow prevention—City policy.
    A.  Unprotected cross-connections with the public water supply are prohibited.

    B.   Whenever backflow protection has been found necessary, the city will require the water user to install an approved backflow prevention device by and at his/her expense for continued services, or before a new service will be granted.

    C.   Wherever backflow prevention has been found necessary on a water supply line entering a water user’s premises, then any and all water supply lines from the city’s mains entering such premises, buildings or structures shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention device. The type of device to be installed will be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 748 § 3(A), 1988)

 

13.60.050 Backflow prevention—General requirements.
    A.  Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system unless the auxiliary water supply is accepted as an additional source by the city, and is approved by the public health agency having jurisdiction.

    B.   Each service connection from the city water system for supplying water to any premises on which any substance is handled in such fashion as may allow its entry into the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the city water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality.

    C.   Backflow prevention devices shall be installed on the service connection to any premises having:

    1.   Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled to the satisfaction of the state or local health department and the city; or

    2.   Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not cross-connections exist. (Ord. 748 § 3(B), 1988)

 

13.60.060 Backflow prevention—Types designated for specific uses.
    A.  The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the consumer’s premises. The type of protective device that may be required (listed in an increasing level of protection) includes: Double check valve assembly (“DC”), reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device (“RP”), and an air-gap separation (“AG”). The water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. The minimum types of backflow protection required to protect the approved water supply, at the user’s water connection to premises with varying degrees of hazard, are given in Table 13.60.060 below. Situations which are not covered in Table 13.60.060 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis, and the appropriate backflow protection shall be determined by the city or health agency.

 

Table 13.60.060

Type of Backflow Minimum Protection Required

Degree of Hazard

Type of Backflow Prevention

A. Sewage and Hazardous Substances.

 

1. Premises where the public water system is used to supplement the reclaimed water supply

AG

2. Premises where there are wastewater pumping and/or treatment plants and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city

AG

3. Premises where reclaimed water is used and there is no interconnection with the potable water system. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the city health agency and the city

AG

4. Premises where hazardous substances are handled in any manner in which the substances may enter a potable water system. This does not include a single-family residence that has a sewage lift pump. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city

AG

5. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides or pesticides are, or can be, injected

RP

B. Auxiliary Water Supplies.

 

1. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply which is interconnected with the public water system. An RP or DC may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city

AG

2. Premises where there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply and there are no interconnections with the public water system. A DC may be provided in lieu of an RP if approved by the health agency and the city

RP

C. Fire Protection Systems.

 

1. Premises where the fire system is directly supplied from the public water system and there is an unapproved auxiliary water supply on or to the premises (not interconnected)

DC

2. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and interconnected with the unapproved auxiliary water supply. An RP may be provided in lieu of an AG if approved by the health agency and the city

AG

3. Premises where the fire system is supplied from the public water system and where either elevated storage tanks or fire pumps which take suction from the private reservoirs or tanks are used

DC

D. Dockside Watering Points and Marine Facilities.

DC

1. Pier hydrants for supplying water to vessels for any purpose

RP

2. Premises where there are marine facilities

RP

E. Premises where entry is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency or at sufficiently short notice to assure that cross-connections do not exist

RP

F. Premises where there is a repeated history of cross-connections being established or reestablished

RP

 

    B.   Two or more services supplying water from different street mains to the same building, structure or premises through which an interstreet main flow may occur, shall have at least a standard check valve on each water service, to be located adjacent to and on the property side of the respective meters. Such check valve shall not be considered adequate if backflow protection is deemed necessary to protect the city’s mains from pollution or contamination; in such cases, the installation of approved backflow devices at such service connections shall be required. (Ord. 748 § 3(C), 1988)

 

13.60.070 Review, inspection and evaluation of premises.
    A.  The city shall review all requests for new services to determine if backflow protection is needed. Plans and specifications must be submitted to the city upon request for review of possible cross-connection hazards as a condition of service for new service connections. If it is determined that a backflow prevention device is necessary to protect the public water system, the required device must be installed before service will be granted.

    B.   The city may require an on-premises inspection to evaluate cross-connection hazards. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary.

    C.   The city may, at its discretion, require a reinspection for cross-connection hazards of any premises to which it serves water. The city will transmit a written notice requesting an inspection appointment to each affected water user. Any customer which cannot or will not allow an on-premises inspection of their piping system shall be required to install the backflow prevention device the city considers necessary. (Ord. 748 § 6(A), 1988)

 

13.60.080 Backflow prevention—Notice to install.
    A.  The city will notify the water user of the survey findings, listing corrective action to be taken if required. A period of sixty days will be given to complete all corrective action required, including installation of backflow prevention devices.

    B.   A second notice will be sent to each water user which does not take the required corrective action prescribed in the first notice within the sixty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to take the required corrective action. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the required corrective actions are taken. (Ord. 748 § 6(B), 1988)

 

13.60.090 Backflow prevention—Testing and maintenance.
    A.  The city will notify each affected water user when it is time for the backflow prevention device installed on their service connection to be tested. This written notice shall give the water user thirty days to have the device tested and supply the water user with the necessary form to be completed and resubmitted to the city.

    B.   A second notice shall be sent to each water user which does not have his/her backflow prevention device tested as prescribed in the first notice within the thirty-day period allowed. The second notice will give the water user a two-week period to have his/her backflow prevention device tested. If no action is taken within the two-week period, the city may terminate water service to the affected water user until the subject device is tested. (Ord. 748 § 6(C), 1988)

 

13.60.100 Certification for backflow prevention device testers.
    A.  Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention devices shall file an approved application with the city clerk, together with a fee as may be established by the city council.

    B.   Competency in all phases of backflow prevention device testing and repair must be demonstrated by means of education and/or experience in order to obtain certification.

    C.   The following are minimum requirements:

    1.   Applicants shall have had at least two years’ experience in plumbing or pipe fitting, or equivalent qualifications;

    2.   Hold a valid certification from the American Water Works Association (AWWA) California-Nevada Section, from the county certification program, or have equivalent training, in the opinion of the city and the health department;

    3.   Each applicant for certification as a tester of backflow prevention devices shall furnish evidence to show that he or she has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test such devices. He or she shall be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports prepared by him.

    D.  The certificate issued to any tester is valid for a period of one year, and may be revoked, suspended or not renewed by the city for improper testing, repairs and/or reporting. (Ord. 748 § 8, 1988)

 

13.60.110 Devices—Specifications.
    A.  Only backflow prevention devices which have been approved by the city shall be acceptable for installation by a water user connected to the city’s potable water system.

    B.   The city will provide, upon request to any affected customer, a list of approved backflow prevention devices. (Ord. 748 § 4(A), 1988)

 

13.60.120 Devices—Location and installation.
    Backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a manner prescribed in Section 7603, Title 22 of the California Administrative Code. Location of the devices should be as close as practical to the user’s connection. The city shall have the final authority in determining the required location of a backflow prevention device.

    A.  Air-Gap Separation (AG). The air-gap separation shall be located on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above-grade and be entirely visible. No water use shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air-gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch above the overflow rim of the receiving tank.

    B.   Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Device (RP). The approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed on the user’s side of and as close to the service connection as is practical. The device shall be installed a minimum of twelve inches above-grade, and not more than thirty-six inches above-grade, measured from the bottom of the device, and with a minimum of twelve inches side clearance. The device shall be installed so that it is readily accessible for maintenance and testing. Water supplied from any point between the service connection and the RP device shall be protected in a manner approved by the city/district.

    C.   Double Check Valve Assembly (DC). The approved double check valve assembly shall be located as close as practical to the user’s connection, and shall be installed above-grade, if possible, and in a manner where it is readily accessible for testing and maintenance. If a double check valve assembly is put below grade, it must be installed in a vault such that there is a minimum of six inches between the bottom of the vault and the bottom of the device, so that the top of the device is no more than a maximum of eight inches below grade, so there is a minimum of six inches of clearance between the side of the device with the test cocks and the side of the vault, and so there is a minimum of three inches clearance between the other side of the device and the side of the vault. Special consideration must be given to double check valve assemblies of the “Y” type. These devices must be installed on their “side,” with the test cocks in a vertical position so that either check valve may be removed for service without removing the device. Vaults which do not have an integrated bottom must be placed on a three-inch layer of gravel. (Ord. 748 § 4(B), 1988)

 

13.60.130 Devices—Testing and maintenance.
    A.  The owners of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention devices are installed, shall have the devices tested by a person who has demonstrated their competency in testing these devices to the city. Backflow prevention devices must be tested at least annually, and immediately after installation, relocation or repair. The city may require a more frequent testing schedule if it is determined to be necessary. No device shall be placed back in service unless it is functioning as required. A report on a form acceptable shall be filed with the city each time a device is tested, relocated or repaired. These devices shall be serviced, overhauled or replaced whenever they are found to be defective, and all costs of testing, repair and maintenance shall be borne by the water user.

    B.   The city will supply affected water users with a list of persons acceptable to the city to test backflow prevention devices. The city will notify affected customers by mail when annual testing of a device is needed, and also supply users with the necessary forms which must be filled out each time a device is tested or repaired.

    C.   Upon request, the city will test a customer’s backflow prevention device to fulfill the requirements of this chapter. The customer will be charged for the test and any maintenance found necessary to keep the device in working order on the next regular water bill. (Ord. 748 § 4(C), 1988)

 

13.60.140 Devices—Removal, repair or relocation.
    Approval must be obtained from the city before a backflow prevention device is removed, relocated or replaced:

    A.  Removal. The use of a device may be discontinued and the device removed from service upon presentation of sufficient evidence to the city to verify that a hazard no longer exists or is not likely to be created in the future;

    B.   Relocation. A device may be relocated following confirmation by the city that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy the installation requirement. A retest will be required following the relocation of the device;

    C.   Repair. A device may be removed for repair, provided the water use is either discontinued until repair is completed and the device is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the city. A retest will be required following the repair of the device; and

    D.  Replacement. A device may be removed and replaced, provided the water use is discontinued until the replacement device is installed. All replacement devices must be approved by the city, and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. (Ord. 748 § 4(D), 1988)

 

13.60.150 User supervisor required when—Duties.
    A.  At each premises where it is necessary, in the opinion of the city, a user supervisor shall be designated by and at the expense of the water user. This user supervisor shall be responsible for the monitoring of the backflow prevention devices and for avoidance of cross-connections.

    B.   In the event of contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to a cross-connection on the premises, the city shall be promptly notified by the user supervisor so that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome the contamination.

 

    C.   The water user shall inform the city of the user supervisor’s identity on, as a minimum, an annual basis, and whenever a change occurs. (Ord. 748 § 5, 1988)

 

13.60.160 Backflow prevention— Water service termination conditions.
    A.  Conditions. When the city encounters water uses that represent a clear and immediate hazard to the potable water supply that cannot be immediately abated, the city shall institute the procedure for discontinuing the city water service.

    B.   Basis for Termination. Conditions or water uses that create a basis for water service termination shall include, but are not limited to, the following items:

    1.   Refusal to install a required backflow prevention device;

    2.   Refusal to test a backflow prevention device;

    3.   Refusal to repair a faulty backflow prevention device;

    4.   Refusal to replace a faulty backflow prevention device;

    5.   Direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a sewer line;

    6.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and a system or equipment containing contaminants;

    7.   Unprotected direct or indirect connection between the public water system and an auxiliary water system;

    8.   A situation which presents an immediate health hazard to the public water system.

    C.   Water Service Termination Procedures.

    1.   For conditions set out in subsection (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this section the city will terminate service to a customer’s premises after two written notices have been sent specifying the corrective action needed and the time period in which it must be done. If no action is taken within the allowed time period water service may be terminated. (Ord. 748 § 7, 1988)

Division IV. Water Conservation
Chapter 13.70 WATER CONSERVATION AND WATER SUPPLY SHORTAGE PROGRAM
13.70.010 Purpose.
    A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish a water conservation and supply shortage program that will reduce water consumption within the city of Pico Rivera through conservation, enable effective water supply planning, assure reasonable and beneficial use of water, prevent waste of water, and maximize the efficient use of water within the city to avoid and minimize the effect and hardship of water shortage to the greatest extent possible.

    B.   This chapter establishes permanent water conservation standards intended to alter behavior related to water use efficiency for non-shortage conditions and further establishes three levels of water supply shortage response actions to be implemented during times of declared water shortage or declared water shortage emergency, with increasing restrictions on water use in response to worsening drought or emergency conditions and decreasing supplies. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.020 Definitions.
    The following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall have the meaning defined in this section:

    A.  “City” means the city of Pico Rivera.

    B.   “Person” means any natural person or persons, corporation, public or private entity, governmental agency or institution, or any other user of water provided by the city.

    C.   “Landscape irrigation system” means an irrigation system with pipes, hoses, spray heads, or sprinkling devices that are operated by hand or through an automated system.

    D.  “Large landscape areas” mean a lawn, landscape or other vegetated area, or combination thereof, equal to more than one acre of irrigable land.

    E.   “Single pass cooling systems” mean equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed.

    F.   “Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

    G.  “Recycled water” means the reclamation and reuse of nonpotable water for beneficial use.

    H.  “Billing unit” means the unit of water used to apply water rates for the purposes of calculating water charges for a person’s water usage. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.030 Application.
    A.  The provisions of this chapter apply to any person in the use of any potable water provided by the city.

    B.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to uses of water necessary to protect public health and safety or for essential government services, such as police, fire or other similar emergency services.

    C.   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the use of water by commercial nurseries and commercial growers to sustain plants, trees, shrubs, crops or other vegetation intended for commercial sale.

    D.  This chapter is intended solely to further the conservation of water. It is not intended to implement any provision of federal, state or local statutes, ordinances or regulations relating to protection of water quality or control of drainage or runoff. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.040 Permanent water conservation requirements—Prohibition against waste.
    The following water conservation requirements are effective at all times and shall be permanent. Violations of this section shall be considered waste and an unreasonable use of water.

    A.  Limits on Water Hours. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited between the hours of ten a.m. and four p.m. Pacific Standard Time on any day, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

    B.   Limit on Watering Duration. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water using a landscape irrigation system or a watering device that is not continuously attended to is limited to no more than fifteen minutes of water per day per station. This subsection does not apply to landscape irrigation systems that exclusively use very low-flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour and weather based controllers or stream rotor sprinklers that meet a seventy percent efficiency standard.

    C.   No Excessive Water Flow or Runoff. Watering or irrigating of any lawn, landscape or other vegetated area in a manner that causes or allows excessive water flow or runoff onto an adjoining sidewalk, driveway, street, alley, gutter or ditch is prohibited.

    D.  No Washing Down Hard or Paved Surfaces. Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios or alleys, is prohibited except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards, and then only by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off device or a low-volume, high pressure cleaning machine equipped to recycle any water used.

    E.   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. Excessive use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected, and in no event more than fourteen days of receiving notice from the city, is prohibited.

    F.   Recirculating Water Required for Water Fountains and Decorative Water Features. Operating a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water is prohibited after April 1, 2010.

    G.  Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not is prohibited, except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device. This subsection does not apply to any commercial car washing facility.

    H.  Drinking Water Served Upon Request Only. Eating or drinking establishments, including, but not limited to, a restaurant, hotel, café, cafeteria, bar, club or other public place where food or drinks are sold, served or offered for sale, are prohibited from providing drinking water to any person unless expressly requested.

    I.    Commercial Lodging Establishments Must Provide Option to Not Launder Linen Daily. Hotels, motels and other commercial lodging establishments must provide customers the option of not having towels and linen laundered daily. Commercial lodging establishments shall prominently display notice of this option in each bathroom using clear and easily understood language.

    J.    No Installation of Single Pass Cooling Systems. Installation of single pass cooling systems is prohibited in buildings requesting new water service.

    K.  No Installation of Nonrecirculating Commercial Car Wash and Laundry Systems. Installation of nonrecirculating water systems is prohibited in new commercial conveyor car wash and new commercial laundry systems.

    L.   Restaurants Required to Use Water Conserving Dish Wash Spray Valves. Food preparation establishments, such as restaurants or cafés, are prohibited from using nonwater conserving dish wash spray valves. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.050 Level 1 water supply shortage.
    A.  A Level 1 water supply shortage exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other water supply reductions, a water shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to ensure sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands. Upon the declaration by the city of a Level 1 water supply shortage condition, the city will implement the mandatory Level 1 conservation measures identified in this section. The type of event that may prompt the city to declare a Level 1 water supply shortage may include, among other factors, a finding that its wholesale water provider calls for extraordinary water conservation.

    B.   Additional Water Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Section 13.70.040, the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 1 water supply shortage:

    1.   Limits on Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to three days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

    2.   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks, or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within seventy-two hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

    3.   Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.060 Level 2 water supply shortage.
    A.  A Level 2 water supply shortage exists when the city determines, in its sole discretion, that due to drought or other supply reductions, a water supply shortage exists and a consumer demand reduction is necessary to ensure sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands. Upon the declaration by the city of a Level 2 water supply shortage condition, the city will implement the mandatory Level 2 conservation measures identified in this section.

    B.   Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 13.70.040 and 13.70.050, the following additional water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 2 water supply shortage:

    1.   Watering Days. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to two days per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. During the months of November through March, watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is limited to no more than one day per week on a schedule established and posted by the city. This provision does not apply to landscape irrigation zones that exclusively use very low flow drip type irrigation systems when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour. This provision also does not apply to watering or irrigating by use of hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or for very short periods of time for the express purpose of adjusting or repairing an irrigation system.

    2.   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within forty-eight hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

    3.   Limits on Filling Ornamental Lakes or Ponds. Filling or refilling ornamental lakes or ponds is prohibited, except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life, provided that such animals are of significant value and have been actively managed within the water feature prior to the declaration of a supply shortage level under this chapter.

    4.   Limits on Washing Vehicles. Using water to wash or clean a vehicle, including, but not limited to, any automobile, truck, van, bus, motorcycle, boat or trailer, whether motorized or not, is prohibited except by use of a hand-held bucket or similar container, a hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, by high pressure/low volume wash systems, or at a commercial car washing facility that utilizes a recirculating water system to capture or reuse water.

    5.   Limits on Filling Residential Swimming Pools and Spas. Refilling of more than one foot and initial filling of residential swimming pools or outdoor spas with potable water is prohibited.

    6.   Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers.

    D.  In addition to the above procedures during a Level 2 water supply shortage, the city may adopt the following procedures:

    1.   Water Allocations/Water Budget. The city will establish a water allocation for property served by the city using a method that does not penalize persons for the implementation of conservation methods of the installation of water saving devices. The city must provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement for the fee or charge or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for on-going water service.

    Following the effective date of the water allocation as established by the city, any person that uses water in excess of the allocation will be subject to a citation in accordance with Section 13.70.210. Any monetary penalty for excess water usage may be imposed for violation of this chapter.

    2.   Water Supply Shortage Rates. During a Level 2 water supply shortage condition, the city may increase water rates by an amount necessary, as determined by the city. The increase in water rates may vary from categories of customers.

    3.   Mandatory Percentage Use Reductions. During a Level 2 water supply shortage condition, all customers will be required to reduce water consumption by a percentage determined by the city. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.070 Level 3 water supply shortage—Emergency condition.
    A.  A Level 3 water supply shortage condition is also referred to as an “emergency” condition. A Level 3 condition exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency and notifies its residents and businesses that a significant reduction in consumer demand is necessary to ensure sufficient supplies will be available to meet anticipated demands. Upon the declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition, the city will implement the mandatory Level 3 conservation measures identified in this section.

    B.   A Level 3 water supply shortage emergency exists when the city declares a water shortage emergency condition pursuant to California Water Code Section 350 and notifies its residents and businesses that more than a thirty percent consumer demand reduction is required to ensure sufficient supplies for human consumption, sanitation and fire protection. The city must declare a water supply shortage emergency in the manner and on the grounds provided in California Water Code Section 350.

    C.   Additional Conservation Measures. In addition to the prohibited uses of water identified in Sections 13.70.040, 13.70.050, and 13.70.060 the following water conservation requirements apply during a declared Level 3 water supply shortage emergency:

    1.   No Watering or Irrigating. Watering or irrigating of lawn, landscape or other vegetated area with potable water is prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to the following categories of use unless the city has determined that recycled water is available and may be lawfully applied to the use:

    a.   Maintenance of vegetation, including trees and shrubs, that are watered using a hand-held bucket or similar container, hand-held hose equipped with a positive self-closing water shut-off nozzle or device, or a very low-flow drip type irrigation system when no emitter produces more than two gallons of water per hour subject to the hour restrictions in Section 13.70.040;

    b.   Maintenance of existing landscape necessary for fire protection;

    c.   Maintenance of existing landscape for soil erosion control;

    d.   Maintenance of plant materials identified to be rare or essential to the well being of rare animals;

    e.   Maintenance of landscape within active public parks and playing fields, day care center, school grounds, cemeteries, and golf course greens, provided that such irrigation does not exceed two days per week;

    f.    Public works projects and actively irrigated environmental mitigation projects.

    2.   Obligation to Fix Leaks, Breaks or Malfunctions. All leaks, breaks or other malfunctions in the water user’s plumbing or distribution system must be repaired within twenty-four hours of notification by the city unless other arrangements are made with the city.

    3.   No New Potable Water Service. Upon declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition, no new potable water service may be provided, no new temporary meters or permanent meters may be provided, and no statements of immediate ability to serve or provide potable water service (such as, will serve letters, certificates, or letters of availability) may be issued, except under the following circumstances:

    a.   A valid, unexpired building permit has been issued for the project; or

    b.   The project is necessary to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare;

    c.   The applicant provides substantial evidence of an enforceable commitment that water demands for the project will be offset prior to the provision of a new water meter(s) to the satisfaction of the city.

    This provision does not preclude the resetting or turn-on of meters to provide continuation of water service of the restoration of service that has been interrupted for a period of one year or less.

    d.   Discontinue Service. The city, in its sole discretion, may discontinue service to consumers who willfully violate provisions of this section.

    e.   Other Prohibited Uses. The city may implement other prohibited water uses as determined by the city, after notice to customers. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.080 Procedures for determination and notification of water supply shortage.
    A.  Declaration and Notification of Level 1 and 2 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of Level 1 and Level 2 water supply shortage conditions may be declared by resolution of the city adopted at a regular or special public meeting held in accordance with state law. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to Level 1 or Level 2 conditions shall take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it shall provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for ongoing water service. A water allocation shall be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice.

    B.   Declaration and Notification of Level 3 Water Supply Shortage. The existence of a Level 3 water supply shortage emergency condition may be declared in accordance with the procedures specified in Water Code Sections 351 and 352. The mandatory conservation requirements applicable to the Level 3 conditions shall take effect on the tenth day after the date the shortage level is declared. Within five days following the declaration of the shortage level, the city shall publish a copy of the resolution in a newspaper used for the publication of official notices. If the city establishes a water allocation, it shall provide notice of the allocation by including it in the regular billing statement or by any other mailing to the address to which the city customarily mails the billing statement for fees or charges for ongoing water service. A water allocation shall be effective on the fifth day following the date of mailing or at such later date as specified in the notice. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.090 Commercial car wash systems.
    Effective on January 1, 2011, all commercial conveyor car wash systems are required to have installed an operational recirculating water system, or must have secured a waiver of this requirement from the city. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.100 Large landscape areas—Rain sensors.
    Large landscape areas, such as parks, cemeteries, golf courses, school grounds and playing fields that use landscape irrigation systems to water or irrigate, must use landscape irrigation systems with rain sensors that automatically shut off such systems during periods of rain or irrigation timers, which automatically use information such as evapotranspiration sensors to set an efficient water use schedule. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.110 Construction purposes.
    Recycled or nonpotable water must be used for construction purposes when available. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.120 No new annexations.
    Upon the declaration of a Level 2 water supply shortage condition, the city will suspend consideration of annexations to its service area. This subsection does not apply to boundary corrections and annexations that will not result in any increased use of water. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.130 Limits on building permits.
    Upon the declaration of a Level 3 water supply shortage condition, the city will limit or withhold the issuance of building permits which require new or expanded water service, except to protect the public health, safety and welfare, or in cases which meet the city’s adopted conservation offset requirements. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.140 Water recycling required if alternative available.
    The use of potable water, other than recycled water, is prohibited for specified uses after the city has provided to the customer an analysis showing that recycled water is a cost-effective alternative to potable water for such uses and the customer has had a reasonable time, as determined by the city manager, to make the conversion to recycled water. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.150 Water recycling—New service.
    Prior to the connection of any new water service, an evaluation must be done by the city to determine whether recycled water exists to supply all or some of the water needed and recycled water must be utilized to the extent feasible. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.160 Water recycling plan.
    A.  The city manager must prepare a water recycling master plan that contains recommendations to increase the amount of recycled water used and shall report to the city council annually on progress towards implementing such recommendations.

    B.   Upon request of the city manager, city departments must prepare and submit quarterly reports on their water conservation efforts. The reports will be consolidated by the city manager and reported to the city council at a minimum of once a year.

    C.   The city may, by written request, require all commercial, residential and industrial customer using twenty-five thousand or more billing units per year to submit a water conservation plan and to submit quarterly progress reports on such plan. The conservation plan must include recommendations for increased water savings, including increased water recycling based on feasibility, and the reports must include progress to date on implementation of such recommendations. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.170 Water conserving plumbing standards.
    A.  On or after January 1, 2010, no structure shall be sold or transferred unless all existing plumbing fixtures in the structure are retrofitted exclusively with water-conserving plumbing fixtures.

    B.   On or after January 1, 2010, upon the establishment of new water service or a change in water service from one person to another nonfamily member, all existing plumbing fixtures are required to be retrofitted exclusively with water-conserving plumbing fixtures. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.180 Procedural requirements.
    The director of public works shall periodically review the provisions of this chapter and recommend necessary updates to the city attorney. The review of the provisions and preparation of resulting recommendations, if any, shall be performed, at a minimum, every two years following the first review, which shall be completed by December 31, 2010. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.190 Reporting mechanism—Hotline.
    The city must establish a method for residents to report violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.200 Hardship waiver.
    A.  Undue and Disproportionate Hardship. If, due to unique circumstances, a specific requirement of this chapter would result in undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water users, then the person may apply for a waiver to the requirements as provided in this section.

    B.   Written Finding. The waiver may be granted or conditionally granted only upon written finding of the existence of facts demonstrating an undue hardship to a person using water or to property upon which water is used, that is disproportionate to the impacts to water users generally or to similar property or classes of water use due to specific and unique circumstances of the user or the user’s property.

    1.   Application. Application for a waiver shall be on a form prescribed by the city and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount set by resolution of the city.

    2.   Supporting Documentation. The application shall be accompanied by photographs, maps, drawings, and other information provided in the application, supporting documents, or such additional information as may be requested, and on water use information for the property as shown by the records of the city or its agent, all of the following:

    a.   That the waiver does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other residents and businesses;

    b.   That because of special circumstances applicable to the property or its use, the strict application of this chapter would have a disproportionate impact on the property or use that exceeds the impacts to residents and businesses generally;

    c.   That the authorizing of such waiver will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent properties, and will not materially affect the ability of the city to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public interest; and

    d.   That the condition or situation of the subject property or the intended use of the property for which the waiver is sought is not common, recurrent or general in nature.

    3.   Approval Authority. The city manager or water authority board shall exercise approval authority and act upon any completed application no later than ten days after submittal and may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the waiver. The applicant requesting the waiver shall be promptly notified in writing of any action taken. Unless specified otherwise at the time a waiver is approved, the waiver applies to the subject property during the term of the mandatory water supply shortage condition.

    4.   Appeals to the City. An applicant may appeal a decision or condition of the city manager or water authority board on a waiver application to the city council within ten days of the decision upon written request for a hearing. The request shall state the grounds for appeal. At a public meeting, the city council shall act as the approval authority and review the appeal de novo by following the regular waiver procedure. The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

13.70.210 Penalties and violations.
    A.  Misdemeanor. Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars.

    B.   Civil Penalties. Any violation of this chapter may be subject to a civil penalty. Civil penalties for failure to comply with any provisions of the chapter shall be as follows:

    1.   First Violation. The city shall issue a written warning and deliver a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter by mail.

    2.   Second Violation. A second violation within the preceding twelve calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars.

    3.   Third Violation. A third violation within the preceding twelve calendar months is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars.

    C.   Water Flow Restrictor. In addition to any fines, the city may install a water flow restrictor device of approximately one gallon per minute capacity for service up to one and one-half inch size and comparatively sized restrictors for larger services after written notice of intent to install a flow restrictor for a minimum of forty-eight hours.

    D.  Termination of Service. In addition to any fines and the installation of a water flow restrictor, the city may disconnect and/or terminate a customer’s water service.

    E.   Cost of Flow Restrictor and Disconnecting Service. A person or entity that violates this chapter is responsible for payment of the city’s charges for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device and for disconnecting and/or reconnecting service per the city’s schedule of charges then in effect. The charge for installing and/or removing any flow restricting device shall be paid to the city before the device is removed. Nonpayment shall be subject to the same remedies as nonpayment of basic water rates.

    F.   Separate Offenses. Each day that a violation of this chapter occurs is a separate offense.

    G.  Notice and Hearing.

    1.   The city shall issue a notice of violation by mail or personal delivery at least ten days before taking enforcement action and said notice shall describe the action to be taken. A customer may appeal the notice of violation by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk no later than the close of business on the day before the date scheduled for enforcement action. Any notice of violation not timely appealed shall be final. Upon receipt of a timely appeal, a hearing on the appeal shall be scheduled in a timely manner, and the city shall mail written notice of the hearing to the customer at least ten days before the date of the said hearing.

    2.   Upon receiving a written notice of appeal, a hearing on the matter shall be held within thirty days the notice was received by the city before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. Upon hearing all of the evidence presented by the city and the appellant, the hearing officer shall prepare a written decision within thirty days of the hearing.

    3.   Pending receipt of a written appeal or pending a hearing pursuant to an appeal, the city may take appropriate steps to prevent the unauthorized use of water as appropriate to the nature and extent of the violations and the current declared water level condition. (Ord. 1056 § 1, 2009)

 

 

Chapter 13.90 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE
13.90.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is:

    A.  That this chapter be at least as effective in conserving water as the model ordinance adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 65595;

    B.   To assure beneficial, efficient, and responsible use of water resources for all users within the city of Pico Rivera;

    C.   To retain the land’s natural hydrological role and promote the infiltration of surface water into the groundwater;

    D.  To acknowledge that landscape water use accounts for more than sixty percent of all domestic water use in the city;

    E.   To recognize that landscapes enhance the aesthetic appearance of developments and communities;

    F.   To encourage the appropriate design, installation, maintenance, and management of landscapes so that water demand can be decreased, runoff can be retained, and flooding can be reduced without a decline in the quality or quantity of landscapes;

    G.  To preserve existing natural vegetation and the incorporation of native plants, plant communities, and ecosystems into landscape design, where possible;

    H.  To promote and encourage the use of low water use plants;

    I.    To minimize the use of cool season turf;

    J.    To promote the conservation of potable water by maximizing the use of recycled water and other water conserving technology for appropriate applications;

    K.  To promote public education about water conservation and efficient water management;

    L.   To reduce or eliminate water waste. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.020 Definitions.
    A.  “Administrator” means the department or person at the city who has the authority to approve a permit, plan check, and design review for a project.

    B.   “Amendments” means any material added to a soil to improve its physical properties, such as water retention, permeability, water infiltration, and drainage.

    C.   “Anti-drain check valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads when the system is off.

    D.  “Applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under this chapter or state law, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

    E.   “Application rate” means the depth of water applied to a given area, measured in inches per minute, or inches per hour, or gallons per hour.

    F.   “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

    G.  “Automatic rain shut-off feature” means a system of which a component automatically suspends the irrigation system event when it rains.

    H.  “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the potable water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

    I.    “Botanical gardens and arboretums” means a garden in which a variety of plants is grown for scientific and educational purposes.

    J.    “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited educational institution or professional trade organization.

    K.  “Control valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. It may also mean all of the sprinklers or emitters in a line controlled by the valve.

    L.   “Controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves or heads to set an irrigation schedule. A weather-based controller is a controller that uses evapotranspiration or weather data. A self-adjusting irrigation controller is a controller that uses sensor data (i.e., soil moisture sensor).

    M.  “Developer” means a landowner or owner’s agent responsible for the development of land. It does not include homeowners or landlords of single-family homes.

    N.  “Discretionary permit” means any permit requiring a decision making body to exercise judgment prior to its approval, conditional approval, or disapproval.

    O.  “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, and/or historic ecosystem.

    P.   “Estimated applied water use (EAWU)” means the portion of the estimated total water use that is derived from applied water. The landscape documentation package shall contain the formula and calculation. The estimated water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.

    Q.  “Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape.

    R.   “ET adjustment factor” or “ETAF” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. A combined plant mix with a site-wide average plant factor of 0.5 (indicating a moderate water need) and average irrigation efficiency of 0.71 produces an ET adjustment factor of (0.7) = (0.5/0.71), which is the standard of water use efficiency generally required by this chapter except that the ETAF for a special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0.

    S.   “Hardscape” means any durable material or feature installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this chapter.

    T.   “High water use plants” means turfs, annuals, container plantings, and other plants recognized in the Water Classification of Landscape Species document as available from the state of California as it currently exists or may be amended in the future.

    U.  “Hydrozone” means a section or zone of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

    V.  “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (i.e., inches per hour).

    W.  “Invasive species” means nonindigenous species that adversely affect the habitats they invade economically, environmentally, or ecologically.

    X.  “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule.

    Y.  “Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of amount applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The minimum irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.71.

    Z.   “Irrigation system” means the network of piping, valves, and irrigation heads.

    AA. “Landscape architect” means a person licensed to practice landscape architecture in this state pursuant to Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 5615) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code.

    BB. “Landscape concept plan” means the portion of a landscape documentation package that includes a design statement, irrigation notes, planting notes, the plant palette, and conforms with the requirements of this chapter.

    CC. “Landscape construction drawings” means the portion of a landscape documentation package that includes the irrigation plan, plant and soils plan, water management plan, and conforms with the requirements of this chapter.

    DD. “Landscape documentation package” or “documentation package” means the complete packet of documents required under this chapter to be submitted to the city. Documentation packages include the landscape concept plan and landscape construction drawings.

    EE. “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county or private water company that provides retail water service.

    FF. “Low head drainage” means drainage from a sprinkler that is caused by water flowing down an irrigation system from a higher level of elevation.

    GG. “Low water use plants” mean Mediterranean region and native trees, shrubs and groundcovers and other plants recognized as low-water-use by the Water Classification of Landscape Species document as available from the state of California as it currently exists or may be amended in the future.

    HH. “Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance.

    II. “Moderate water use plants” mean ornamental trees, shrubs, groundcovers, perennials, and other plants recognized as moderate-water-use by the Water Classification of Landscape Species document as available from the state of California as it currently exists or may be amended in the future.

    JJ. “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, or inorganic material such as pebbles, stones, gravel, decorative sand or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.

    KK. “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which an irrigation system of sprinklers is designed by the manufacturer to operate, usually indicated at the base of a sprinkler.

    LL. “Overspray” means the water that is delivered beyond the landscaped areas by the irrigation system onto pavements, walks, structures, or other non-landscaped areas.

    MM. “Planting plan” means a plan submitted with the construction drawings indicating a list and quantity of plants.

    NN. “Potable water” means water meant for human consumption that is treated to legal standards for human consumption.

    OO. “Pressure regulator” means a device used in sprinkler systems for radius and high-pressure control.

    PP. “Project net landscape area,” “landscaped area,” or “landscape project area” means all of the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other previous or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment.

    QQ. “Rain sensor” means a system component that detects rainfall and automatically overrides the irrigation system during rain events.

    RR. “Recycled water” means water which, as a result of treatment of waste, is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur and is therefore considered a valuable resource. Recycled water shall not be intended for human consumption.

    SS. “Rehabilitated landscapes” means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review and meets the requirements of this chapter.

    TT. “Runoff” means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area.

    UU. “SMART irrigation controller” means weather-based or soil moisture-based irrigation controller that monitors and uses information about the environmental conditions at a specific location and landscape to automatically adjust watering schedules.

    VV. “Soil management plan” means a plan submitted with the construction drawings indicating results from soil tests and recommended soil amendments.

    WW. “Soil test” means a test done by a soil test lab that indicates at minimum soil texture, water holding capacity, pH, and clay.

    XX. “Soil type” means the classification of soil based on the percentage of its composition of sand, silt, and clay.

    YY. “Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, where turf provides a playing surface.

    ZZ. “Sprinkler head” means a device that delivers water through a nozzle.

    AAA. “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

    BBB. “Submeter” means a separate meter that is located on the private side of the water system and is plumbed to measure all water that flows only through the irrigation system intended for landscaping. The meter is to be used to monitor irrigation water use for landscaping.

    CCC. “Turf” means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass or grass-like sedge with its roots, a groundcover surface of moved grass or grass-like sedge. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tail fescue are common cool-season turf. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, Carex pansa, and Buffalo grass are common warm-season turf.

    DDD. “Water efficient landscape worksheet” means a worksheet that calculates a site’s water budget.

    EEE. “Water feature” means any water applied to the landscape for nonirrigation, decorative purposes. Fountains, streams, ponds, lakes, and swimming pools are considered water features.

    FFF. “Water management plan” means a plan submitted with the construction drawings as part of the landscape documentation package.

    GGG.           “Water schedules” means a schedule of irrigation times throughout a given year.

    HHH.           “Water-conserving landscape design” means a landscape design developed to conserve water. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.030 Applicability.
    A.  All planting, irrigation, and landscape-related improvements required by this chapter shall apply to the following landscape projects:

    1.   New construction and rehabilitated landscapes for public agency projects and private development projects with a total project net landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review. A landscape area includes pools and other water features but excludes hardscape areas.

    2.   New construction and rehabilitated landscapes which are developer-installed residential projects with a total project net landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review. A landscape area includes pools and other water features but excludes hardscape areas.

    3.   New construction which are homeowner-installed residential projects with a total project net landscape area equal to or greater than five thousand square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review. A landscape area includes pools and other water features but excludes hardscape areas.

    4.   Existing landscapes that are one acre or more are limited to preparing a water efficient landscape worksheet pursuant to the specifications for existing landscapes in the landscape documentation package.

    5.   Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries shall prepare a water efficient landscape worksheet, landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule, and irrigation audit, survey and water use analysis. Existing cemeteries are limited to preparing a water efficient landscape worksheet according to the specifications for existing landscapes in the landscape documentation package.

    6.   Special landscaped areas, such areas dedicated to edible plants, irrigated with recycled water, or dedicated to active play, shall prepare a water efficient landscape worksheet and landscape documentation package according to the specifications for special landscaped areas.

    B.   This chapter does not apply to:

    1.   Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

    2.   Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

    3.   Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

    4.   Botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.040 Landscape design criteria.
    A landscape documentation package prepared by a licensed landscape architect shall include the following landscape design criteria:

    A.  Plant Selection and Grouping.

    1.   Any plant may be used in the landscape, providing the EAWU does not exceed the MAWA and that the plants must meet the specifications set forth in this subsection.

    2.   Plants which have similar water needs shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones.

    a.   Low and moderate water use plants can be mixed but the entire hydrozone will be classified as moderate water use for MAWA calculations.

    b.   High water use plants shall not be mixed with low or moderate water use plants.

    3.   Plants shall be selected appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climate, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. Protection and preservation of existing native species and natural areas is encouraged. The planting of appropriate trees is encouraged.

    4.   The Minimal Use of Turf.

    a.   Turf areas shall be used wisely in response to functional needs and shall not exceed the MAWA.

    b.   Where turf is installed, the use of warm season turf is strongly encouraged.

    c.   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length.

    5.   Fire prevention needs shall be addressed in areas that are fire prone. Design should be consistent with regulations from the fire department.

    6.   Invasive species of plants as listed by the California Invasive Plant Council should be avoided especially near parks, buffers, greenbelts, water bodies, and open spaces because of their potential to cause harm to sensitive areas.

    7.   Encourage the appropriate use of mulch within developed landscapes to retain moisture.

    a.   Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes greater than 3:1.

    b.   A minimum layer of two inches of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping groundcovers or areas where mulch is not advisable. The plans shall identify the type of mulch and application depth.

    B.   Water Features.

    1.   Recirculating water systems shall be used for decorative water features.

    2.   Where available, recycled water shall be used as the source for water fixtures (excluding swimming pools and spas).

    3.   The surface area of a water feature will be included in the MAWA calculation with the evaporation rate. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.050 Irrigation requirements.
    A.  All irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent runoff, over-spray, low head drainage and other similar conditions. Soil types and infiltration rates shall be considered when designing irrigation systems. Irrigation systems shall be designed, constructed, managed, and maintained to achieve as high an overall efficiency as possible.

    B.   Dedicated and separate landscape water meters shall be installed for all projects greater than five thousand square feet, except for single-family residences. Dedicated landscape water meters are highly recommended on landscape areas less than five thousand square feet to facilitate water management.

    C.   All irrigation systems shall include:

    1.   A SMART irrigation controller, or other equivalent technology which automatically adjusts the frequency and/or duration of irrigation events in response to changing weather conditions, shall be required. The planting areas shall be grouped and irrigated in relation to hydrozones based on similarity of water requirements;

    2.   Anti-drain check valves shall be installed to prevent low-head drainage in sprinkler heads;

    3.   A pressure regulator when the static pressure exceeds the maximum recommended operating pressure of the irrigation system;

    4.   A rain sensor with an automatic rain shut-off feature shall be required;

    5.   A backflow prevention device;

    6.   Connection to reclaimed water system if subject property is located within one hundred fifty feet of a public reclaimed water distribution system, and subject to appropriate health standards;

    7.   Installation that conforms to the current Uniform Plumbing Code;

    8.   Irrigation shall comply with the city’s water conservation regulations in Chapter 13.70 of this code. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.060 Soil and grading requirements.
    A.  Soil testing shall be performed after mass grading if applicable, prior to landscape installation to ensure the selection of appropriate plant material that is suitable for the site, and reported in a soil management plan. The soil management plan shall include:

    1.   Determination of soil texture, indicating the available water holding capacity;

    2.   An approximate soil infiltration rate measure or derived from soil texture/infiltration rate tables. A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate;

    3.   Measure of pH and total soluble salts;

    4.   Recommended amendments.

    B.   Grading on-site shall be designed to minimize unnecessary soil compaction, erosion and water waste. Grading plans must satisfy all other applicable laws related to grading and be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

    C.   Where slopes exceed ten percent, a grading plan drawn at the same scale as the planting plan that accurately and clearly identifies finished grades, drainage patterns, pad elevations, spot elevations, and stormwater retention improvements. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.070 Submittal requirements.
    Applicants subject to the requirements of this chapter shall submit a complete landscape documentation package to the administrator. The package may be submitted in two parts: a landscape concept plan, which is submitted with an application for a zoning approval or similar approval; and landscape construction drawings, submitted with the plan check or building permit application. All applications and plans shall conform to the design criteria, irrigation, soils and grading requirements, recycled water requirements and water budget requirements set forth in this chapter.

    A.  The landscape concept plan shall include:

    1.   Design statement, irrigation notes, planting notes, and a conceptual plant palette identification of proposed hydrozones;

    2.   MAWA circulation for the landscape project area (including water features);

    3.   ETWU calculation for the landscape project area;

    4.   Hydrozone information.

    B.   The landscape construction drawings shall include:

    1.   Compliance with the design standards and specifications contained in this chapter;

    2.   Compliance with the landscape concept plan. If the construction drawings differ from the landscape concept plan, the applicant may be required to submit a revised landscape concept plan;

    3.   An irrigation plan. The irrigation plan shall be a separate document from the planting plan. The irrigation plan shall be prepared pursuant to the requirements in this chapter and include pressure calculations and the location, installation details, and specifications of control valves, irrigation heads, piping, irrigation controllers, and power supply;

    4.   A planting plan and soils plan which shall include, but not be limited to:

    a.   A description of any existing plant material to be retained or removed,

    b.   A plan showing the planting areas and hydrozones, plant spacing, plant location, and size, natural features, water features and all paved areas,

    c.   A legend listing the common and botanical plant names and total quantities by container size and species,

    d.   A description of the seed mixes with application rates and relevant germination specifications,

    e.   Soil management plan, including the soil test results and recommendations,

    f.    The grading plan shall be submitted for reference;

    5.   A water management plan which shall include, but not be limited to:

    a.   An introduction and statement of site conditions as described in this section or in the landscape concept plan,

    b.   Identification of the party or parties responsible for implementation of the water management plan,

    c.   The anticipated water requirements in inches per year, and water budget for the various hydrozones identified in the landscape concept plan to include calculations demonstrating an overall water budget that requires no more irrigation than the 0.7 of the ET adjustment factor,

    d.   A description of the water delivery systems, including the type of irrigation system to be used, water conservation methods to be applied, and precipitation rates for each hydrozone,

    e    Season irrigation water schedules or procedures for programming of proposed SMART controllers,

    f.    A maintenance plan for the ongoing operation and maintenance of the irrigation system,

    g.   All applications for model homes shall include the nature of public information documents and signage that will be placed at model homes describing water conservation principles used in the landscaping for the model home.

    C.   An applicant submitting a landscape documentation project shall include with the documentation package any fees established by the city to cover the city’s cost to review any submitted documents. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.080 Compliance and enforcement.
    The community and economic development department shall have the duty and authority to administer the provisions of this chapter until such time the certificate of completion is completed. The public works department shall work with the community and economic development department to ensure compliance with other provisions in this code and with state law regarding the conservation of water. The public works department shall also have the duty and authority to administer the provisions of this chapter for any property that has had its certificate of completion certified.

    A.  A project must proceed with the following review and approval process:

    1.   Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a complete landscape documentation package prepared by an independent licensed landscape architect shall be submitted to the administrator for review and approval. The licensed landscape architect shall ensure that all components of the package adhere to the requirements of this chapter. Any documentation packages submitted without the signature of a licensed landscape architect shall not be accepted for review.

    2.   Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final inspection for a project subject to this chapter, a certificate of completion shall be submitted to the administrator certifying that the landscaping has been completed in accordance with the approved planting and irrigation plans for the project. The certificate of completion shall be signed by a licensed landscape architect and shall indicate the following:

    a.   The landscaping has been installed in conformance with the approved planting and irrigation plans;

    b.   The SMART irrigation controller has been set according to the irrigation schedule;

    c.   The irrigation system has been adjusted to maximize irrigation efficiency and eliminate over-spray and run-off; and

    d.   A copy of the irrigation schedule has been given to the property owner.

    3.   Upon receipt of a certificate of completion, the city shall either approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city shall not be obligated to issue an occupancy permit and will provide information to the project applicant regarding necessary corrections, appeal, or other assistance.

    4.   Upon notice of the applicant, the administrator shall have the right to enter the project site to conduct inspections for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, before, during, and immediately after installation of the landscaping.

    5.   A copy of the completed landscape documentation package shall be given to the planning division and public works department. If the property is found to be in excess of their established MAWA, the property shall be subject to an irrigation audit.

    B.   Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the city. The city public works department may require mandatory irrigation audits at the property owners’ expense to demonstrate that the landscaping conforms to the MAWA.

    C.   An irrigation audit shall proceed as follows:

    1.   The applicant shall submit an irrigation audit to the city upon the public works department’s request pursuant to this chapter.

    2.   In the event that the applicant does not submit an irrigation audit to the city within sixty days after the public works department has requested an irrigation audit be submitted, the public works department may conduct an irrigation audit and charge the property owner any and all fees associated with the irrigation audit.

    D.  In addition to any other remedies provided for in the code, any violation of this chapter and failure to comply with the terms of the landscape documentation package and certificate of completion submitted to the city pursuant to this code may be enforced by a civil action brought by the city.

    1.   In any such action, the city may seek, and the court may grant, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies:

    a.   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;

    b.   An assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation which led to the establishment of the violation and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this chapter;

    c.   Any other costs incurred in enforcing the provisions of this chapter;

    d.   Any other action the city deems appropriate to protect the general welfare and the city’s water supplies, and to reduce water consumption in accordance with this chapter and with the declared policies and law of the state.

    2.   Assessments under this section shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with implementing or enforcing this chapter.

    E.   In addition to any other remedies provided for in this chapter, any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or a term in County Jail not to exceed six months. A violation may also be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars. Any person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.090 Landscape and irrigation maintenance.
    Landscape and irrigation improvements required by this chapter shall be continually maintained in optimal conditions at all times. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to:

    A.  Fertilizing;

    B.   Irrigation head adjustments, repairs and replacements, per original approval;

    C.   Maintaining adequate water pressure;

    D.  Pruning and weeding all landscaping within the property;

    E.   Removing all dead plant material;

    F.   Replacing all dead plant material, per original approval;

    G.  Replenishing mulch;

    H.  Resetting, repairing or replacing the SMART automatic controller, per original approval;

    I.    Valve adjustments, repairs and replacements, per original approval. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.100 Recycled water.
    A.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems (i.e., dual distribution systems) shall be required to allow for the current and future use of recycled water, unless a written exemption by the city’s public works department has been granted stating that recycled water will not be available in the foreseeable future.

    B.   Irrigation systems shall make use of recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the public works department stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available in the foreseeable future or where the physical constraints or functional difficulties would make the use of recycled water irrigation systems impracticable.

    C.   The public works department may grant an exemption from the use of recycled water if the use of recycled water would not meet all relevant public health codes and standards, if the use of recycled water would not be available in the foreseeable future through the local water purveyor, or where the physical constraints or functional difficulties would make the use of recycled water systems impracticable.

    D.  The recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed in accordance with all local agency and state codes. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.110 Stormwater management.
    A.  Stormwater management combines practices to minimize runoff and water waste to recharge groundwater, and to improve water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape, irrigation, and grading design plans to minimize runoff, and increase retention and infiltration are highly recommended onsite.

    B.   Project applicants shall refer to the city or regional water quality control board for information addressing stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.120 Existing landscapes.
    A.  Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention, as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor and as may be mutually agreed by the city.

    The city and/or the regional or local water purveyor may administer programs such as irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys and/or irrigation audits, tiered water rate structures, water budgeting by parcel, or other approaches to achieve landscape water use efficiency community-wide to a level equivalent to or less than would be achieved by applying a MAWA calculated with an ETAF of 0.8 to all landscaped areas in the city over one acre in size.

    B.   The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, including apartments, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.130 Recovery of costs.
    A.  The city manager or designee shall serve an invoice for costs upon the person or responsible person who is subject to a notice of a violation, a cease and desist order, or an administrative compliance order. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the city. If any person or responsible person fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance to the provisions in this chapter, then the city may institute collection proceedings. The invoice for costs may include reasonable attorneys’ fees.

    The city shall impose any other penalties or regulatory fees, as fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council, for a violation or enforcement of this chapter.

    B.   In addition to the costs which may be recovered pursuant to the code, and in order to recover the costs of the water efficient landscape regulatory program set forth in this chapter, the city council may from time to time, fix and impose by resolution fees and charges. The fees and charges may include, but are not limited to, fees and charges for:

    1.   Any visits of any enforcement officer, or any other city staff or authorized representative of the city for time incurred for inspections of the property;

    2.   Any monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures pertaining to enforcement of this chapter;

    3.   Any audits conducted by the city pursuant to this chapter;

    4.   Enforcing compliance with any term or provision of this chapter;

    5.   Any other necessary and appropriate fees and charges to recover the cost of providing the city’s water efficient landscape regulatory program. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

 

13.90.140 Appeals.
    A.  The applicant or any affected person may appeal the final decision of staff regarding any approvals required under this chapter by filing a written notice of appeal to the city council within ten business days after the date of the final decision in writing.

    B.   An appeal, established by the city, shall be required for each appeal under this section. No appeal shall be placed on the agenda of any meeting of the city council until such fee has been paid. (Ord. 1061 § 1, 2010)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 TECHNICAL BUILDING CODES
Chapter 15.08 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 15.12 HOUSING CODE
Chapter 15.16 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
Chapter 15.24 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 15.28 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 15.32 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 15.34 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.35 ENERGY CODE
Chapter 15.37 HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.38 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.40 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
Chapter 15.42 REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.44 FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.48 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.50 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 15.52 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Chapter 15.54 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS

Chapter 15.04 TECHNICAL BUILDING CODES
15.04.010 Adoption of specific codes—Copies on file.
    A.  For the purpose of prescribing regulations for erecting, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment use, height, and area of buildings and structures, the following construction codes subject to the modifications set forth in this chapter, are hereby adopted:

    1.   California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition;

    2.   California Building Code, 2019 Edition, including Volumes 1 and 2, and Appendix I, based on the 2018 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council;

    3.   California Residential Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council;

    4.   California Green Building Standards Code, 2019 Edition;

    5.   California Plumbing Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials;

    6.   California Mechanical Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials;

    7.   California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2017 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association;

    8.   California Historical Building Code, 2019 Edition, as published and adopted by the Building Standards Commission;

    9.   California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, based on the 2018 International Existing Building Code as published by the International Code Council;

    10. California Energy Code, 2019 Edition, as published and adopted by the Building Standards Commission;

    11. California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition, as published and adopted by the Building Standards Commission;

    12. Uniform Code For The Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition;

    13. Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition;

    14. Los Angeles County Fire Code (Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code), amending the 2019 California Fire Code as published and adopted by the Building Standards Commission.

    B.   In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d), one copy of an up to date version of said codes will remain on file for use and examination by the public in the office of the building official. (Ord. 1141 § 2, 2020)

 

15.04.020 Definition of terms.
    Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in this Title or in any of the codes adopted by reference in this Title, unless the context directs otherwise, such names or terms shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section, as follows:

    A.  “Building division” means the public works department, building division of the city of Pico Rivera; 

    B.   “Building official” means the person serving in the position of building official within the public works department of the city of Pico Rivera or designee;   

    C.   “Health office” means the Los Angeles County department of health services. (Ord. 1141 § 2, 2020)

 

15.04.030 Resolution of conflicts in application.
    In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between any provision contained in the California Codes and any amendment thereto or addition thereto contained in this title, the amendment or addition thereto shall control. (Ord. 1141 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 15.08 BUILDING CODE
15.08.010 Documents—Adopted by reference.
    A.  The city council of the city of Pico Rivera hereby adopts the 2019 Edition of the California Building Code including Appendix I, based on the 2018 Edition of the International Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, as Chapter 15.08 of Title 15 of this code, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended as set forth in this chapter. Said code is adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.

    B.   The purpose of these codes is to prescribe regulations for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures. (Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

     State law references: Authority to regulate construction, Government Code Section 38660; California Building Standards Law, Government Code Section 18901 et seq.

 

15.08.020 Chapter 1—General code provisions.
    Chapter 1, Division II of the 2019 California Building Code is hereby deleted and a new Chapter 1, Administration is added to read as follows:

 

Section 101

General

Section 102

Applicability

Section 103

Building division

Section 104

Duties and powers of building official

Section 105

Permits

Section 106

Construction documents

Section 107

Temporary structures and uses

Section 108

Permit fees

Section 109

Inspections

Section 110

Certificate of occupancy

Section 111

Service utilities

Section 112

Board of appeals

Section 113

Violations and penalties

Section 114

Stop work order

Section 115

Unsafe structures and equipment

Section 116

Construction toilets

Section 117

Safety assessment placards

 

SECTION 101

GENERAL

 

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the California Building Code of the State of California, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures.

 

101.2.1 Appendices. Provisions in the appendices shall not apply unless specifically adopted.

 

101.3 Intent. The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, energy conservation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations.

 

101.4 Referenced codes. The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.7 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.

 

101.4.1 Electrical. The provisions of the California Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto.

 

101.4.2 Gas. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories.

 

101.4.3 Mechanical. The provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and for appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air-conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems.

 

101.4.4 Plumbing. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system. The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to private sewage disposal systems.

 

101.4.5 Property maintenance. The provisions of the Uniform Housing Code shall apply to existing structures and premises; equipment and facilities; light, ventilation, space heating, sanitation, life and fire safety hazards; responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants; and occupancy of existing premises and structures.

101.4.6 Fire prevention. The provisions of the California Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling or use of structures, materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation.

 

101.4.7 Energy. The provisions of the California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6 shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of buildings for energy efficiency.

 

SECTION 102

APPLICABILITY

 

102.1 General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.

 

102.2 Other laws. The provisions of this code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.

 

102.3 Application of references. References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically identified by number shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or provision of this code.

 

102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

 

102.5 Partial invalidity. In the event that any part or provision of this code is held to be illegal or void, this shall not have the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.

 

102.6 Existing structures. The legal occupancy of any structure existing on the date of adoption of this code shall be permitted to continue without change, except as is specifically covered in this code, the California Building Code, Uniform Housing Code or the California Fire Code, or as is deemed necessary by the building official for the general safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.

 

 

SECTION 103

BUILDING DIVISION

 

103.1 Creation of enforcement agency. The Building Division is hereby created and the official in charge thereof shall be known as the building official or a duly authorized representative.

 

103.2 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, the related technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as delegated by the building official.

 

SECTION 104

DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL

 

104.1 General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this code. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this code and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.

 

104.2 Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and issue permits for the erection, and alteration, demolition and moving of buildings and structures, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this code.

 

104.3 Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.

 

104.4 Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The building official is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.

 

104.5 Identification. The building official shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this code.

 

104.6 Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this code or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this code which makes the structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this code, provided that if such structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. The building official shall obtain an inspection warrant and may be accompanied by a sheriff.

 

104.7 Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of public records.

 

104.8 Liability. The building official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this code or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and is hereby relieved from personal liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building official or any subordinate shall not be liable for cost in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code.

 

104.9 Approved materials and equipment. Materials, equipment and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.

 

104.9.1 Used materials and equipment. The use of used materials which meet the requirements of this code for new materials is permitted. Used equipment and devices shall not be reused unless approved by the building official.

 

104.10 Modifications. Wherever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the building official shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, upon application of the owner or owner’s representative, provided the building official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health, accessibility, life and fire safety, or structural requirements. The details of action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the department of building safety.

 

104.11 Alternative materials, design and methods of construction and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material, design or method of construction shall be approved where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.

 

104.11.1 Evaluation reports. Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or assemblies not specifically provided for in this code, shall consist of valid evaluation reports from approved sources.

 

104.11.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports of such tests shall be retained by the building official for the period required for retention of public records.

 

SECTION 105

PERMITS

 

105.1 Required. Any owner or authorized agent who intends to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit.

 

Exception: Electrical maintenance permits may be obtained on an annual basis subject to compliance with the following:

1.     Any person, firm or corporation regularly employing one or more qualified maintenance electricians and possessing a valid annual electrical maintenance permit for the installation, alteration and maintenance of electrical equipment in or on buildings or premises owned or occupied by the permittee, may make application and obtain an annual maintenance permit. The application for this permit shall be made in writing to the Building Official and shall contain a description of the premises on which the work is to be done under the permit. Work authorized by an electrical maintenance permit shall be limited to installations, alterations, extensions and maintenance in or on existing buildings.

2.     Within not more than fifteen (15) days following the end of each calendar month, the person, firm or corporation to which an annual permit is issued shall transmit to the Building Official a monthly report of all electrical work which was done for the preceding month and shall obtain a permit for all such work and pay the fees in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by the City Council resolution except the charge for issuance of the permit.

3.     The person, firm or corporation to whom an annual maintenance permit is issued shall keep a record of all electrical equipment installed under said permit and the Building Official shall have access to such records.

4.     A permit granted to one person, firm or corporation shall not authorize any other person, firm or corporation, except an employee of the permittee, to do any electric wiring.

5.     A fee shall be paid to the Building Official in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution, for each annual maintenance electrical permit at the time such permit is issued. Fees for all the work installed under such permit shall be paid at the time of submitting the monthly report.

 

Every person applying for qualification as maintenance electrician shall pay the Building Official in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution, for examination and qualification, and successfully pass an examination by the Building Official, relative to electrical work. In lieu of examination, possession of a State Electrical Contractor’s License or proof of qualification by another governmental jurisdiction acceptable to the Building Official may be considered as meeting the requirements of this Section. Waiver of examination shall not be considered a waiver of any fee required by this Section. Each annual maintenance electrician permit shall expire on December 31st of each year and shall be renewed within thirty (30) days thereafter upon payment of an annual renewal fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Unless otherwise exempted by this Code, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted items.

 

Building Permits shall not be required for the following:

 

Building:

1.     One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (complying with zoning consistency review and fee).

2.     Wooden or chain link fences not over 6 feet high and masonry garden walls less than 3 feet high. (Planning approval is required.)

3.     Oil derricks.

4.     Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III A liquids.

5.     Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18 925 L) and the ratio of height to diameter does not exceed 2:1.

6.     Sidewalks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above adjacent grade, and not over any basement or story below and not part of an accessible route.

7.     Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work.

8.     Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. (Other Dept. approvals are required, including a temporary use permit.)

9.     Prefabricated swimming pool accessory to a Group R-3 occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely above ground.

10    Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural purposes, not including service systems.

11.   Treehouses, swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached one- and two-family dwellings.

12.   Window awnings supported by an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support of Groups R-3 and U occupancies.

13.   Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and partitions not over 5 feet 9 inches (1,753 mm) in height.

 

Electrical:

1.     Repairs and maintenance: Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles.

2.     Radio and television transmitting stations: The provisions of this code shall not apply to electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but do apply to equipment and wiring for a power supply and the installations of towers and antennas.

3.     Temporary testing systems: A permit shall not be required for the installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus.

4.     Low Voltage Systems: Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 1,200 watts of energy.

 

Gas:

1.     Portable heating appliance.

2.     Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe.

 

Mechanical:

1.     Portable heating appliance.

2.     Portable ventilation equipment.

3.     Portable cooling unit.

4.     Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code.

5.     Replacement of any part that does not alter its approval or make it unsafe.

6.     Portable evaporative cooler.

 

Plumbing:

1.     The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe, provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drain pipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with the new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code.

2.     The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

 

105.2.1 Emergency repairs. Where equipment replacements and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit application shall be submitted within the next working business day to the building official.

 

105.2.2 Repairs. Application or notice to the building official is not required for ordinary repairs to structures, replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.

 

105.2.3 Public service agencies. A permit shall not be required for the installation, alteration or repair of generation, transmission, distribution or metering or other related equipment that is under the ownership and control of public service agencies by established right.

 

105.3 Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of building safety for that purpose. Such application shall:

 

1.     Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made.

2.     Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by legal description, street address or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work.

3.     Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended.

4.     Be accompanied by construction documents and other information as required in Section 106.

5.     State the valuation of the proposed work.

6.     Be signed by the applicant, or the applicant’s authorized agent.

7.     Give such other data and information as required by the building official.

 

105.3.1 Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the construction documents do not conform to the requirements of pertinent laws, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor.

 

No building permit or other similar applicable permit bearing on property development or use including additions, modifications, revisions or parking lots shall be issued unless and until the Public Works Director, Zoning Administrator or their designated representatives have reviewed and found same to be in compliance with all applicable Code provisions and/or entitlements.

 

If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this code and laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and the approval as to compliance with all applicable Code provisions and/or entitlements has been secured from the Public Works Director and the Zoning Administrator or their designated representative, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.

 

105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned 180 days after the date of filing, unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

105.4 Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this code or of any other ordinance of the jurisdiction. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. The issuance of a permit based on construction documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a structure where in violation of this code or of any other ordinances of this jurisdiction.

 

105.5 Expiration. Whenever the Building Official determines by inspection that work on any building or structure for which a permit has been issued and the work started thereon has been suspended for a period of 180 days or more, the owner of the property upon which such structure is located or other person or agent in control of said property upon receipt of notice in writing from the Building Division to do so shall within ten (10) days from the date of such written notice obtain a new permit to complete the required work and diligently pursue the work to completion or shall remove or demolish the buildings or structure within one hundred twenty (120) days from date of the written notice. Should a new permit wish to be obtained after a permit has expired, full fees would be required.

 

105.6 Liens to be discharge. No permit shall be issued to any person or corporation under the provisions of this Chapter in respect to any property where the cost of any building repair or abatement has been confirmed by the Board of Appeals and a lien therefor has been recorded unless and until the amount of said lien with interest, has been paid in full.

 

105.7 Surrender of permit. If no portion of the work or construction covered by a permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this Code has been commenced, the person to whom such permit has been issued may deliver such permit to the Building Official with a request that such permit be canceled. The Building Official shall thereupon stamp, or write on the face of such permit the words, “Canceled at the request of the Permittee.” Thereupon such permit shall be null and void and of no effect.

 

105.8 Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this code wherever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

 

105.9 Placement of permit. The building permit or copy shall be kept on the site of the work until the completion of the project.

 

SECTION 106

CONSTRUCTION DOCUMENTS

 

106.1 Submittal documents. Construction documents, statement of special inspections and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets with each permit application. The construction documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be constructed. Where special conditions exist, the building official is authorized to require additional construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional.

 

Exception: The building official is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that review of construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.

 

106.1.1 Information on construction documents. Construction documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this code and relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, as determined by the building official.

 

106.1.1.1 Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this code and the construction documents and shall be approved prior to the start of system installation. Shop drawings shall contain all information as required by the referenced installation standards in Chapter 9.

 

106.1.2 Means of egress. The construction documents shall show in sufficient detail the location, construction, size and character of all portions of the means of egress in compliance with the provisions of this code. In other than occupancies in Groups R-2, R-3, and I-1, the construction documents shall designate the number of occupants to be accommodated on every floor, and in all rooms and spaces.

 

106.1.3 Exterior wall envelope. Construction documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this code. The construction documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves or parapets, means of drainage, water-resistive membrane and details around openings.

 

The construction documents shall include manufacturer’s installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system which was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used.

 

106.2 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of new construction, as well as any known easements on the site, and existing distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades and, as applicable, flood hazard areas, floodways, and design flood elevations; and it shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted.

 

106.3 Examination of documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction documents and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of this code and other pertinent laws or ordinances.

 

106.3.1 Approval of construction documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as “Reviewed for Code Compliance.” One set of construction documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly authorized representative.

 

106.3.2 Previous approvals. This code shall not require changes in the construction documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been heretofore issued or otherwise lawfully authorized, and the construction of which has been pursued in good faith within 180 days after the effective date of this code and has not been abandoned.

 

106.3.3 Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this code. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder’s own risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted.

 

106.3.4 Design professional in responsible charge.

 

106.3.4.1 General. When it is required that documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The building official shall be notified in writing by the owner if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.

 

The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.

 

Where structural observation is required by Section 1704, the statement of special inspections shall name the individual or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur (see also duties specified in Section 1704).

 

106.3.4.2 Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period.

 

Deferral of any submittal items shall have the prior approval of the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction documents for review by the building official.

 

Documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and been found to be in general conformance to the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the design and submittal documents have been approved by the building official.

 

106.4 Amended construction documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction documents shall be resubmitted for approval as an amended set of construction documents.

 

106.5 Number of construction documents. One set of approved construction documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than 180 days from date of completion of the permitted work, or as required by state or local laws.

 

SECTION 107

TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES

 

107.1 General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than 180 days. The building official is authorized to grant extensions for demonstrated cause.

 

107.2 Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this code as necessary to ensure public health, safety and general welfare.

 

107.3 Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the California Electrical Code.

 

107.4 Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued.

 

SECTION 108

PERMIT FEES

 

108.1 General. A fee for each required permit shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

108.2. Plan review fees and expiration. When the valuation of the proposed construction exceeds $500.00 and a plan is ready to be submitted by Subsection 105.3, a plan-checking fee, in an amount set by City Council resolution shall be paid to the City at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. When submittal documents are incomplete or changes so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items, an additional fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

108.3. Work without permits—Investigation fee. An investigation fee in addition to the permit fee shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. This fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code nor from any penalties prescribed by law.

 

For the purpose of this Section a sanitary plumbing outlet on or to which a plumbing fixture or appliance may be set or attached shall be construed to be a fixture. Fees for reconnection and retest of existing plumbing systems in relocated buildings shall be based on the number of plumbing fixtures, gas systems, water heater, etc., involved.

 

When interceptor traps or house trailer site traps are installed at the same time as a building sewer on any lot, no sewer permit shall be required for the connection of any such trap to any appropriate inlet fitting provided in the building sewer by the permittee constructing such sewer.

 

When a permit has been obtained to connect to existing buildings or existing work to the public sewer or to connect to a new private disposal facility, backfilling or private sewage disposal facilities abandoned consequent to such connection is included in the building sewer permit.

 

108.4. Refunds. Refunds shall be paid in accordance with the refund schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

108.5. Certificate of occupancy fee. A fee for each Certificate of Occupancy or Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council Resolution.

 

SECTION 109

INSPECTIONS

 

109.1 General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

109.2 Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine or cause to be examined buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed.

 

109.3 Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth in Sections 109.3.1 through 109.3.10.

 

109.3.1 Footing and foundation inspection. Footing and foundation inspections shall be made after excavations for footings are complete and any required reinforcing steel is in place. For concrete foundations, any required forms shall be in place prior to inspection. Materials for the foundation shall be on the job, except where concrete is ready mixed in accordance with ASTM C 94, the concrete need not be on the job.

 

109.3.2 Concrete slab and under-floor inspection. Concrete slab and under-floor inspections shall be made after in-slab or under-floor reinforcing steel and building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is placed or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

 

109.3.3 Lowest floor elevation. In flood hazard areas, upon placement of the lowest floor, including the basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the elevation certification required in Section 1612.4 shall be submitted to the building official.

 

109.3.4 Frame inspection. Framing inspections shall be made after the roof deck or sheathing, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and pipes, chimneys and vents to be concealed are complete and the rough electrical, plumbing, heating wires, pipes and ducts are approved.

 

109.3.5 Lath and gypsum board inspection. Lath and gypsum board inspections shall be made after lathing and gypsum board, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or gypsum board joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

 

Exception: Gypsum board that is not part of a fire-resistance-rated assembly or a shear assembly.

 

109.3.6 Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved.

 

109.3.7 Energy efficiency inspections. Inspections shall be made to determine compliance with the California Energy Code and shall include, but not be limited to, inspections for: envelope insulation R and U values, fenestration U value, duct system R value, and HVAC and water-heating equipment efficiency.

 

109.3.8 Other inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and other laws that are enforced by the department of building safety.

 

109.3.9 Special inspections. For special inspections, see Section 1704.

 

109.3.10 Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after all work required by the building permit is completed.

 

109.4 Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability.

 

109.5 Inspection requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the building permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and means for inspections of such work that are required by this code.

 

109.6 Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed, or notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the same fails to comply with this code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official.

 

SECTION 110

CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY

 

110.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied and no change in the existing occupancy classification or change of business ownership or ownership of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made or until the building official has inspected and issued a certificate of occupancy therefor as provided herein.

 

Exception No. 1: Group R, Division 3 and Group U Occupancies.

 

Exception No. 2: Commercial Office Space sublet within an existing office space, approved by a Certificate of Occupancy is exempt from building inspection.

 

Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval or a violation of the provisions of this code or of other ordinances of the jurisdiction. Certificates presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other ordinances of the jurisdiction shall not be valid.

 

110.2 Certificate issued. After the building official inspects the building or structure and finds no violations of the provisions of this code or other laws that are enforced by the city, and all work has been completed if a permit was issued, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy that contains the following:

 

1.     The building permit number.

2.     The address of the structure.

3.     The name and address of the owner.

4.     A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued.

5.     A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this code for the occupancy and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

6.     The name of the building official.

7.     The edition of the code under which the permit was issued.

8.     The use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.

9.     The type of construction as defined in Chapter 6.

10.   The design occupant load.

11.   If an automatic sprinkler system is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required.

12.   Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit.

 

110.3 Temporary occupancy. The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy before the completion of the entire work covered by the permit, provided that such portion or portions shall be occupied safely. The building official shall set a time period during which the temporary certificate of occupancy is valid.

 

In the event the building is not completed and ready for final inspection in the time prescribed by the Building Official, the building shall be vacated and the utilities disconnected until such time as the building is completed and final inspection is made and a Certificate of Occupancy is issued.

 

110.4 Revocation. The building official is authorized to, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy or completion issued under the provisions of this code wherever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this code.

 

SECTION 111

SERVICE UTILITIES

 

111.1 Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this code for which a permit is required, until released by the building official.

 

There shall be no clearance for connection of gas or electrical utilities until final building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical inspections have been made and approval has been first obtained from the Building Official, except as provided for in Subsection 110.3 for a temporary Certificate of Occupancy.

 

111.2 Temporary connection. The building official shall have the authority to authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power.

 

111.3 Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this code and the codes referenced in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and wherever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter.

 

SECTION 112

BOARD OF APPEALS

 

112.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a board of appeals. The board of appeals shall be appointed by the governing body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business.

 

112.2 Limitations on authority. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive requirements of this code.

 

112.3 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to building construction and are not employees of the jurisdiction.

 

112.4 Applications, fees and findings. Any person appealing the decision of the Building Official shall file with the Building Official a written application accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council Resolution at any time not more than 20 days after the decision of the Building Official.

 

The application shall set forth and include any information as the Building Official may require.

 

Upon the filing of a verified application, the Building Official shall transmit said application forthwith to the Board of Appeals, and such board shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony, from and on behalf of the applicant, and shall render their findings and decisions on the matter in writing to the applicant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official within 20 days after the conclusion of its proceedings, the Building Official shall make all findings and decisions freely accessible to the public.

 

SECTION 113

VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

 

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, relocate, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

 

A violation of any provision of this code, or of any permit, approved plans and specifications, or any amendment thereto, is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of the code occurs or continues, constitutes a new and additional separate offense.

 

The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be permit for, or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects, constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

 

SECTION 114

STOP WORK ORDER

 

114.1 Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this code being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this code or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order.

 

114.2 Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.

 

114.3 Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law.

 

SECTION 115

UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT

 

115.1 Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, unsanitary or deficient because of inadequate means of egress facilities, inadequate light and ventilation, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or that involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this section. A vacant structure that is not secured against entry shall be deemed unsafe.

 

115.2 Record. The building official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition. The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the unsafe condition.

 

115.3 Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the structure, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official acceptance or rejection of the terms of the order.

 

115.4 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is: (a) delivered to the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested; or (c) delivered in any other manner as prescribed by local law. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner’s agent or upon the person responsible for the structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner.

 

115.5 Restoration. The structure or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the structure, such repairs, alterations, additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of the California Existing Building Code.

 

SECTION 116

CONSTRUCTION TOILETS

 

116.1 Temporary construction toilets. No person shall commence or proceed with the erection, construction, alteration, repair, raising, adding to, removal or demolition of any building or structure, unless adequate, suitable, sanitary toilet facilities under the control of such person are provided for the use of any person employed or working upon such building or structure. Such toilet facilities shall be located upon or within a reasonable distance of the lot, premises or site upon which such work is being done. In no case shall the line of travel to any toilet facility exceed three hundred feet (300’).

 

116.2 Toilet standards. Every toilet shall be of the water flush type and connected to a public sewer. All toilet structures shall be completely enclosed on four sides and the top and the door shall be self closing; the toilet floor shall be smooth, and screened ventilation shall be provided in toilet compartment. In lieu of flush water closets, approved chemical toilets may be provided.

 

SECTION 117

SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS

 

Sections:

117.1 Intent.

117.2 Application of provisions.

117.3 Definitions.

117.4 Placards.

 

117.1 Intent. This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. The chapter further authorizes the Building Official and his or her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.

 

117.2 Application of provisions. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the City of Pico Rivera. The Building Official may extend the provisions as necessary.

 

117.3 Definitions. Safety assessment is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy.

 

117.4 Placards.

(a)    The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached.

(1)    INSPECTED—Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

(2)    RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy.

(3)    UNSAFE—Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the Building Official, or his or her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note in general terms the type of damage encountered.

(b)    This ordinance number, the name of the jurisdiction, its address, and phone number shall be permanently affixed to each placard.

(c)    Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the Building Official. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to alter, remove, cover or deface a placard unless authorized pursuant to this section.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.030 Section 312.1 amended—Swimming pools.
    Section 312.1 of the California Building Code is amended to add “swimming pools” to the list of Group U occupancies such that the section reads as follows:

 

312.1 General. Buildings and structures of an accessory character and miscellaneous structures not classified in any specific occupancy shall be constructed, equipped and maintained to conform to the requirements of this code commensurate with the fire and life hazard incidental to their occupancy. Group U shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

 

Agricultural buildings

Aircraft hangars, accessory to a one- or two-family residence (see Section 412.4 of the California Building Code)

Barns

Carports

Communication equipment structures with a gross floor area of less than 1,500 square feet (139 m2)

Fences more than 6 feet (1,829 mm) high

Grain silos, accessory to a residential occupancy

Livestock shelters

Private garages

Retaining walls

Sheds

Stables

Tanks

Towers

Swimming pools

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.040 Sections 311.4 and 312.2 added—Garage surfaces.
    Section 311.4 is added to read as follows:

 

In areas where motor vehicles are stored or operated, floor surfaces shall be paved with Portland cement concrete with a minimum compressive strength of 2000 psi or approved equal.

 

    Section 312.2 is added to read as follows:

 

In areas where motor vehicles are stored or operated, floor surfaces shall be paved with Portland cement concrete with a minimum compressive strength of 2000 psi or approved equal.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.050 Section 312.3 added—Barbed wire and other fences.
    Section 312.3 is added to read as follows:

 

312.3. No barbed wire or other sharp, pointed fence or electrically charged wire shall be erected, constructed or maintained.

 

Exception: The Building Official may permit properties with rear or side property lines abutting a utility right-of-way to install barbed wire with valid justification.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.060 Sections 403.4.8.3 and 403.4.8.4 amended—Smokeproof enclosures.
    Sections 403.4.8.3 and 403.4.8.4 of the California Building Code are modified by moving No. 1, Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smokeproof enclosures, from Section 403.4.8.3 Standby Power Loads and placing it in Section 403.4.8.4 Emergency Power Loads. The revised sections are to read as follows:

 

403.4.8.3 Standby power loads. The following are classified as standby power loads:

1.     Elevators;

2.     Where elevators are provided in high-rise buildings for accessible means of egress, fire service access or occupant self-evacuation, the standby power system shall also comply with Sections 1009.4, 3007 or 3008, as applicable.

 

403.4.8.4 Emergency power loads. The following are classified as emergency power loads:

1.     Exit signs and means of egress illumination required by Chapter 10;

2.     Elevator car lighting;

3.     Emergency voice/alarm communications systems;

4.     Automatic fire detection systems;

5.     Fire alarm systems;

6.     Electrically powered fire pumps;

7.     Power and lighting for the fire command center required by Section 403.4.6; and

8.     Ventilation and automatic fire detection equipment for smokeproof enclosures.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.070 Section 501.2 amended—Address identification.
    Section 501.2 of the California Building Code shall be amended to read:

 

501.2 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm) for single family residential structures; 6 inches (105.4 mm) high for multi-family structures; and 12 inches (304.8 mm) high for commercial structures, suite identifiers shall be a minimum of 5 inches (87.83 mm) high and above suite doors or as approved by the local AHJ. Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from a public way, a monument, pole or other acceptable sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.

 

All commercial buildings shall maintain an address painted on the roof in contrasting colors that measures 3 feet tall with 9-inch (158.9 mm) minimum strokes. The address numbers shall be underlined in order to clarify the correct reading of the address from the air.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.080 Reserved.
 

15.08.090 Reserved.
 

15.08.100 Section 718.3. amended—Draftstopping in floors.
    Section 718.3. of the California Building Code is amended by deletion of Exception, add a new exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 is installed, the area between draft stops may be 3,000 square feet (279 m2) and the greatest horizontal dimension may be 100 feet (30,480 mm).

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.110 Section 718.4 amended—Draftstopping in attics.
    Section 718.4 of the California Building Code is amended by deletion of Exception, add a new exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: Where an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 is installed, the area between draft stops may be 9,000 square feet (836 m2) and the greatest horizontal dimension may be 100 feet (30,480 mm).

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.120 Table 1505.1 amended—Roof coverings.
    Table 1505.1 is hereby amended, by the deletion of Table 1505.1 and the addition of a new Table 1505.1 thereto, to read as follows:

TABLE 1505.1

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING

CLASSIFICATIONS

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

 

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

A

A

A

A

A

A

A

A*

A*

*   Unless approved by the building official where Class B roofing is allowed.

 

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.130 Section 1505.1.3 amended—Roof coverings.
    Section 1505.1.3 is hereby amended, by the deletion of the entire section and the addition of a new section thereto, to read as follows:

 

1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A, unless approved by the building official.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.140 Section 1617.11.2 amended—Building seismic separation.
    Section 1617.11.2 is hereby amended read as follows:

 

1617.11.2 Structural Separation. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3 Equation 12.12-1 as follows:

 



(Equation 12.12-1)

 

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.150 Section 3109.1 amended—Public bodies of water exemption.
    Section 3109.1 is amended by adding an exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: Exemption of public bodies of water. Where bodies of water are located on public land within the City of Pico Rivera, this section need not be complied with where it has been determined by the Building Official that dispensing with any or all of the provisions of this section will adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare. This section shall not apply to public bodies of water located on land owned, possessed or under control of the State, County, Municipal or other governmental entities or their lessees or assigns.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.160 Section 3109.4.1.10 added—Prohibited activity.
    Section 3109.4.1.10 of Volume 2 of the 2019 California Building Code is added to read as follows:

 

3109.4.1.10 Prohibited activity adjacent to pools regulated by this section. Every person in possession of land within the City of Pico Rivera, either as owner, purchaser under contract, or otherwise, fee holder, lessee, tenant, or licensee, adjacent to land coming within the definition of this section upon which there is located a swimming pool, shall not alter, change or increase the level of the underlying ground in possession of said person and adjacent to any fence or structure required under this section so as to place the possessor of said land upon which exists a swimming pool, in violation of this section, without a permit to do so from the Building Official. Said permit shall be subject to provisions of this section.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.170 Section 202 amended—Private pool definition.
    Section 202 is amended by deletion of the definition of private pool and adding a new definition as follows:

 

PRIVATE POOL is any constructed pool or spa, permanent or portable, and over 18 inches deep, which is intended for non-commercial use as a swimming pool by not more than three owner families and their guests.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.180 Reserved.
 

15.08.190 Section 3109.3 added—Pool lighting restriction.
    Section 3109.3 is added to read as follows:

 

3109.3 Lights. Any lights used to illuminate a swimming pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from any adjoining premises.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.200 Chapter 36 added—Construction and maintenance of parking areas.
    Add new Chapter 36 to read as follows:

 

CHAPTER 36

CONSTRUCTION AND

MAINTENANCE OF PARKING AREAS

 

Section 3600

 

3601 General. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the construction and maintenance of all parking areas used or intended to be used for parking of vehicles whether required by Ordinance or not, and including driveways and access to such parking areas.

 

3602 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply unless a different meaning is expressly provided elsewhere in this Chapter.

 

3602.1 Bus is any self-propelled vehicle other than a motor truck or truck tractor, designed for carrying more than nine persons, including the driver, and used or maintained for the transportation of passengers.

 

3602.2 Motor truck is a self-propelled vehicle designed or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.

 

3602.3. Parking area is an area or space designed, used or intended to be used for the storage, parking, maintenance, service, driving, repair, display or operation of vehicles and includes areas used or intended to be used for driveway or access to such parking areas from the public right-of-way to such area, but does not include public roads, streets, highways and alleys. Parking area, as herein defined, includes within its definition those areas defined in Section 18.44 of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code pertaining to automobile storage areas and off-street parking spaces as well as the driveway thereof.

 

3602.4 Passenger vehicle is any self-propelled vehicle other than a motor truck or truck tractor, designed for carrying no more than nine persons including the driver, and used or maintained for the transportation of persons and shall include motor trucks with a gross vehicle rating less than 6,000 pounds.

 

3602.5 Truck tractor is a self propelled vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and loads so drawn.

 

3602.6 Vehicle is a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

 

3603 Scope. No areas shall be used for the storage, parking, maintenance, service, driving, repair, display or operation of vehicles unless constructed and maintained in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.

 

Exception: (1) That portion of any land coming within the definitions of parking area in use for such purposes on the effective date of the ordinance enacting this Chapter and which is paved and is being maintained in a safe manner so as not to become a nuisance, may continue in use without meeting the provisions of this Chapter, however, any extension, alteration or reconstruction of such areas in whole or in part shall be subject to the terms and provisions of this Chapter.

 

Exception: (2) The Public Works Director may authorize temporary parking areas to be used in connection with special events, new construction, or areas to be used for a limited period of time not exceeding six months where construction of permanent facilities in accordance with the standards of this Chapter would be impractical. The Public Works Director may impose requirements for dust control, temporary paving or such other requirements as may be necessary to accomplish the intent of this Chapter, as conditions pursuant to authorization.

 

3604 Permit required. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, reconstruct, alter, enlarge or pave any parking area without first obtaining a separate paving permit from the Public Works Director.

 

Exception: (1) No paving permit shall be required for any paving work within or under a building for which a valid building permit has been issued.

 

Exception: (2) No paving permit shall be required for paving work serving R-3 Occupancies where the areas to be paved do not exceed 1,000 square feet.

 

3605 Standards. Parking areas shall be constructed in accordance with the standards for public works contracts heretofore adopted by the City Council, and except as otherwise specifically provided in this Chapter. In the event any provision of this Chapter should be inconsistent in whole or in part with said public works standards, the provisions of this Chapter shall govern to that extent.

 

3606 Paving required.

 

3606.1 General. All parking areas shall be surfaced with materials approved by the Public Works Director so as to provide a permanent surface capable of withstanding the type of vehicular traffic to which such area is likely to be subjected.

 

3607 Covered parking areas. Parking areas within or under a building shall be paved with Portland cement concrete with a minimum compressive strength of 2,000 psi or approved equal.

 

3608 Open parking areas. Parking areas other than those within a building shall be paved as follows;

 

3608.1 Areas designed or used for display, operation or parking of motor vehicle shall be paved with Portland Cement concrete, asphaltic concrete or other approved permanent type of paving materials.

 

3608.2 Areas for parking or storage of vehicles other than motor vehicles and areas where hard-surfaced paving would pose a material hazard to prospective users may be surfaced with an approved less permanent type of surfacing, provided, however, that such surface shall be the equivalent of 1/4″ pea gravel, not less than 2″ in thickness. Base or subgrade slopes for temporary parking areas shall be the equivalent of 1/4″ pea gravel, not less than 2″ in thickness. Base or subgrade slopes for temporary parking areas shall be maintained at not less than 1% slope.

 

3609 Plans. Plans for parking areas shall be submitted to the Public Works Director for checking. Plans shall show sufficient information to enable the Public Works Director to determine their compliance with this Chapter.

 

Plans shall be drawn to scale and shall show existing and proposed elevations, materials of construction, details of drainage structures, method of disposal of surface water, drainage provisions for protection and drainage of adjoining properties including any necessary easements, quantities of cut or fill necessary to complete the work and any other information deemed necessary by the Public Works Director.

 

3610 Fees. Fees for paving permits shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

3611 Approvals required.

 

3611.1 No work shall be done on any parking area beyond the point authorized in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the Public Works Director. Such approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by each of the inspections required by Subsection (b).

 

3611.2 The Public Works Director, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent; shall make the following inspections of parking areas and shall approve that portion of the construction as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or his agent wherein the same fails to comply with the law.

 

3611.2.1 Subgrade Inspection to be made when the site has been cleared and is prepared to receive fill material or aggregate base. When no fill operation is to be done, or the fill is minor in nature, subgrade inspection may be waived by the Public Works Director.

 

3611.2.2 Base Inspection to be made after base or subgrade has been brought to proper grade and alignment for placing of paving materials and after all required curbing and gutters are in place.

 

3611.2.3 Final Inspection to be made when parking area is complete.

 

3612 Testing. When there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this Chapter or evidence that any material or any construction does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the Public Works Director may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at the expense of the owner of his agency by an approved agency.

 

3613 Thickness. Pavement thickness shall be determined by the type of traffic it is likely to be subject to and the type of soil at the site. Pavement shall have minimum thickness of three inches (3″) for passenger vehicle parking areas and a minimum thickness of five inches (5″) for motor truck, truck tractor or bus parking areas.

 

Exceptions: Thickness of asphalt concrete may be reduced to a minimum thickness of two inches (2″) for passenger vehicle traffic and three inches (3″) for motor truck, truck tractor, or bus traffic provided an approved aggregate base course is constructed under the asphalt pavement. The minimum thickness of such base course shall be four inches (4″).

 

3614 Asphalt concrete pavement. Asphalt concrete pavement shall be of mix Type 1-C 40/50 as set forth in the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.

 

3615 Portland cement pavement. Portland Cement concrete used for curbs and gutters and for paving of parking areas outside of buildings shall have a minimum compressive strength of 2,000 psi.

 

3616 Preparation of surface to be paved.

 

3616.1 Preparation of surfaces to be paved shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works construction aforementioned.

 

3616.2 Soil sterilization shall be used in all areas to be paved with asphalt concrete. Sterilants shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer’s recommendations.

 

3616.3 Prime Coating: when asphalt concrete pavement is to be placed without providing a base course an asphalt prime coat consisting of SC-70 liquid asphalt shall be applied at a rate of 0.10 and 0.25 gallons per square yard, in accordance with the aforementioned Standard Specifications for Public Works construction, prior to placing of pavement.

 

3617 Drainage. All paved areas shall be sloped to drain. Finished slopes of areas paved with asphalt concrete shall be not less than one percent (1%). Finish slope of areas paved with Portland Cement concrete shall be not less than one-half percent (1/2%). Where Portland Cement concrete gutters are installed to receive drainage from asphalt concrete paved areas, such gutters shall be not less than three feet (3′) in width.

 

3618 Storm water disposal. Paved areas shall be designed to carry surface water to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse approved by the Public Works Director. Concentrated flows of water from parking areas shall not flow by gravity over any public property, but shall be collected in an appropriate manner within the property confines and conducted under the sidewalk in a manner satisfactory to the Public Works Director.

 

3619 Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be kept in good repair. Any alteration, enlargement, reconstruction, in whole or in part, other than normal maintenance repairs, shall be pursuant to permit and subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The provisions of Section 116 of the California Building Code 2016 Edition, as amended, shall apply to parking areas and for the purpose “Building” or “Structure” as used therein shall mean “Parking Area.”

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.210 Chapter 37 added—Relocation of buildings.
    Add new Chapter 37 to read as follows:

 

CHAPTER 37

RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS

 

Section 3700

 

3701 Scope. No person shall move or relocate any building or structure onto any premises until he first posts a surety bond and secures a building permit as hereinafter provided.

 

Exception. The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to moving a contractor’s tool house, construction building or similar structure which is moved as construction requires, onto any premises.

 

3702 Waiver of bond or permit. Neither a bond nor a deposit need be posted nor made in any case where the Building Official finds that the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to the regularly occupied business premises of a house mover or that of moving a building to an adjacent property of the same owner or within the confines of a single parcel and that no such security is necessary in order to assure compliance with the requirements of this Chapter.

 

The Building Official may waive the requirement of bond or deposit when the owner of the property is a governmental agency.

 

3703 Application. Every application to the Building Official for a relocation building permit shall be in writing upon a form furnished by the Building Official and shall set forth such information as the Building Official may reasonably require in order to carry out the purpose of this Chapter.

 

3704 Investigation required. In order to determine any of the matters presented by the application, the Building Official may require plans, photographs or other substantiating data, and may cause to be made any investigation which he believes is necessary or helpful. After the investigation is completed, if the applicant fails to post the required bond and secure the relocation building permit within sixty (60) days, the application is null and void.

 

3705 Application fees. In addition to the building permit fee required, the applicant for a relocation building permit shall pay an application and investigation fee, in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution, to the Building Official for inspection of the building as its present location and investigation of the proposed site.

 

3706 Permit fees. Building permit fees for repairs or alterations to relocated buildings shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution. Valuation for relocated building shall be computed as being not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the value for new work.

 

3707 Issuance of permit. If the condition of the building or structure in the judgment of the Building Official admits of practicable and effective repair, he may issue a relocation building permit to the owner of the property where the building or structure is to be relocated, upon conditions as hereinafter provided; otherwise the permit shall be denied.

 

3708 Condition of permit. The Building Official, in granting any relocation building permit, may impose thereon such terms and conditions as he may deem reasonable and proper. These terms may include, but are not limited to, the period of time required to complete all work; the requirements of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structure to the end that such building or structure will comply with all requirements of this Code and all other applicable laws and ordinances.

 

3709 Definitions. Approved surety is a surety company which: (1) is authorized to do business in the State of California; (2) has fulfilled all legal obligations pertaining to dealings involving the City of Pico Rivera Building Laws upon demand of the Building Official; (3) has been approved by the Building Official as a qualified surety company.

 

3710 Bond required. The Building Official shall not issue a relocation building permit unless the owner first posts with the Building Official a bond executed by said owner, as principal, and by an approved surety company authorized to do business in this State, as surety, or deposits a cash bond as hereafter provided.

 

3711 Bond requirements. The surety bond required by this chapter shall:

(a)    Be in form joint and several.

(b)    Name the City of Pico Rivera as obligee.

(c)    Be in an amount equal to the estimated costs, plus 10% of the work required to be done in order to comply with all the conditions of the relocation building permit, such amount to be estimated by the Building Official, but in no case shall said bond be less than $10,000.00.

(d)    State therein the legal description or address of the property upon which the building or structure is to be relocated.

 

3712 Bond conditions. The surety bond shall provide that:

1.     All work required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the relocation building permit shall be performed and completed within the time period as set by the Building Official.

2.     The time limit specified may be extended for good and sufficient cause after written request of the Principal and Surety, either before or after said time limit has expired. The Building Official shall notify the Principal and Surety in writing of such time extension and may extend the time limit without consent of the surety.

3.     The term of such bond posted pursuant to this section shall begin upon the date of the posting thereof and shall end upon the completion to the satisfaction of the Building Official of the performance of all the terms and conditions of the relocation building permit.

4.     The Building Official, the Surety or duly authorized representative of either shall have access to the premises described in the relocation building permit for the purpose of inspecting the progress of the work.

5.     Upon default by the Principal, the Surety shall be required to perform all conditions set forth in the relocation permit and have the right of entry to the premises to perform such conditions.

6.     In the event of any default in the performance of any term or conditions of the relocation building permit, the Surety or any person employed or engaged on its behalf, may go upon the premises to complete the required work to remove or demolish the building or structure, and clear, clean and restore the site.

7.     The relocation building permit shall be null and void if the building or structure is not relocated to the proposed site within sixty (60) days after issuance of the permit.

 

3713 Notice of default. Whenever the Principal on the bond defaults in the performance of the conditions required by the relocation building permit, the Building Official shall give notice in writing to the Principal and the Surety on the bond.

 

3714 Details of notice. The Building Official in the notice of default shall state the conditions of the bond which have not been complied with and the period of time deemed by him to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work.

 

3715 Surety requirements. After a receipt of a notice of default, the Surety, within the time therein specified shall cause the required work to be performed.

 

3716 Option of demolition. When any default has occurred on the part of the Principal under the provisions of this Chapter, the Surety, as its option, in lieu of completing the work required may remove or demolish the building or structure and clear, clean and restore the site.

 

3717 Default of cash bond. If a cash bond has been posted the Building Official shall give notice of default, as provided above, to the Principal and if compliance is not met within the time specified, the Building Official shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceeding whatever, to use the cash deposit or any portion of said deposit to cause the required work to be done by contract or otherwise at his discretion. The balance, if any, of such cash deposit, upon the completion of the work, shall be returned to the depositor or to his successors or assigns after deducting the cost of the work plus 10 percent (10%) thereof.

 

3718 Return of cash bond. When a cash bond has been posted, and all requirements of relocation building permit have been completed, the Building Official shall return the cash to the depositor or to his successors or assigns except any portion thereof that may have been used or deducted as provided elsewhere in this Chapter.

 

3719 Right of entry penalties. The owner, his representatives, successor or assigns or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress or egress to or from any such premises, of any authorized representative or agent of any surety of the City of Pico Rivera engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or removing any building or structure for which a relocation building permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

3720 Denial or relocation permit. No permit shall be granted hereunder when it has been determined that to move or relocate said building, house, garage or structure would be detrimental to the public peace, health, safety and welfare in that the building is so constructed as to be in a dangerous condition or is infested with pests or is unsanitary or is not fit for human habitation or is so dilapidated, defective or unsightly or in such a condition that its location at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvement within the immediate neighborhood.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

15.08.220 Chapter 38 added—Grading and excavation.
    Add new Chapter 38 to read as follows:

 

CHAPTER 38

GRADING AND EXCAVATIONS

 

SECTION 3800

 

3801 Purpose. The purpose of this appendix is to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare by regulating grading on private property.

 

3805 Scope. This appendix sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction, including private streets and all utilities therein.

 

The standards listed below are recognized standards.

1.     Testing.

1.1   ASTM D 1557, Moisture-density Relations of Soils and Soil Aggregate Mixtures

1.2   ASTM D 1556, In Place Density of Soils by the Sand Cone Method

1.3   ASTM D 2167, In Place Density of Soils by the Rubber Balloon Method

1.4   ASTM D 2937, In Place Density of Soils by the Drive Cylinder Method

1.5   ASTM D 2922 and D 3017, In Place Moisture Contact and Density of Soils by Nuclear Methods

 

The following California section replaces the corresponding model code section for applications specified by law for the Department of Housing and Community Development and the Office of Statewide Health Planning and Development.

 

3805a Scope [For HCD 1, OSHPD 1&2]. This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction.

 

SECTION 3806.

PERMITS REQUIRED

 

3806.1 Permits Required. Except as specified in Section 3806.2 of this section, no person shall do any grading without first having obtained a grading permit from the Public Works Director.

 

3806.2 Exempted Work. A grading permit is not required for the following:

1.     When approved by the Public Works Director, grading in an isolated, self-contained area if there is no danger to private or public property.

2.     An excavation below finished grade for basements and footings of a building, retaining wall or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. This shall not exempt any fill made with the material from such excavation or exempt any excavation having an unsupported height greater than 5 feet (1,524 mm) after the completion of such structure.

3.     Cemetery graves.

4.     Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations.

5.     Excavations for wells or tunnels or utilities.

6.     Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing or stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous property.

7.     Exploratory excavations under the direction of soil engineers or engineering geologists.

8.     An excavation that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course and (1) is less than 1 foot (305 mm) in depth or (2) does not create a cut slope greater than 3 feet (915 mm) in height and steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units horizontal (30% slope).

9.     A fill less than 1 foot (305 mm) in depth and placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope), or less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth, not intended to support structures, that does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.3 m3) on any one lot and does not obstruct a drainage course.

 

Exemption from the permit requirements of this chapter shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction.

 

SECTION 3807 HAZARDS. Whenever the Public Works Director determines that any existing excavation or embankment or fill on private property has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers property, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Public Works Director, shall within the period specified therein repair or eliminate such excavation or embankment to eliminate the hazard and to be in conformance with the requirements of this code.

 

SECTION 3808 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this appendix, the definitions listed hereunder shall be construed as specified in this section.

APPROVAL shall mean that the proposed work or completed work conforms to this chapter in the opinion of the Public Works Director.

 

AS-GRADED is the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading.

 

BEDROCK is in-place solid rock.

 

BENCH is a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

 

BORROW is earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

 

CIVIL ENGINEER is a professional engineer registered in the state to practice in the field of civil works.

 

CIVIL ENGINEERING is the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design and construction of civil works.

 

COMPACTION is the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

 

EARTH MATERIAL is any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof.

 

ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST is a geologist experienced and knowledgeable in engineering geology.

 

ENGINEERING GEOLOGY is the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

 

EROSION is the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice.

 

EXCAVATION is the mechanical removal of earth material.

 

FILL is a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.

 

GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER. See soils engineer.

 

GRADE is the vertical location of the ground surface.

 

Existing Grade is the grade prior to grading.

 

Finish Grade is the final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan.

 

Rough Grade is the stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.

 

GRADING is any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

 

KEY is a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

 

PROFESSIONAL INSPECTION is the inspection required by this code to be performed by the civil engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist. Such inspections include that performed by persons supervised by such engineers or geologists and shall be sufficient to form an opinion relating to the conduct of the work.

 

SITE is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is performed or permitted.

 

SLOPE is an inclined ground surface the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

 

SOIL is naturally occurring superficial deposits overlying bedrock.

 

SOILS ENGINEER (GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER) is an engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of soils engineering (geotechnical) engineering.

 

SOILS ENGINEERING (GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING) is the application of the principles of soils mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection or testing of the construction thereof.

 

TERRACE is a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

 

 

SECTION 3809

GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

 

3809.1 Permits Required. Except as exempted in Section 3806 of this code, no person shall do any grading without first obtaining a grading permit from the Public Works Director. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site, and may cover both excavations and fills.

 

3809.2 Application. The provisions of Section 106.3.1 are applicable to grading. Additionally, the application shall state the estimated quantities of work involved.

 

3809.3 Grading Designation. Grading in excess of 2,500 cubic yards (1,911 m3), grading and earthworks construction supporting a major structure as determined by the Public Works Director and grading on known or established flood hazard and/or environmentally sensitive areas, shall be performed in accordance with the approved grading plan prepared by a civil engineer, and shall be designated as “engineered grading.” Grading involving less than 500 cubic yards (1,911 m3) shall be designated “regular grading” unless the permittee chooses to have the grading performed as engineered grading, or the Public Works Director determines that special conditions or unusual hazards exist, in which case grading shall conform to the requirements for engineered grading. Regular grading plans shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications unless exempted by the Public Works Director.

 

3809.4 Engineered Grading Requirements. Application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans and specifications, and supporting data consisting of a soils engineering report and engineering geology report. The plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by an individual licensed by the state to prepare such plans or specifications when required by the Public Works Director.

 

Specifications shall contain information covering construction and material requirements. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that they will conform to the provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give location of the work, the name and address of the owner, and the person by whom they were prepared.

 

The plans shall include the following information:

1.     General vicinity of the proposed site.

2.     Property limits and accurate contours of existing ground and details of terrain and area drainage.

3.     Limiting dimensions, elevations or finish contours to be achieved by the grading, and proposed drainage channels and related construction.

4.     Detailed plans of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, cribbing, dams and other protective devices to be constructed with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and the estimated runoff of the area served by any drains.

5.     Location of any buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed and the location of any buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners that are within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of the property or that may be affected by the proposed grading operations.

6.     Recommendations included in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report shall be incorporated in the grading plans or specifications. When approved by the Public Works Director, specific recommendations contained in the soils engineering report and the engineering geology report which are applicable to grading, may be included by reference.

7.     The dates of the soils engineering and engineering geology reports together with the names, addresses and phone numbers of the firms or individuals who prepared the reports.

 

3809.5 Soils Engineering Report. The soils engineering report required by Section 3809.4 shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, including buttress fills, when necessary, and opinion on adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading as affected by soils engineering factors, including the stability of slopes.

 

3809.6 Engineering Geology Report. The engineering geology report required by Section 3809.4 shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinion on the adequacy for the intended use of sites to be developed by the proposed grading, as affected by geologic factors.

 

3809.7 Liquefaction Study. The Public Works Director may require a geotechnical investigation in accordance with Section 1803A when, during the course of an investigation, all of the following conditions are discovered, the report shall address the potential for liquefaction:

1.     Shallow ground water, 50 feet (15,240 mm) or less.

2.     Unconsolidated sandy alluvium.

3.     Seismic Zones C through F.

 

3809.8 Regular Grading Requirements. Each application for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a plan in sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work. The plans shall give the location of the work, the name of the owner and the name of the person who prepared the plan. The plan shall include the following information:

1.     General vicinity of the proposed site.

2.     Limiting dimensions and depth of cut and fill.

3.     Location of any buildings or structures where work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of the proposed grading.

 

3809.9 Issuance. The provisions of Section 106.4 are applicable to grading permits. The Public Works Director may require that grading operations and project designs be modified if delays occur which incur weather-generated problems not considered at the time the permit was issued.

 

The Public Works Director may require professional inspection and testing by the soils engineer. When the Public Works Director has cause to believe that geologic factors may be involved, the grading will be required to conform to engineered grading.

 

SECTION 3810

GRADING FEES

 

3810.1 General. Fees shall be addressed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

 

3810.2 Plan review fees and expiration. When a plan or other data is required by the Public Works Director to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution. Applications for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding 180 days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended more than once. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

 

3810.3 Grading permit fees. A fee for each grading permit shall be paid to the Public Works Director. Fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution. Separate permits and fees shall apply to retaining walls or major drainage structures as required elsewhere in this code. There shall be no separate charge for standard terrace drains as similar facilities.

 

3810.4 Investigation fees, work without a permit. Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this code has been commenced without first obtaining said permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is then or subsequently issued. This fee shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this Code nor from any penalties prescribed by law.

 

3810.5 Refunds. Refunds shall be paid in accordance with the refund schedule adopted by City Council.

 

SECTION 3811 BONDS. The Public Works Director may require bonds in such form and amounts as may be deemed necessary to ensure that the work, if not completed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, will be corrected to eliminate hazardous conditions.

 

In lieu of a surety bond the applicant may file a cash bond or instrument of credit with the Public Works Director in an amount equal to that which would be required in the surety bond.

 

SECTION 3812

CUTS

 

3812.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering or engineering geology report, cuts shall conform to the provisions of this section.

 

In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be waived for minor cuts not intended to support structures.

 

3812.2 Slope. The slope of cut surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use and shall be no steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units horizontal (50% slope) unless the permittee furnishes an acceptable soils engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property.

 

SECTION 3813

FILLS

 

3813.1 General. Unless otherwise recommended in the approved soils engineering report, fills shall conform to the provisions of this section.

 

In the absence of an approved soils engineering report, these provisions may be waived for minor fills not intended to support structures.

 

3813.2 Preparation of Ground. Fill slopes shall not be constructed on natural slopes steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units horizontal (50% slope). The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, non-complying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials scarifying to provide a bond with the new fill and, where slopes are steeper than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope) and the height is greater than 5 feet (1,524 mm), by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soils engineer. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than 1 unit vertical in 5 units horizontal (20% slope) shall be at least 10 feet (3,048 mm) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least 10 feet (3,048 mm) wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and acceptance by the soils engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill.

 

3813.3 Fill Material. Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Except as permitted by the Public Works Director, no rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches (305 mm) shall be buried or placed in fills.

 

Exception: The Public Works Director may permit placement of larger rock when the soils engineer properly devises a method of placement, and continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill stability. The following conditions shall also apply:

1.     Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the grading plan.

2.     Rock sizes greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in maximum dimension shall be 10 feet (3,048 mm) or more below grade, measured vertically.

3.     Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with well-graded soil.

 

3813.4 Compaction. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of 90 percent of maximum density.

 

3813.5 Slope. The slope of fill surfaces shall be no steeper than is safe for the intended use. Fill slopes shall be no steeper than 1 unit vertical in 2 units horizontal (50% slope).

 

SECTION 3814

SETBACKS

 

3814.1 General. Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. Setback dimensions shall be as shown in Figure A-38-1.

 

3814.2 Top of Cut Slope. The top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and need not exceed a maximum of 10 feet (3,048 mm). The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.

 

3814.3 Toe of Fill Slope. The toe of fill slope shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than one half the height of the slope with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and need not exceed a maximum of 20 feet (6,096 mm). Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the Public Works Director deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include but are not limited to:

1.     Additional setbacks.

2.     Provision for retaining or slough walls.

3.     Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion.

4.     Provisions for the control of surface waters.

 

3814.4 Modification of Slope Location. The Public Works Director may approve alternate setbacks. The Public Works Director may require an investigation and recommendation by a qualified engineer or engineering geologist to demonstrate that the intent of this section has been satisfied.

 

SECTION 3815

DRAINAGE AND TERRACING

 

3815.1 General. Unless otherwise indicated on the approved grading plan, drainage facilities and terracing shall conform to the provisions of this section for cut or fill slopes steeper than 1 unit vertical in 3 units horizontal (33.3% slope).

 

3815.2 Terrace. Terraces at least 6 feet (1,829 mm) in width shall be established at not more than 30-foot (9,144 mm) vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris except that where only one terrace is required, it shall be at mid-height. For cut or fill slopes greater than 60 feet (18,288 mm) and up to 120 feet (36,576 mm) in vertical height, one terrace at approximately mid-height shall be 12 feet (3,658 mm) in width.

 

Terrace widths and spacing for cut and fill slopes greater than 120 feet (36,576 mm) in height shall be designed by the civil engineer and approved by the Public Works Director. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

 

Swales or ditches on terraces shall have a minimum gradient of 5 percent and must be paved with reinforced concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in thickness or an approved equal paving. They shall have a minimum depth at the deepest point of 1 foot (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 5 feet (1,524 mm).

 

A single run of swale or ditch shall not collect runoff from a tributary area exceeding 13,500 square feet (1,254.2 m2) (projected) without discharging into a down drain.

 

3815.3 Subsurface Drainage. Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

 

3815.4 Disposal. All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry waters to the nearest practicable drainage way approved by the Public Works Director or other appropriate jurisdiction as a safe place to deposit such waters. Erosion of ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of non-erosive down drains or other devices.

 

Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of 2 percent toward approved drainage facilities, unless waived by the Public Works Director.

 

Exception: The gradient from the building pad may be 1 percent if all of the following conditions exist throughout the permit area:

1.     No proposed fills are greater than 10 feet (3,048 mm) in maximum depth.

2.     No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of 10 feet (3,048 mm).

3.     No existing slope faces steeper than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% slope) have a vertical height in excess of 10 feet (3,048 mm).

 

3815.5 Interceptor Drains. Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the tributary drainage area above slopes toward the cut and has a drainage path greater than 40 feet (12,192 mm) measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) of concrete or gunite and reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 30 inches (762 mm) measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of drain shall be approved by the Public Works Director.

 

SECTION 3816

EROSION CONTROL

 

3816.1 Slopes. The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control against erosion. This control may consist of effective planting. The protection for the slopes shall be installed as soon as practicable and prior to calling for final approval. Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to the erosion-resistant character of the materials, such protection may be omitted.

 

3816.2 Other Devices. Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion and provide safety.

 

SECTION 3817

GRADING INSPECTION

 

3817.1 General. Grading operations for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Public Works Director.

 

Professional inspection of grading operations shall be provided by the civil engineer, soils engineer and the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 3817.5 for engineered grading and as required by the Public Works Director for regular grading.

 

3817.2 Civil Engineer. The civil engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall consist of observation and review as to the establishment of line, grade and surface drainage of the development area. If revised plans are required during the course of the work they shall be prepared by the civil engineer.

 

3817.3 Soils Engineer. The soils engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the permittee, the Public Works Director and the civil engineer.

 

3817.4 Engineering Geologist. The engineering geologist shall provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include professional inspection of the bedrock excavation to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved report. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved engineering geology report shall be submitted to the soils engineer.

 

3817.5 Permittee. The permittee shall be responsible for the work to be performed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in conformance with the provisions of this code, and the permittee shall engage consultants, if required, to provide professional inspections on a timely basis. The permittee shall act as a coordinator between the consultants, the contractor and the Public Works Director. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be responsible for informing the Public Works Director of such change and shall provide revised plans for approval.

 

3817.6 Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall inspect the project at the various stages of work requiring approval to determine that adequate control is being exercised by the professional consultants.

 

3817.7 Notification of Noncompliance. If, in the course of fulfilling their respective duties under this chapter, the civil engineer, the soils engineer or the engineering geologist finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this chapter or the approved grading plans, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the permittee and to the Public Works Director.

 

3817.8 Transfer of Responsibility. If the civil engineer, the soils engineer, or the engineering geologist of record is changed during grading, the work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed in writing to accept their responsibility within the area of technical competence for approval upon completion of the work. It shall be the duty of the permittee to notify the Public Works Director in writing of such change prior to the recommencement of such grading.

 

SECTION 3818

COMPLETION OF WORK

 

3818.1 Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports and drawings and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable.

1.     An as-built grading plan prepared by the civil engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 3817.5 showing original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains. As-constructed locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the soils engineer.

Civil engineers shall state that to the best of their knowledge the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan.

 

2.     A report prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 3817.3, including locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report. Soils engineers shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibilities is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable provisions of this chapter.

3.     A report prepared by the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 3817.5, including a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of same on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan. Engineering geologists shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geologist report and applicable provisions of this chapter.

4.     The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the Public Works Director a statement of conformance to said as-built plan and the specifications.

 

3818.2 Notification of Completion. The permittee shall notify the Public Works Director when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted.

 

 



 

 

Figure A-38-1 Drainage and Setback Dimensions

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

 

 

15.08.230 Appendix I, Section 1101.1 amended—Patio enclosures.
    Section 1101.1 of Appendix I is deleted in its entirety and a new section is added to read as follows:

 

1101.1 General. Patio covers shall be permitted to be detached from or attached to dwelling units. Patio covers shall be used only for recreational, outdoor living purposes and not as carports, garages, storage rooms or habitable rooms. Openings shall be permitted to be enclosed with insect screening, readily removable approved translucent or transparent plastic not more than 0.125 inch (3.2 mm) in thickness or readily removable glass conforming to the provisions of Chapter 24. Dual glazed windows are not permitted to be installed in patio cover enclosures constructed under the provisions of this appendix.

(Ord. 1141 § 3, 2020)

Chapter 15.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
15.10.010 Adoption.
    The 2019 California Residential Standards Code, Part 2.5, including Appendix H and Appendix K, known as the California Residential Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, including amendments, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. (Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.020 Chapter 1, Division II, Section R102.1 amended.
    Section R102.1 is amended to read:

 

R102.1 General. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where in any specific case different sections of the code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where in any specific case the California Residential Code does not have a provision that is included in the California Building Code that would be applicable due to the type or method or construction, the California Building Code provisions will apply.

(Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.030 Chapter 1, Division II, Sections R105.2 and R105.3.2 amended.
    Section R105.2, Item No. 7, is amended to read:

 

7.     Swimming pools that are less than 18 inches deep.

 

    Section R105.3.2 is amended to read:

 

R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty days after the date of filing unless such application has been pursued in good faith or a permit has been issued; except that the building official is authorized to grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not to exceed 90 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

(Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

15.10.040 Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108.5 amended.
    Section R108.5 is amended to read:

 

R108.5 Refunds. Refunds for permit when no work has commenced shall be limited to the permit cost minus a fee equal to all services provided including refund processing.

(Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.050 Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108.6 amended.
    Section R108.6 is amended to read:

 

R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences work that requires a permit on a building, electrical, mechanical, or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to the cost of the required permit plus an investigation fee or a fee equal to the expenditures for the complaint investigation, whichever is greater at the discretion of the building official.

(Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.060 Chapter 2, Section R202 amended.
    Section R202 is amended to add this definition:

 

R202 Reconstruction. If the value of reconstruction (or renovation) of a building is equal to or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the building immediately prior to such reconstruction, the entire building shall comply with the code provisions for new construction. The value of reconstruction (or renovation) for a property shall include the value of all construction stemming from construction related permits issued within the last two years. The Value shall be determined by using the city adopted building valuation table.

(Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.070 Reserved.
 

15.10.080 Chapter 4, Section R403.1.3.6 amended.
    Section R403.1.3.6 is amended to read:

 

R403.1.3.6 Isolated concrete footings. In detached one- and two- family dwellings that are three stories or less in height and constructed with stud bearing walls, isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals are not permitted.

(Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.090 Chapter 9, Sections R902.1 and R908.3.1 amended.
    Section R902.1 is amended to read:

 

R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Class A or B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry, and exposed concrete roof deck.

 

2.     Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks.

 

Wood roof coverings are prohibited with the following exception:

 

Re-roofing of less than 10% or the total roof area of existing wood roof covering in four years may be done with fire-retardant shakes or shingles.

 

    Section R908.3.1 of the California Residential Code is amended by deletion of Exception 3. (Ord. 1141 § 4, 2020)

 

15.10.100 Reserved.
 

15.10.110 Reserved.

Chapter 15.12 HOUSING CODE
15.12.010 Document adopted by reference.
    The Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, is hereby adopted as Chapter 15.12 of Title 15 of this code, with amendments and additions as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.12.020 Section 203 amended—Housing advisory and appeals board.
    Section 203 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following:

 

  203.3. Application, fees and findings. Any person appealing the decision of the Building Official shall file with the Building Official a written application accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution at any time not more than 20 days after the decision of the Building Official.

 

  The application shall set forth and include any information as the Building Official may require.

 

  Upon the filing of a verified application, the Building Official shall transmit said application forthwith to the Board of Appeals, and such board shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony, from and on behalf of the applicant, and shall render its findings and decisions on the matter in writing to the applicant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official within 20 days after the conclusion of its proceedings. The Building Official shall make all findings and decisions freely accessible to the public.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.12.030 Section 204 amended—Violations and penalties.
    Sections 204 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows:

 

  204. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or any other legal entity to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, relocate, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

 

    A violation of any provision of this code, or of any permit, approved plans and specifications, or any amendment thereto, is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not to exceed

$1000 or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of the code occurs or continues, constitutes a new and additional separate offense.

 

  The issuance of granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be permit for, or any approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.12.040 Section 302 amended—Fees and refunds.
    Section 302 of the Uniform Housing code, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows:

 

  302.1. PERMIT FEES. A fee for each permit required by this Code shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

  302.2. PLAN REVIEW FEES. When a plan or other data is required by the Building Official to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications for review. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

 

  302.3. REFUNDS. Refunds shall be paid in accordance with the refund schedule adopted by City Council resolution.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 15.16 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE
15.16.010 Document adopted by reference.
    The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is hereby adopted as Chapter 15.16 of Title 15 of this code, with amendments and additions as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.16.020 Section 203 amended—Violations and penalties.
    Section 203 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is amended to read as follows:

 

  203. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or any other legal entity to erect construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, relocate, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of this code.

 

  A violation of any provision of this code, or of any permit, approved plans and specifications, or any amendment thereto, is a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1000 or by imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of the code occurs or continues, constitutes a new and additional separate offense.

 

  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be permit for, or an approval of any violation of any of the provisions of this Code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this Code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.16.030 Section 205 amended—Board of appeals.
    Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is amended by adding the following:

 

  205.3. Application, Fees and Findings. Any person appealing the decision of the Building Official shall file with the Building Official a written application accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by City Council resolution at any time not more than 20 days after the decision of the Building Official. The application shall set forth and include any information as the Building Official may require.

 

  Upon the filing of a verified application, the Building Official shall transmit said application forthwith to the Board of Appeals and such Board shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony, from and on behalf of the applicant and shall render its findings and decisions on the matter in writing to the applicant with a duplicate copy to the Building Official within 20 days after the conclusion of its proceedings, the Building Official shall make all findings and decisions freely accessible to the public.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.16.040 Section 405 added—Securing dangerous buildings.
    Section 405 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is added to read as follows:

 

  405. In addition to the procedures provided for Abatement of Nuisances as set forth in Section 401 of this Code, the Building Official is hereby given summary power to secure from entry any structure which in his/her discretion he/she determined to be immediately dangerous, or immediately hazardous or in other manner injurious to public health or safety. Such structures may be secured by the Building Official by nailing of boards over the doors and windows of such structure: however, he/she shall not be limited to only this method and may use other methods at his/her discretion to accomplish the same purpose which may be more appropriate under the circumstances. The Building Official shall also post a sign stating in effect “DANGEROUS BUILDING, DO NOT ENTER” upon the structure in at least one conspicuous place. The Building Official shall immediately upon such action send notice to the owners of the real property upon which the structure is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment rolls. Such notice shall contain the following information:

 

1. That he/she has secured the structure.

 

2. The cost incurred by the City thereby.

 

3. That he/she has posted signs as provided by this section.

 

4. The reason why he/she has taken the action.

 

5. That an appeal may be made within ten (10) days to the Board of Appeals in this section.

 

6. That if his/her action is not annulled by the Board of Appeals, the cost of securing the property shall become a lien upon the real property, unless the cost is paid to the city within thirty (30) days of the mailing of the notice. If any owner of property, or any person having any interest in property affected by the action of the Building Official in securing a structure as permitted by this section is aggrieved by the action of the Building Official in securing the structure, such person or persons may appeal the action of the Building Official by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the mailing of notice of the action by the Building Official. The notice of appeal must be verified under oath or under penalty of perjury and must state the grounds upon which the action of the Building Official is appealed. The Board of Appeals shall, upon receiving such notice of appeal, hear any evidence or other relevant matters presented by the appellant or the Building Official as its next regular meeting or special meeting after the filing of the notice of appeal. After hearing all evidence and other relevant matters presented at said hearing or without hearing if no appeal is made upon the report of the Building Official, the Board of Appeals may then confirm, amend, or annul the action of the Building Official. If the action of the Building Official is annulled, the City at its own expense shall remove any and all instruments used to secure said structure, and shall remove any and all signs stating the building is unsafe to enter. If however, the Board of Appeals confirms the action of the Building Official in securing the structure at the hearing on appeal, or if no appeal is taken at any other regular meeting, or adjourned meeting, then the cost incurred by the City in securing the structure shall become a lien against the property, and a resolution of the City Council confirming the action of the Building Official, including the imposition of a lien upon the property upon which the structure is located to pay for the cost of securing it, may be adopted upon receipt of a report from the Building Official.

 

  Such resolution may be filed with the Los Angeles County Tax Assessor, and the lien imposed thereby may be collected for the City by him, along with the next annual tax levy and assessment on said property.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

 

15.16.050 Section 406 added—Summary abatement of nuisances.
    Section 406 of the Uniform Code of the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, is added to read as follows:

 

  406. Summary Abatement of Nuisances. The same procedure, as provided for in Section 405 of this Code for abating nuisances through securing from entry any structure which is determined by the Building Official to be immediately dangerous or immediately hazardous may also be used by the Building Official in connection with the summary abatement of all other nuisances upon private property which the Building Official determines, at his or her discretion, as constituting an immediately dangerous or hazardous condition. The Building Official may then summarily abate such nuisance, at his/her discretion, in the most appropriate manner, under the circumstances, which may include, but not be limited to the following methods: Fencing, draining water from swimming pools and filling with appropriate ballast, removing fire hazards, filling or covering open holes and grading or strengthening land fills or excavations. Although the manner and methods used by the Building Official shall be at his/her discretion, he/she shall, in making his/her determinations, seek the most economical method and endeavor not to place an undue economical hardship upon the owner of the property, and only use those measures which will eliminate the dangerous and hazardous features, Notice of his/her actions shall be sent to the record owner of the property affected, as shown on the last equalized assessment rolls, and procedure for appeals, hearings establishing of liens, collecting of the lien by the assessor, and other actions by the Appeals Board shall be the same as that provided in Section 405 of the Code.

(Ord. 991 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 15.24 MECHANICAL CODE
15.24.010 Document adopted by reference.
    A.  The city council of the city of Pico Rivera hereby adopts the 2019 Edition of the California Mechanical Code based on the 2018 Edition of the Uniform Mechanical Code, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as Chapter 15.24 of Title 15 of this code, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended as set forth in this chapter. Said code is adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.

    B.   The purpose of this code is to prescribe regulations for the protection of the public health and safety and to establish minimum regulations for the installation, alteration, design, construction, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance of heating, ventilating, comfort cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances within the city. (Ord. 1141 § 6, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 6, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 32, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

       State law references: Adoption by reference, Government Code Section 50022.1 et seq.

 

15.24.020 Chapter 1—General code provisions.
    Chapter 1 of the 2019 California Mechanical Code is hereby deleted and replaced by the following:

 

101 Administrative Provisions. For administrative provisions for this code, see Section 15.08.020.

(Ord. 1141 § 6, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 6, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 32, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

Chapter 15.28 ELECTRICAL CODE
15.28.010 Document adopted by reference.
    The California Electrical Code, 2019 Edition, is hereby adopted as Chapter 15.28 of Title 15 of this code, with amendments and additions as set forth in this chapter.

    A.  The city council of the city of Pico Rivera hereby adopts the 2019 Edition of the California Electrical Code based on the 2017 Edition of the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, as Chapter 15.28 of Title 15 of this code, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended as set forth in this chapter. Said code is adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.

    B.   The purpose of the code is to prescribe regulations for the installation, arrangement, alteration, repair, use and other operation of electrical wiring, connections, fixtures and other electrical appliances on premises within the city. (Ord. 1141 § 7, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 7, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 33, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

       State law references: Adoption by reference, Government Code Section 50022.1 et seq.

 

15.28.020 Article 89—General code provisions.
    Article 89 of the 2019 California Electrical Code is hereby deleted and replaced by the following:

 

Article 89 Administrative Provisions. For administrative provisions for this code, see Section 15.08.020.

(Ord. 1141 § 7, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 7, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 33, 2013; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

15.28.030 Article 310.10 amended.
    Article 310.10 is hereby amended, by the addition of a second paragraph, to read as follows:

 

Copper wire shall be used for wiring No. 6 and smaller in all installations. Consideration for use of aluminum wiring can be made by the Building Official for feeder lines only on an individual basis where adequate safety measures can be ensured.

(Ord. 1141 § 7, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 7, 2016; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

15.28.040 Article 310 amended.
    Article 310 is amended, by addition of a new Article 310.16, to read as follows:

 

310-16 Continuous inspection of aluminum wiring. Aluminum conductors of No. six (6) or smaller used for branch circuits shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the Building Official for proper torqueing of connections at their termination point.

(Ord. 1141 § 7, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 7, 2016; Ord. 1039, 2008)

Chapter 15.32 PLUMBING CODE
15.32.010 Document adopted by reference.
    A.  The city council of the city of Pico Rivera hereby adopts the 2019 Edition of the California Plumbing Code based on the 2018 Edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, as Chapter 15.32 of Title 15 of this code, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended as set forth in this chapter. Said code is adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.

    B.   The purpose of this code is to prescribe regulations for the protection of the public health and safety and to establish minimum regulations for the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, maintenance or use of plumbing systems within the city. (Ord. 1141 § 8, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 8, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 34, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

       State law references: Adoption by reference, Government Code Section 50022.1 et seq.

 

15.32.020 Chapter 1—General code provisions.
    Chapter 1 of the 2019 California Plumbing Code is hereby deleted and replaced by the following:

 

 

101 Administrative Provisions. For administrative provisions for this code, see Section 15.08.020.

(Ord. 1141 § 8, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 8, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 34, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

Chapter 15.34 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
15.34.010 Adoption.
    The 2019 California Building Standards Code, Part 11, California Green Building Standards Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1141 § 9, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 9, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 35, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 15.35 ENERGY CODE
15.35.010 Adoption.
    The 2019 California Building Standards Code, Part 6, California Energy Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1141 § 10, 2020;Ord. 1101 § 10, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 36, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 15.37 HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE
15.37.010 Adoption.
    The 2019 California Building Standards Code, Part 8, California Historical Building Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1141 § 12, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 12, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 37, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 15.38 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
15.38.010 Document adopted by reference.
    A.  The city council of the city of Pico Rivera hereby adopts the 2019 Edition of the California Existing Building Code based on the 2018 Edition of the International Existing Building Code, as published by the International Code Council, as Chapter 15.38 of Title 15 of this code, except such portions as are deleted, modified, or amended as set forth in this chapter. Said code is adopted and incorporated as if fully set forth herein.

    B.   The purpose of this code is to establish the minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare through structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation and energy conservation; safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment; and to provide safety to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency operations. (Ord. 1141 § 13, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 13, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 38, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

       State law references: Adoption by reference, Government Code Section 50022.1 et seq.

 

15.38.020 Chapter 1—General code provisions.
    Chapter 1 of the 2016 Edition of the California Existing Building Code is hereby deleted and replaced by the following:

 

101 Administrative Provisions. For administrative provisions for this code, see Section 15.08.020.

(Ord. 1141 § 13, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 13, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 38, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1039, 2008)

 

15.38.030 Section 301.6 added—Repair, alteration, addition or change of occupancy exceeding fifty percent of replacement valuation.
    Section 301.6 is added to Chapter 1 of the 2019 Edition of the California Existing Building Code to read as follows:

 

301.6 Repair, alteration, addition or change of occupancy exceeding 50% of replacement valuation. If the valuation of repair, alteration, addition or change of occupancy to an existing building exceeds 50% of the replacement valuation for the entire existing building, the entire building shall comply with the code provisions for new construction. The valuation shall be determined by using the city adopted building valuation table, or as otherwise determined by the building official.

(Ord. 1141 § 13, 2020)

Chapter 15.40 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
15.40.010 Purpose of chapter provisions.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures for the removal of overhead utility facilities and the installation of underground facilities in underground utility districts. (Prior code § 8800)

 

15.40.020 Definitions.
    Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

    A.  “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

    B.   “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

    C.   “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above-ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

    D.  “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited, as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.40.040 of this chapter.

    E.   “Utility” means and includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communications or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Prior code § 8801)

 

15.40.030 Necessity for undergrounding—Public hearing.
    The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city, and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned, by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. Prior to holding of such hearing, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities. (Prior code § 8802)

 

15.40.040 Underground utility districts—Designation authority.
    The city council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district, and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Prior code § 8803)

 

15.40.050 Removal of poles and wires required when.
    Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 15.40.100 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 8804)

 

15.40.060 Overhead facilities—Unusual conditions.
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council, in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Prior code § 8805)

 

15.40.070 Overhead facilities—Permitted when.
    In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

    A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

    B.   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

    C.   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

    D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts;

    E.   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building, or to an adjacent building, without crossing any public street;

    F.   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

    G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

    H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Prior code § 8806)

 

15.40.080 Formation of district—Notice to property owners.
    A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

    B.   Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.40.040, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners, as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the affected utilities. (Prior code § 8807)

 

15.40.090 Utility company responsibilities.
    If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Prior code § 8808)

 

15.40.100 Property owners—Responsibilities.
    A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 15.40.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served.

    B.   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. (Prior code § 8809)

 

15.40.110 Property owners—Alternative provisions.
    The city council may, at its discretion, adopt the following procedure in lieu of Section 15.40.100:

    A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 15.40.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

    B.   The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Pico Rivera. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

    C.   The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited, and become a lien upon the property.

    D.  If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if the premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

    E.   The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

    F.   Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

    G.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. (Prior code § 8810)

 

15.40.120 City responsibilities.
    The city shall remove, at its own expense, all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under the provisions of this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter. (Prior code § 8811)

 

15.40.130 Extension of time to complete work.
    In the event that any act required by this chapter, or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 15.40.040 of this chapter, cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Prior code § 8812)

 

15.40.140 Violation—Penalty.
    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Prior code § 8813)

Chapter 15.42 REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
15.42.010 Adoption.
    The 2019 California Building Standards Code, Part 12, California Referenced Standards Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1141 § 14, 2020; Ord. 1101 § 14, 2016; Ord. 1080 § 39, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 15.44 FIRE CODE
15.44.010 Document adopted by reference.
    A.  Los Angeles County Fire Code (Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code), amending the 2019 California Fire Code and comprised of the 2018 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council is hereby adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the city of Pico Rivera.

    B.   The same shall hereafter constitute the Fire Code of the city regulating the safeguarding of life, property and public welfare to a reasonable degree from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, use and handling of dangerous and hazardous materials, substances and devices; the operation, installation, construction, location, safeguarding and maintenance of attendant equipment within the jurisdiction of the Los Angeles County Fire Department, and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor, and providing penalties for the violation of such code.

    C.   At least two copies of the Los Angeles County Fire Code shall be kept on file in the office of the building official and shall be maintained by the building official for use and examination by the public.

    D.  In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between any provision contained in the Fire Code and any amendments or additions thereto contained in this chapter, the amendments or additions thereto shall control.

    E.   In the event of any conflict or ambiguity between any provision contained in the Fire Code and any other provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, the provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall control. (Ord. 1141 § 15, 2020)

Chapter 15.48 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
15.48.010 Adoption by reference—Exceptions.
    The 2012 Edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction prepared by the Joint Cooperative Committee of the Southern California Chapter American Public Works Association and Southern California Districts Associated General Contractors of California, is adopted by reference, as an integral part of specifications covering all future Public Works construction within the city, with the exception of Section 7-3, which shall be as follows with respect to minimum coverage limits:

 

Bodily Injury

$ 500,000 each person

 

$1,000,000 each accident

 

$1,000,000 aggregate products

 

 

Property Damage

$ 500,000 each person

 

$1,000,000 aggregate

 

(Ord. 1080 § 42, 2013; Ord. 1065 § 4, 2010; Ord. 805 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 15.50 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Article I. General Provisions
15.50.010 Title for citation.
    This chapter shall be known as the “floodplain management ordinance.” (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.015 Statutory authorization.
    The Legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Pico Rivera does adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

15.50.020 Findings of fact.
    A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Pico Rivera are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

    B.   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.030 Statement of purpose.
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

    A.  Protect human life and health;

    B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

    C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

    D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

    E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

    F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

    G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

    H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

Article II. Definitions
15.50.055 Definitions generally.
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.065 Appeal.
    “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.066 Area of shallow flooding.
    “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO, AH zone, or an AR zone where a depth is noted on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flow is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.070 AR zone.
    “AR zone” means a special flood hazard area that results from the decertification of a previously accredited flood protection system that is determined to be in the process of being restored to provide a one hundred year or greater level of flood protection. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.075 Base flood.
    “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “one hundred year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.080 Basement.
    “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.090 Building.
    Building. See “structure.” (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.091 Developed areas.
    A.  For the purposes of this chapter, the city of Pico Rivera has been determined to be a developed area, as defined as follows:

    1.   A primarily urbanized, built-up area that is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres, has basic urban infrastructure, including roads, utilities, communications, and public facilities, to sustain industrial, residential, and commercial activities; and

    a.   Within which seventy-five (75) percent or more of the parcels, tracts, or lots contain commercial, industrial, or residential structures or uses, or

    b.   Is a single parcel, tract, or lot in which seventy-five (75) percent of the area contains existing commercial or industrial structures or uses, or

    c.   Is a subdivision developed at a density of at least two residential structures per acre within which seventy-five (75) percent or more of the lots contain existing residential structures;

    2.   Undeveloped parcels, tracts, or lots, the combination of which is less than twenty (20) acres and contiguous on at least three sides to areas meeting the criteria of subsection 1 of this section,

    3.   A subdivision that is a minimum of twenty (20) contiguous acres that has obtained all necessary government approvals, provided that the actual “start of construction” of structures has occurred on at least:

    a.   Ten percent of the lots or remaining lots of a subdivision, or

    b.   Ten percent of the maximum building coverage or remaining building coverage allowed for a single lot subdivision, and construction of structures is underway. Residential subdivisions must meet the density criteria in subsection (1)(c) of this section;

    4.   Developed areas as identified in the city of Pico Rivera zoning map presently in effect or as amended. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.095 Development.
    “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.100 Encroachment.
    “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.105 Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
    “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.110 Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
    “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.115 Flood, flooding, or flood water.
    “Flood, flooding, or flood water” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.130 Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).
    “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.135 Flood insurance study.
    “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.140 Floodplain or flood-prone area.
    “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see “flooding”). (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.145 Floodplain administrator.
    “Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.150 Floodplain management.
    “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.155 Floodplain management regulations.
    “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.160 Floodproofing.
    “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.165 Fraud and victimization.
    “Fraud and victimization” as related to Section 15.50.560, Variances, of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city council will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.175 Governing body.
    “Governing body” is the city council of the city of Pico Rivera that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.190 Hardship.
    “Hardship” as related to Section 15.50.560, Variances, of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. Said variance shall be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.195 Highest adjacent grade.
    “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.200 Historic structure.
    “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

    A.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

    B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

    C.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

    D.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.205 Levee.
    “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.210 Levee system.
    “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.215 Lowest floor.
    “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. (See “basement” definition).

    A.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

    1.   The wet floodproofing standard in Section 15.50.525(C)(3) of this chapter;

    2.   The anchoring standards in Section 15.50.525(A) of this chapter;

    3.   Construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.50.525(B) of this chapter;

    4.   The standards for utilities in Section 15.50.530 of this chapter.

    B.   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.220 Manufactured home.
    “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.” (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.225 Manufactured home park or subdivision.
    “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.230 Mean sea level.
    “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.235 New construction.
    “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.240 New manufactured home park or subdivision.
    “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.245 Obstruction.
    “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.250 One hundred year flood.
    One hundred year flood or 100 year flood. See “base flood.” (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.255 Public safety and nuisance.
    “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Section 15.50.560, Variances, of this chapter means that the granting of a variance shall not result in anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.260 Recreational vehicle.
    “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

    A.  Built on a single chassis;

    B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

    C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck;

    D.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

15.50.265 Regulatory floodway.
    “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.275 Special flood hazard area.
    “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on the FIRM as zones AR, AH, AO, AR/A or as an AR zone where a depth is noted. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.280 Start of construction.
    “Start of construction” includes proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.285 Structure.
    “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.300 Variance.
    “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.305 Water surface elevation.
    “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine areas. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.310 Watercourse.
    “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.315 Violation.
    “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.325 Remedy a violation.
    “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

Article III. Administration
15.50.410 Lands to which this chapter applies.
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.420 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) dated July 6, 1998 and accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council of the city of Pico Rivera by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at the City Hall, City of Pico Rivera, 6615 Passons Boulevard, Department of Public Works. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.430 Compliance.
    No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.440 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.450 Interpretation.
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be:

    A.  Considered as minimum requirements;

    B.   Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and

    C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.460 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of Pico Rivera, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.470 Severability.
    This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.490 Establishment of development permit.
    A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.50.420 of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

    A.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures and the elevation of highest adjacent grade; or

    B.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, if required in Section 15.50.525(C) of this chapter; and

    C.   All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.50.505(D) of this chapter; and

    D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.500 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
    The director of public works is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.505 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
    The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

    A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine that:

    1.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

    2.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

    3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and

    4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

    B.   Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.50.420 of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article IV of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.

    C.   Notification of Other Agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

    1.   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

    2.   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

    3.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

    D.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

    1.   Certification required by Section 15.50.525(C)(1) of this chapter (lowest floor elevations);

    2.   Certification required by Section 15.50.525(C)(2) of this chapter (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

    3.   Certification required by Sections 15.50.525(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

    4.   Certification of elevation required by Section 15.50.535 of this chapter (subdivision standards);

    5.   Certification required by Section 15.50.550 of this chapter (floodway encroachments).

    E.   Map Determinations. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.50.560 of this chapter.

    F.   Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.50.430 of this chapter.

    G.  AR Zone Duties.

    1.   Use the adopted official map or legal description of those designated developed areas within zone AR, as defined in Article II of this chapter to determine if a proposed project is in a developed area;

    2.   Determine the base flood elevation to be used for individual projects, all of which will be within developed areas, and areas not designated as developed areas;

    3.   Require the applicable standards;

    4.   Provide written notification to the permit applicant that the area has been designated as an AR zone and the structure be elevated or protected. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.510 Appeals.
    The city council of the city of Pico Rivera shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

Article IV. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
15.50.525 Standards of construction.
    The areas in AR/A zone in reference to the Rio Hondo River and the A zone in reference to the San Gabriel River are areas which are not within the city of Pico Rivera’s jurisdiction. Any activities in these areas shall be strictly limited to emergency or routine maintenance of the channels or bridges crossing these rivers.

    In all other areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

    A.  Anchoring.

    1.   All new construction shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

    2.   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Article II of this chapter.

    B.   Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction shall be constructed:

    1.   With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

    2.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

    3.   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

    C.   Elevation and Floodproofing. (See Article II of this chapter for definitions)

    1.   Residential construction, shall have the lowest floor, including basement, in an AR zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to the lower of either the AR base, flood elevation or the elevation that is three feet above the highest adjacent grade, but in no event shall be less than two feet above the highest adjacent grade.

    Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

    2.   Nonresidential construction, shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (C)(1) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

    a.   Be floodproofed below the elevation recommended under subsection (C)(1) of this section or that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

    b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

    c.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of subsection (C)(2) of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

    3.   All new construction with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must exceed the following minimum criteria:

    a.   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or

    b.   Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater.

    4.   New manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in Section 15.50.540 of this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.530 Standards for utilities.
    A.  All water supply and sanitary sewage systems to new construction shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

    1.   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

    2.   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

    B.   On-site waste disposal systems to new construction shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.535 Standards for subdivisions.
    A.  All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

    B.   All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

    C.   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

    D.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

    E.   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.540 Standards for manufactured homes.
    All manufactured homes placed on sites located:

    A.  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;

    B.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

    C.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

    D.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation collapse and lateral movement. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.550 Standards for recreational vehicles.
    All recreational vehicles:

    A.  Will either be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use—a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

    B.   Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.50.490 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.50.540(A) of this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

Article V. Variance Procedure
15.50.560 Variances.
    The variance criteria set forth in this section of the chapter are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

    It is the duty of the city of Pico Rivera to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this ordinance are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.570 Appeal board.
    A.  In passing upon requests for variances, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

    1.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

    2.   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

    3.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

    4.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

    5.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

    6.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

    7.   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

    8.   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

    9.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and

    10. Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

    B.   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

    1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in substantially increased premium rates for flood insurance coverage; and

    2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the county recorder of the county of Los Angeles and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

    C.   The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

 

15.50.580 Conditions for variances.
    A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.50.480 and 15.50.525 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

    B.   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

    C.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood haz-

ard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city council body believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

    D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a:

    1.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;

    2.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” (as defined in Article II of this chapter) to the applicant; and

    3.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (as defined in Article II of this chapter, see “public safety or nuisance”), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Article II of this chapter) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

    E.   Variances may be issued for new construction, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsection A through E of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

    F.   Upon consideration of the factors of Section 15.50.570(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 909 § 2, 1998)

Chapter 15.52 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
15.52.010 Purpose.
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of solar energy systems by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for installation of small residential rooftop solar energy systems, while promoting public health and safety, and preventing specific adverse impacts that may result from the installation and use of such solar energy systems. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.5. If amendments to Government Code Section 65850.5 conflict with the provisions of this chapter, then this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with Section 65850.5, as the same may be amended. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 2018)

 

15.52.020 Definitions.
    A.  “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

    1.   A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

    2.   A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

    3.   A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

    4.   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

    B.   “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

    C.   “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    1.   E-mail;

    2.   The Internet;

    3.   Facsimile.

    D.  “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful small residential solar energy system permit application.

    E.   “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 2018)

 

15.52.030 Expedited permitting process.
    The building official shall implement an expedited, streamlined, permitting process for installation of small residential rooftop solar energy systems, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 2018)

 

15.52.040 Permit application process.
    A.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall provide information required by the city’s checklist for installation of small residential rooftop solar energy systems to verify that the installation will not have a specific, adverse impact on public health and safety and building occupants. Verification includes, but is not limited to:

    1.   Verifying (using of standard engineering evaluation techniques) that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

    2.   At the applicant’s cost, verifying (using standard electrical inspection techniques) that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

    B.   An application that satisfies the information requirements in the city’s adopted checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete and promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documentation meet the requirements of the city’s checklist, and are consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official shall approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations within the building official’s purview for the installation of a small residential rooftop solar energy system. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid without obtaining other approvals that may be required by the city or other entities. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

    C.   If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

    D.  The city’s adopted checklist and permit application shall be published on the city’s website. An applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the city’s building division by personal, mailed or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications, and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 2018)

 

15.52.050 Technical review.
    A.  If the building official reviews an application and makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the small residential rooftop solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the city may require the applicant to apply for a conditional use permit. The planning commission shall grant a conditional use permit for installation of a small residential rooftop solar energy system unless the planning commission makes written findings, based on substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed installation would have a significant, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and that there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. Any conditions imposed on an application to install a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety at the lowest cost possible.

    B.   In the technical review of a charging station, the building official or planning commission shall not condition the approval of a small residential rooftop solar energy system installation permit on an association’s (as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080) approval of the station.

    C.   The building official’s decision to approve a permit pursuant to Section 15.52.040(B) above, or to require a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection A of this section, may be appealed to the planning commission.

    D.  For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the building official and fire chief. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 2018)

 

15.52.060 Small residential rooftop solar energy systems installation requirements.
    A.  A solar energy system shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by state and local permitting authorities.

    B.   Solar energy systems for heating water in single family residences and solar collectors used for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined in the California Plumbing and Mechanical Codes.

    C.   A solar energy system for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1124 § 1, 2018)

Chapter 15.54 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
15.54.010 Purpose.
    A.  The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for installation of electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts that may result from the installation and use of such charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7. If amendments to Government Code Section 65850.7 conflict with the provisions of this chapter, then this chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with Section 65850.7, as the same may be amended.

    B.   This chapter is intended to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations, but does not supersede the building official’s authority to identify and address higher priority life-safety situations. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 2018)

 

15.54.020 Definitions.
    A.  “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

    B.   “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

    C.   “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

    1.   Electronic mail or e-mail.

    2.   The Internet.

    3.   Facsimile.

    D.  “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful electric vehicle charging station permit application. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 2018)

 

15.54.030 Expedited permitting process.
    The building official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 2018)

 

15.54.040 Permit application processing.
    A.  Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall provide information required by the city’s checklist for installation of electrical vehicle charging stations to verify that the installation will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

    b.   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the city’s checklist, and are consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official shall approve the application and issue all necessary permits within the building official’s purview for the installation of an electric vehicle charging station. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station without obtaining other approvals that may be required by the city.

    C.   If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

    D.  The city’s adopted checklist and permit application shall be published on the city’s website. The building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications and associated supporting documents. In accepting such permit applications, the building official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 2018)

 

15.54.050 Technical review.
    A.  If the building official reviews an application and makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that the electrical vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, the city may require the applicant to apply for a conditional use permit. The planning commission shall grant a conditional use permit for installation of an electric vehicle charging station unless the planning commission makes written findings, based on substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed installation would have a significant, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and that there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. Any conditions imposed on an application to install an electric vehicle charging station shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety at the lowest cost possible.

    B.   In the technical review of a charging station, the building official or planning commission shall not condition the approval of an electric vehicle charging station installation permit on an association’s (as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080) approval of the station.

    C.   The building official’s decision to approve a permit pursuant to Section 15.54.040(B) above, or require a conditional use permit pursuant to subsection A of this section, may be appealed to the city’s planning commission. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 2018)

 

15.54.060 Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
    A.  Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability.

    B.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

    C.   Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

    D.  Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 2018)

Title 16 ENVIRONMENT
Chapter 16.04 STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION

Chapter 16.04 STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION
16.04.010 Purpose and intent.
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect and improve water quality of receiving waters by:

    A.  Reducing illicit discharges to the municipal stormwater system to the maximum extent practicable;

    B.   Eliminating illicit connections to the municipal stormwater system;

    C.   Eliminating spillage, dumping, and disposal of pollutant materials into the municipal stormwater system;

    D.  Reducing pollutant loads in stormwater and urban runoff, from land uses and activities identified in the municipal NPDES permit; and

    E.   Reducing the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 through interagency coordination.

    The provisions of this chapter are adopted pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the “Clean Water Act,” codified and amended at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect the water quality of the receiving waters of the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto; applicable implementing regulations; the municipal NPDES permit, and any amendment, revision, or re-issuance thereof. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.020 Definitions.
    For the purpose of the provisions of this chapter concerning water quality hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

    “Automotive service facility” means a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) codes. For inspection purposes, permittees need not inspect facilities with SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532 through 7534, and 7536 through 7539 provided that these facilities have no outside activities or materials that may be exposed to stormwater.

    “Basin plan” means the Water Quality Control Plan, Los Angeles Region, Basin Plan for the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, adopted by the Regional Water Board on June 13, 1994 and subsequent amendments.

    “Best management practices” or “BMPs” are practices, physical devices, or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water.

    “Clean Water Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

    “Commercial facility” means any development on private land that is not industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to: hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions, recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities; mini-malls and other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public warehouses and other light industrial complexes, restaurants, automotive service facilities, automotive dealerships, and retail gasoline station outlets or any other definition provided in the municipal NPDES permit or Stormwater Quality Management Plan.

    “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance.

    “Disturbed area” means an area that is altered as a result of clearing, grading, and/or excavation.

    “Executive officer” means executive officer of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles.

    “Illicit connection” means any man-made conveyance that is connected to the storm drain system without a permit, excluding roof drains and other similar type connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits, inlets, or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system.

    “Illicit discharge” means any discharge into the MS4, or from the MS4 into a receiving water, that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge includes any non-stormwater discharge, except authorized non-stormwater discharges; conditionally exempt non-stormwater discharges; and non-stormwater discharges resulting from natural flows specifically identified in Part III.A.1.d of the NPDES permit.

    “Industrial activity” means any of the ten classifications of industrial facilities specified in 40 Code of Federal Regulations Section 122.26(b)(14), defined by Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and which is required to obtain a NPDES permit, not including construction activities.

    “Low impact development (LID)” consists of building and landscape features designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff.

    “Maximum extent practicable” or “MEP” means the extent to which the city can reduce the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. MEP requires selecting and implementing effective BMPs, and rejecting applicable BMPs only where: (1) other effective BMPs will serve the same purpose; (2) the BMPs would not be technically feasible; or (3) the cost would be prohibitive. Factors considered include, but are not limited to:

    1.   Effectiveness: whether the BMP addresses a pollutant of concern.

    2.   Regulatory compliance: whether the BMP complies with stormwater regulations, as well as other environmental regulations.

    3.   Public acceptance: whether the BMP has public support.

    4.   Cost: whether the cost of implementing the BMP has a reasonable relationship to the pollution control benefits achieved.

    5.   Technical feasibility: whether the BMP is technically feasible, considering soils, geography, and water resources.

    “Municipal NPDES permit” means California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region, Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES Permit No. CAS004001 Waste Discharge Requirements for Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Discharge Within the Coastal Watersheds of Los Angeles County, Except Those Discharges Originating from the City of Long Beach MS4, and any amendment thereto or re-issuance thereof.

    “Municipal separate storm sewer system” (referred to herein as “MS4”), means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):

    1.   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States;

    2.   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;

    3.   Which is not a combined sewer; and

    4.   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.2 (40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(8)).

    “Non-stormwater discharge” means any fluid discharge to the storm drain system and/or receiving waters that is not composed entirely of stormwater but may not necessarily be an illicit discharge.

    “NPDES” or “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” means the national permitting program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under Clean Water Act (CWA) Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405. The term includes an “approved program.”

    Mandated by Congress under the Clean Water Act, the NPDES Stormwater Program is a comprehensive two-phased national program for addressing the non-agricultural sources of stormwater discharges which adversely affect the quality of our nation’s waters. The program uses the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting mechanism to require the implementation of controls designed to prevent harmful pollutants from being washed by stormwater runoff into local water bodies.

    “Outfall” means a point source as defined in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) at 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to waters of the United States, and does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm sewers, or pipes, tunnels or other conveyances with connect segments of the same stream or other waters of the United States, and are used to convey waters of the United States (40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(9)) (Order No. R4-2012-0175).

    “Owner” as applied to a building or real property, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or real property.

    “Person” means, within the context of this chapter, any natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, or company.

    “Pollutant” or “pollutants” means those “pollutants” defined in CWA Section 502(6) (33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6)), and incorporated by reference into California Water Code Section 13373, and may include, but is not limited to, garbage, debris, lawn clippings, leaves, fecal waste, biological waste, sediment, sludge, manure, fertilizers, pesticides, oil, grease, gasoline, paints, solvents, cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing toxic or non-toxic chemicals, metals, including batteries.

    “Public works director” means the director of public works of the city of Pico Rivera.

    “Receiving waters” means rivers, lakes, oceans, or other bodies of water that receive runoff.

    “Redevelopment” means land-disturbing activity that results in the creation, addition, or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to: the expansion of a building footprint, addition or replacement of a structure, replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of a routine maintenance activity, and land disturbing activities related to structural or impervious surfaces. Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety.

    “Regional Board” means the appointed members of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.

    “Restaurant” means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC Code 5812).

    “Retail gasoline outlet” means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and lubricating oils.

    “Runoff” means any runoff including stormwater and dry weather flows from a drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows.

    “Standard urban stormwater mitigation program” means the Los Angeles countywide Stormwater Quality Management Program which includes descriptions of programs, collectively developed by the permittees in accordance with provisions of the NPDES permit, to comply with applicable federal and state law, as the same is amended from time to time.

    “State Board” means the State Water Resources Control Board of the California Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter “SWRCB”).

    “Stormwater runoff” means any surface water flow produced by rain or snow melt. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.030 Illicit discharges, dumping, and non-stormwater discharges.
    A.  No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge to enter the municipal stormwater system.

    B.   No person shall place, dump, dispose, litter, accumulate, maintain, discharge, or cause to enter into the MS4, any pollutant or any foreign object such as batteries, tires, waste receptacles, yard debris, refuse, rubbish, food waste, chemicals, animal waste or oil cans, which are also considered illicit discharges.

    C.   Any person causing an illicit discharge to the MS4 may be required to pay for the cost of clean-up and remediation.

    D.  Any owner of any private property from which a non-stormwater discharge is observed may be required to pay for the cost of collecting and analyzing the discharge to determine if it is an illicit discharge.

    E.   Discharges identified in Part III.A of the 2012 NPDES MS4 permit are considered exempt or conditionally exempt illicit discharges. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

   

16.04.040 Illicit connections.
    A.  No person shall maintain or intentionally use a connection that operates to convey an illicit discharge to the municipal stormwater system.

    B.   Upon discovery of an illicit connection, the person owning or operating such connection shall either remove it or render it incapable of conveying an illicit discharge.

    C.   If any person fails to eliminate an illicit connection after being called upon by the city to do so, the city administrator or the director of public works or designee(s), shall impose appropriate measures to remove or disable the illicit connection and may recover the costs from the owner of such illicit connection. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.050 Reduction of pollutants in runoff.
    No person shall cause, or threaten to cause, the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 by exposing such pollutants to stormwater runoff. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.060 Control of pollutants from commercial facilities.
    Subject commercial facilities shall implement BMPs prescribed by the Regional Board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit, as called for more particularly in the city’s stormwater quality management program, or any revisions made thereto. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.070 Control of pollutants from industrial activities.
    A.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any industry in the city that is subject to waste discharge requirements specified in the SWRCB Water Quality Control Board’s Industrial General Permit (IGP), or any revision or re-issuance thereof, to operate without a general industrial activities stormwater NPDES permit.

    B.   Industries that require a NPDES IGP shall retain on-site the following documents: (1) a copy of the notice of intent for general permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity; (2) a waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; and/or (3) a stormwater pollution prevention plan and monitoring program plan; (4) any stormwater quality data; and (5) evidence of facility self-inspection.

    C.   Any industry in the city requiring a NPDES IGP shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents described in subsection B of this section.

    D.  Industrial facilities not subject to the NPDES Industrial General permit that are subject to pollution control requirements under the municipal NPDES Permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the Regional Board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.080 Control of pollutants from other industrial facilities.
    Industrial facilities not subject to the general industrial activities stormwater NPDES permit but subject to pollution control requirements under the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the regional board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.090 Control of pollutants from state permitted construction activities.
    A. No person shall commence or continue any construction activity in the city that causes the disturbance of one acre or more of soil by clearing, grading, and excavating without demonstrating to the city that such person has obtained a NPDES Construction General Permit from the SWRCB. The NPDES Construction General Permit does not apply to the following construction activity:

    1.   Routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of the facility;

    2.   Disturbances to land surfaces solely related to agricultural operations such as disking, harrowing, terracing and leveling, and soil preparation;

    3.   Construction activity covered by an individual NPDES permit for stormwater discharges;

    4.   Landfill construction activity that is subject to the Industrial General Permit; or

    5.   Construction activity that discharges to combined sewer systems.

    In the case of a public emergency that requires immediate construction activities, a discharger shall submit a brief description of the emergency construction activity within five days of the onset of construction, and then shall submit all PRDs within thirty days.

    B.   Any person engaged in a construction activity requiring a general construction activity stormwater NPDES permit shall retain at the construction site the following documents: (1) a copy of the notice of intent to comply with terms of the general permit to discharge water associated with construction activity; (2) a waste discharge identification number issued by the SWRCB; (3) a stormwater pollution prevention plan and monitoring program plan for the construction activity requiring the construction permit; and (4) records of all inspections, compliance and non-compliance reports, evidence of self-inspection and good housekeeping practices.

    C.   Any person engaged in a construction activity in the city requiring an NPDES general construction stormwater activity permit shall, upon reasonable request from a duly authorized officer of the city, provide any of the documents specified in subsection B of this section and shall retain said documents for at least three years after completion of construction.

    D. Construction activity not subject to the NPDES Industrial General Permit that are subject to pollution control requirements under the municipal NPDES permit, shall implement BMPs prescribed by the Regional Board or its executive officer, through programs or actions made pursuant to the municipal NPDES permit. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.100 Control of pollutants from other construction activities.
    Any person engaged in a construction activity that is not subject to the general construction stormwater activity NPDES permit, but is subject to the municipal NPDES permit, shall comply with all requirements specified in the stormwater management quality program, including any revisions made thereto. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.110 Control of pollutants from new developments/ redevelopment projects.
    A.  Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Program (SUSMP). Subject new development and redevelopment projects are required to comply with SUSMP conditions assigned by the city that shall consist of: (1) low impact development (“LID”) structural and non-structural best management practices (“BMPs”); (2) source control BMPs; and (3) structural and non-structural BMPs for specific types of uses. LID controls effectively reduce the amount of impervious area of a completed project site and promote the use of infiltration and other controls that reduce runoff. Source control BMPs prevent runoff contact with pollutant materials that would otherwise be discharged to the MS4. Specific structural controls are also required to address pollutant discharges from certain uses including, but not limited to, developments, retail gasoline outlets, automotive service facilities, restaurants, and industrial and commercial facilities where pollutant materials are disposed, stored, or handled.

    B.   Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan Review and Approval. An applicant for a subject new development or a redevelopment project shall incorporate into the applicant’s project plans into a SUSMP plan subject to city review and approval.

    C.   California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”). Any project subject to CEQA review but is not specified in a redevelopment or development project category may be required to comply with any of the SUSMP requirements at the city’s discretion.

    D.  Stormwater Management/Watershed Management Program. The city’s stormwater management program (“SWMP”) plan or watershed management program (“WMP”) plan, whichever is in effect at the time of review, shall contain specific conditions and procedures for meeting planning land development and SUSMP requirements. The program plans shall contain guidance documents to facilitate compliance including but not limited to an updated SUSMP guidance manual, a Low Impact Development (LID) Guidance Manual, and Green Street Manual referencing the USEPA’s guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure Manual.

    E.   Certificate of Occupancy. As a condition for issuing a certificate of occupancy for new development or redevelopment project, the authorized enforcement officer shall require facility operators and/or owners to build all the stormwater pollution control best management practices and structural or treatment control BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit a signed certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the SUSMP and other applicable regulatory requirements.

    F.   Transfer of Properties. The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either: (1) assume responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control BMP; or (2) to replace existing structural or treatment control BMPs with new control measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the city and the SUSMP. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof of inspection.

    1.   For residential properties where the structural or treatment control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by a homeowner’s association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance shall be included in the project’s conditions, covenants and restrictions (CC&Rs). Printed educational material will be required to accompany the first deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide information on what stormwater management facilities are present, signs that maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be performed. The transfer of this information shall also be required with any subsequent sale of the property.

    2.   If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area proposed for dedication to a public agency, they will be the responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.120 Enforcement—Authority.
    A.  The director of public works, the city engineer, and duly authorized representatives thereof, are hereby authorized and directed to enforce all provisions of this chapter.

    B.   Nothing in this chapter precludes a local authority from using regular full-time employees to enforce this chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police and code enforcement officers.

    C.   Fees to be charged for plan checking, inspection, enforcement and any other activities carried out by the city shall be specified by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.130 Enforcement—Right of entry and inspection.
    A.  The director of public works, city engineer, or duly authorized designee thereof, may, on twenty-four hours’ oral or written notice, unless exigent circumstances justify a shorter time period, enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms of this chapter and perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter, provided that:

    1.   If such building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry.

    2.   If such building or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or occupant of the building or premises and request entry. In the event that a request for entry is refused, the officer is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.

    B.   Such inspection may include, but is not limited to:

    1.   Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises;

    2.   Identifying points of discharge of all waste water, non-stormwater, processed water system and pollutants;

    3.   Investigating the natural slope of the premises, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems;

    4.   Establishing location of all points of discharge from the premises, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;

    5.   Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge;

    6.   Inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank or other mobile equipment;

    7.   Inspecting all records of the owner or occupant of public or private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, and any and all records relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system;

    8.   Inspecting, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials with any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system;

    9.   Inspecting the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems any connection to other pipelines on the property, including the use of dye and smoke tests, video surveys, photographs or videotapes, and the taking of measurements, drawings, or any other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the premises;

    10. Installing and maintaining of monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the municipal storm drain system; or

    11. Evaluating compliance with this chapter or the Clean Water Act. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

 

16.04.140 Enforcement—Violations and penalties.
    A.  The director of public works, city engineer, or duly authorized representatives may serve notice of violation upon a person owning or occupying a premises, describing the violations and requiring prompt correction thereof, when:

    1.   Pollutants or potential pollutants are being maintained, discharged or deposited in such a manner as to create, or if allowed to continue will create, any one or more of the following conditions: (a) a public nuisance; (b) a menace to the public safety; (c) pollution of underground or surface waters; (d) damage to any public sewer, municipal storm sewer system, or public or private property.

    2.   The person has failed to respond or comply with a previous notice of violation within the time period specified in the notice.

    B.   Failure to comply with a duly served notice of violation shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter.

    C.   The city manager, director of public works, or duly authorized representatives may serve a cease and desist order upon a person owning or occupying a premises, requiring the person to immediately:

    1.   Discontinue any illicit discharge, including process water, wastewater or pollutant discharge to the MS4;

    2.   Block or divert any flow of water from the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter; and

    3.   Discontinue any other violation of this chapter.

    The cease and desist order may contain terms and conditions or other provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.

    D.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is punishable by fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. As a part of any sentence or other penalty imposed, or the award of any damage, the court may also order that restitution be paid to the city or any injured person, or, in the case of a violator who is a minor, by the minor’s parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. Restitution may include the amount of any reward.

    E.   The city attorney is also authorized to file in a court of competent jurisdiction a civil action seeking an injunction against any violation or threatened or continuing violation of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city for all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation, monitoring, treatment, abatement, removal or remediation undertaken by or at the expense of the city, and may include all legal expenses and fees and any or all costs incurred relating to the restoration or remediation of the environment.

    F.   Each separate discharge in violation of this chapter and each day a violation described in this chapter exists, without correction, shall constitute a new and separate violation punishable as a separate criminal offense and/or civil violation.

    G.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, also may be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts, including civil and criminal penalties. In addition, the city attorney is authorized to file a citizen’s suit pursuant to the Clean Water Act, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and appropriate relief.

    H.  The penalties and remedies established by this chapter shall be cumulative.

    I.    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for any and all costs incurred by the city in responding to, investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning, removing, or remediating any illicit discharge or pollutant from the municipal storm drain system; rectifying any illicit connection; or remediating any violation of this chapter. Such costs to be paid to the city include all administrative expenses and all legal expenses, including costs and attorneys’ fees, in obtaining compliance, and in litigation including all costs and attorneys’ fees on any appeal. The costs to be recovered pursuant to this section shall be recoverable from any and all persons violating this chapter.

    J.    The city shall have full power and authority to take any necessary precautions including, but not limited to, decontamination, storm drain closure, packaging, diking, and transportation of materials, in order to protect life, protect property, or prevent an imminent hazard to the public’s health, safety or welfare. In the event any violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public health, safety, or the environment, the director of public works, city engineer or any authorized agent thereof, may enter upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the discharge of pollutants, where such discharge presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health or safety, or the environment.

    K.  Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, violations of this chapter may further be deemed to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by administrative or civil or criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code and state law. All costs and fees incurred by the city as a result of any violation of this chapter which constitute a nuisance, including all administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner, in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording, as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. The city attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs and enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the premises in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5.

    L.   Any remedies provided to the city in this chapter are not exclusive, and the city may utilize any and all other remedies as otherwise provided by law.

    M.  Compliance by any person or entity with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve any such person or entity from complying with other applicable local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements. (Ord. 1086 § 1, 2014)

Title 17 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.12 TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 17.16 PROCESSING OF TENTATIVE TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 17.18 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 17.20 FINAL TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS
Chapter 17.24 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 17.26 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE AND NOTICES OF VIOLATION
Chapter 17.28 DESIGN STANDARDS
Chapter 17.32 IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 17.36 FEES, DEPOSITS AND BONDS
Chapter 17.40 APPEALS

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.04.010 Title for citation.
    This title of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall hereinafter be known as the subdivision code of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9101.01)

 

17.04.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of Title 17 of this code is to establish and set forth regulations and procedures that will, when properly administered, assist in the effectuation and implementation of the goals, provisions and objectives of the city’s Comprehensive General Plan. It is also intended to promote the conservation, stabilization and protection of property values through the orderly growth and development of the community, in conjunction with Titles 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 18 of this code. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9101.02)

 

17.04.030 Statutory authority.
    This title, regulating land divisions, consolidations and other such practices deemed necessary for the protection, promotion and maintenance of the public health, safety, environment and general welfare, is authorized pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, as cited in Section 17.04.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9101.04)

 

17.04.040 Subdivision Map Act—Adopted—Applicability.
    All land divisions, whether creating, consolidating or reverting, subdivision tracts, records of survey or parcel maps, shall be subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act contained in Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California, and as may thereafter be amended, and such provisions shall become a part of Title 17 of this code. The regulations contained in this land division code are adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9101.03)

 

17.04.050 Advisory agency—Planning commission authority.
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act wherein the term “Advisory Agency” is used, the planning commission is designated as such advisory agency, and shall be vested with all powers and duties granted or imposed by the Subdivision Map Act, except those functions reserved to the city council, division of land committee, or the city planner, as may be set forth elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9101.05)

 

17.04.060 References to other laws.
    Whenever reference is made to other ordinances of the city or to other statutes of the state of California, such reference applies to requirements of such ordinances or statutes applicable on the date of final action on a tentative map and to the provisions of variations, modifications and permits granted pursuant to such ordinances or statutes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.01)

 

17.04.070 Compliance required.
    A person, firm or corporation shall not lease, finance or transfer title to a portion of land or division of land, or offer to do so, or contract to do so, until a final tract or parcel map therefor, in full compliance with the provisions of this title and of the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed with the city and in the office of the recorder of Los Angeles County, unless otherwise exempted by this title or by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.02)

 

17.04.080 Exemptions to Title 17.
    The provisions of Title 17 of this code do not apply to any of the following:

    A.  Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days’ notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code unless a showing is made in individual cases, under substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates the application of the regulations to those short-term leases in individual cases;

    B.   Divisions of land described in California Government Code Sections 66412, 66412.1 or 66499.30 (e). (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.04)

 

17.04.085 Presumption of valid subdivision.
    Any portion of a division of land in full compliance with or exempt from any law which was in effect at the time such land division was legally established shall be presumed to be a valid subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of Title 17. Any portion of a division of land in full compliance with the requirements of Section 66412.6 of the Subdivision Map Act shall likewise be presumed to be a valid subdivision of land pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and of this Title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.04.090 Building and building permit prerequisites.
    No building shall be constructed, nor shall a permit for the construction of a building be issued, nor shall a portion of any lot be used when not conforming to the provisions of this title. Any such permit, if issued in conflict with this title, shall be canceled, and any fees paid in connection therewith shall be refunded to the permittee. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.05)

 

17.04.110 Division of land committee.
    A.  A division of land committee is created and established to principally serve as a reviewing body for tentative maps required by the Subdivision Map Act and/or by this title. The division of land committee may, and upon request by the city planner shall review such other maps as may be required by the city planner as part of information to be supplied for application for waiver of map, certificate of compliance or lot line adjustment, as the case may be, and in accord with provisions for same in the Subdivision Map Act.

    B.   All meetings conducted by the division of land committee shall be open to the public, and the committee shall consist of the following members or their respective representatives duly authorized to act in their stead; provided, however, that in no case shall more than one of the aforesaid members set forth in subsections B1, B2 or B3 hereof be represented by his or her duly authorized representative:

    1.   The city planner, who shall hold the office of chairman;

    2.   The director of public works;

    3.   The director of recreation and community services;

    4.   Such other officers and representatives of other agencies which, in the opinion of the city planner, have an interest in a proposed division of land. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.13)

 

17.04.120 Conformity to general plan—Waivers.
    The following shall govern General Plan conformance and time for or waiver of a report:

    A.  General Plan Conformance. A report as to conformity to the General Plan, which is required pursuant to Section 65402 of the Government Code of the state as the result of a proposed division of land, may be included as a part of and at the same time as the action taken by the advisory agency on such division of land.

    B.   Time for or Waiver of Report. A report, as set forth in subsection A of this section, shall not be required for a proposed subdivision which involves any one or all of the following:

    1.   The disposition of the remainder of a larger parcel which was acquired and used in part for street purposes; or

    2.   Acquisitions, dispositions or abandonments for street widening purposes; or

    3.   Alignment projects, provided that the advisory agency expressly finds that any such disposition for street purposes, acquisitions, dispositions, or abandonments for street widening, or alignment projects is of a minor nature. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.11)

 

17.04.130 Planned residential lot sale or separation conditions.
    Where lots are sold or otherwise separated in ownership, no dwelling unit or lot shall be sold or encumbered separately from an undivided interest in the open space and areas designated as common vehicular and/or pedestrian access appurtenant to such dwelling unit and lot in accordance with the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this code. Such undivided interest shall include either an undivided interest in the open space and area designated for common vehicular and/or pedestrian access, or a share in the corporation or voting membership in an association owning the open space and designated common vehicular and/or pedestrian access. This provision shall not apply when the required open space reserved to the lot owners and maintenance easements are granted to an established maintenance district, or when other satisfactory means to insure permanent reservation of required open space have been approved by the planning commission and city council. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.10)

 

17.04.140 Annexed property.
    When any area in a division of land or proposed division of land for which a tentative tract or parcel map has been filed but a final tract or parcel map has not been finally approved, is annexed to the city, all procedures and regulations required by this title and the Subdivision Map Act shall be deemed to commence as of the effective date of the annexation. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.12)

 

17.04.150 Voidable transactions designated.
    A person, firm or corporation is prohibited from selling or leasing any division of land until a final tract map or parcel map, in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, has been duly recorded or filed in the office of the county recorder. The determination and abatement of a violation of the Subdivision Map Act and this title may be in accordance with Sections 66499.34, 66499.35 and 66499.36 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.07)

 

17.04.160 Falsification of information.
    Fraudulent misrepresentation of pertinent information shall be sufficient reason to invalidate an approval obtained pursuant to this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.09)

 

17.04.170 Violation—Penalty.
    Violation of Title 17 of this code is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.06)

 

17.04.180 Violation—Other remedies.
    The provisions of Title 17 of this code are not intended to prohibit any legal, equitable or summary remedy to which the city or other political subdivision, or any person, may otherwise be entitled, and the city or other political subdivision or person may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed division of land in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.08)

Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
17.08.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to define certain words, terms, phrases and headings affecting the scope and nature of accomplishing the intent and purpose of Title 17 of this code. Such words, terms, phrases and headings contained in this chapter and appearing elsewhere in this title shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them, and in all cases shall preempt any dictionarial reference made thereto. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.01)

 

17.08.020 Definitions generally.
    The following words, terms, phrases and headings are hereby categorized and defined as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02)

 

17.08.030 Advisory agency.
    “Advisory agency” means the planning commission. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(4))

 

17.08.040 Appeal board.
    “Appeal board” means the same as city council, including the term “legislative body.” (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(8))

 

17.08.050 City.
    “City” means the city of Pico Rivera, California. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(12))

 

17.08.060 City council.
    “City council” means the elected city council of the city of Pico Rivera, and includes the term “legislative body.” (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(A)(16))

 

17.08.070 City engineer.
    “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city of Pico Rivera, or his or her representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(20))

 

17.08.080 City planner.
    “City planner” means the director of community development of the city of Pico Rivera, or his or her representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(24))

 

17.08.090 Community.
    “Community” means the same as city. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(28))

 

17.08.100 County engineer.
    “County engineer” means the county engineer of the county of Los Angeles, or his or her representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02)

 

17.08.110 Dedication.
    “Dedication” means the grant and conveyance of real property, easement or right to the city for public use without payment of compensation by the city. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(8))

 

17.08.120 Director of community development.
    “Director of community development” means the director of community development of the city of Pico Rivera, or his or her representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(36))

 

17.08.130 Design.
    “Design” means:

    A.  The minimum area, width, grading and general layout of all lots in a subdivision;

    B.   Street alignments, grades and widths;

    C.   Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities including alignments and grades thereof;

    D.  Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

    E.   Fire roads and fire breaks;

    F.   Lot size and configuration;

    G.  Traffic access;

    H.  Grading;

    I.    Land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes.

    J.    Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with or implementation of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9102.10)

 

17.08.140 Design unit.
    “Design unit” means a parcel of land shown on a tentative map for which the subdivider requests approval of the design. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(16))

 

17.08.150 Director of public works.
    “Director of public works” means the director of public works of the city of Pico Rivera, or his or her representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(40))

 

17.08.160 Division of land.
    “Division of land” means the same as subdivision. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(20))

 

17.08.170 Drainage facility.
    “Drainage facility” means any drainage device or structure which may be used to control or direct the flow of water and/or alleviate flood hazard, including but not limited to berms, channels, culverts, curbs, ditches, gutters, pavement and pipes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(B)(24))

 

17.08.180 Final map.
    “Final map” means a map of a proposed division of land prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act, to be filed in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(28))

 

17.08.190 Fire chief.
    “Fire chief” means the forester and fire warden of the county of Los Angeles, or his or her representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(44))

 

17.08.200 Flood hazard.
    “Flood hazard” means a potential danger to life, land or improvements due to inundation or stormwater runoff having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of watercourses. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(32))

 

17.08.210 Frontage.
    “Frontage” means, for design purposes only, the narrowest portion of a lot or parcel which abuts a public or private street or highway to which the lot or parcel has the right of access, which is not in conflict with Title 18 of this code. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(36))

 

17.08.220 Future street or alley.
    “Future street or alley” means a street or alley which is necessary for the future division of lots within a division of land, or for the development of adjacent properties, and which is offered for public use at any indeterminate future time when the city council determines that the acceptance and construction of such street or alley is warranted. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(40))

 

17.08.230 Geological hazard.
    “Geological hazard” means a hazard inherent in the earth, or artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property or improvements due to the movement, failure or shifting of earth. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(44))

 

17.08.240 General plan.
    “General plan” means the Comprehensive General Plan of the city of Pico Rivera duly adopted and in full force and effect. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(B)(48))

 

17.08.250 Headings.
    “Headings” means the words, terms and phrases ascribed to the title of Title 17, and to the chapters, sections and/or subsections, and the effect of such headings shall not be deemed to limit, modify, govern or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of this title, or any chapter, section or subsection contained therein. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(48))

 

17.08.260 Highway.
    “Highway” means a thoroughfare of primary importance in the city or state highway system, other than a freeway, which is shown on the circulation element of the General Plan. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(52))

 

17.08.270 Improvements.
    “Improvements” means such structures or facilities to be installed or agreed to be installed by a subdivider, on land to be used for public or private alleys, streets, highways or other easements, as a condition precedent to the approval and/or acceptance of a final map or parcel map, including but not limited to, street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, traffic-control devices, street signs, sanitary sewers, water mains, and drainage facilities. “Improvements” also refers to any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the local agency, or by a combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with or implementation of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(56))

 

17.08.280 Lease.
    “Lease” means a written agreement or contract conveying an interest or tenancy for a period of time exceeding five years. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(60))

 

17.08.290 Lot line adjustment.
    “Lot line adjustment” means the adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(4))

 

17.08.300 Lot or parcel.
    “Lot or parcel” means a unit of land identified on a final tract or parcel map, filed in the office of the county recorder, with a separate or distinct number. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(B)(64))

 

17.08.310 Ornamental street lighting.
    “Ornamental street lighting” means a system of street lighting composed of individual freestanding light standards. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(B)(68))

 

17.08.320 Parcel map.
    “Parcel map” means a map prepared and recorded in accord with the Subdivision Map Act, Chapter 2, Article 3, Sections 66444 et seq. of the Government Code, and shall be applicable to divisions of land as prescribed in Section 66426 of the Government Code and all divisions of land of four or fewer units except as otherwise specifically provided in this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(72))

 

17.08.330 Person.
    “Person” means any individual, corporation, company, firm, association, partnership, copartnership, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, syndicate, club, estate, business trust, organization or any entity, or the authorized agent thereof. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(76))

 

17.08.340 Planning commission.
    “Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (A)(52))

 

17.08.350 Record of survey.
    “Record of survey” means a map prepared in compliance with Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code, and a record of survey map shall not be used to divide real property or air space. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(B)(80))

 

17.08.360 Section.
    “Section” means a section of this title, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(84))

 

17.08.370 Shall and may.
    “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(88))

 

17.08.380 Street.
    “Street” means a public or private right-of-way designed to provide vehicular access to abutting properties. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(92))

 

17.08.390 Subdivider.
    “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision, for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.” (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(96))

 

17.08.400 Subdivision.
    “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Subdivision” includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Business and Professions Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. As used in this section, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(100))

 

17.08.410 Subdivision Map Act.
    “Subdivision Map Act” means Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(104))

 

17.08.420 Superintendent of streets.
    “Superintendent of streets” means the same as “director of public works.” (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(A)(56))

 

17.08.430 Tenses, singular and plural, gender.
    “Tenses” means that the present tense shall include and mean the future tense, and the reciprocal thereof; that the singular tense includes and means the plural tense, and the reciprocal thereof; that the singular number includes and means the plural number, and the reciprocal thereof; and, that the masculine gender includes and means the feminine gender, and the reciprocal thereof. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02(A)(60))

 

17.08.440 Tentative map.
    “Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it, and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. “Vesting tentative map” refers to a map which meets the requirements of a tentative map and Government Code Sections 66498.1 to 66498.9. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9103.02 (B)(108))

 

17.08.450 Tract map.
    “Tract map” means a map prepared and recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act for the subdivision of property into more than four subdivided units except as provided in Government Code Section 66426. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.12 TENTATIVE MAPS
17.12.010 General guidelines.
    Tentative tract and parcel maps shall be prepared by processing them in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. (Prior code § 9104.01)

 

17.12.020 Map numbers.
    The subdivider shall apply for a map number prior to submission of a tentative tract or parcel map. Map numbers shall be assigned by the county engineer. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.02)

 

17.12.025 Application form and information list.
    A subdivision application and information form shall be provided by the city planner to each applicant for a tentative tract or parcel map. The applicant/subdivider shall complete the subdivision application and information form and submit it to the city planner with all other information required to complete the subdivision application. The subdivision application and information form shall advise the subdivider that he or she must provide the following information:

    A.  Compliance with Section 17.12.020;

    B.   Compliance with Section 17.12.030;

    C.   Compliance with Section 17.12.040;

    D.  Compliance with Section 17.12.050;

    E.   The provisions of Section 17.12.070;

    F.   The applicant must sign a hazardous waste and substances statement pursuant to Government Code Section 65962.5;

    G.  The applicant shall indicate whether he/she will need to comply with the applicable requirements of Sections 25505, 25533 and 25534 of the Health and Safety Code and the requirements for a permit for construction or modification from the air pollution control district or air quality management district exercising jurisdiction in the area governed by the city;

    H.  The applicant shall certify whether or not the proposed project will handle, as defined in Article I (commencing with Section 25500 of Chapter 6.95 of Division 20) of the Health and Safety Code, an acutely hazardous material or a mixture containing an acutely hazardous material, in a quantity equal to or greater than the quantity specified in subdivision a of Section 25536 of the Health and Safety Code, or will contain a source or modified source with hazardous air emissions. This provision does not apply to applications solely for residential construction;

    I.    A statement that the city will process the application in accordance with the procedures and time limitations specified in Government Code Sections 65943, 65944, 65950, 65951, 65952 and 65952.1;

    J.    A statement advising the applicant of the public notice requirements for posting, mailing or publication;

    K.  A statement advising the applicant of the provisions of Government Code Section 65961 regarding the imposition of conditions on subdivisions;

    L.   A statement advising the applicant of his or her right to request a notice of changes in the law pursuant to Government Code Sections 65945, 65945.3 and 65945.5. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.12.030 Preparation.
    Each tentative tract or parcel map shall be prepared in accordance with the following requirements:

    A.  Tentative maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor.

    B.   Each tentative map shall clearly show the details of the plan thereon.

    C.   Map sheets shall be eighteen inches in width and twenty-six inches in length. In no case shall the scale be less than one inch to one hundred feet (1′ = 100′). (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.03)

 

17.12.040 Information to be shown.
    Each tentative tract or parcel map shall show and contain the following information:

    A.  The assigned map number;

    B.   The date of preparation, north point, and scale;

    C.   The boundary of the division of land and of the design unit, if not identical to the boundary of the division of land, shown to scale and tied to a known point;

    D.  A key map, indicating the location of the proposed division of land in relation to the surrounding area;

    E.   The approximate contours, showing existing topography;

    F.   The approximate location of all existing and proposed trees standing within the boundaries of the division of land and proposed rights-of-way;

    G.  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow, and the location, width and direction of flow of each watercourse;

    H.  The location, width, approximate grade and center line and radius of existing and proposed streets, alleys, highways, ways and easements which are within or adjacent to the proposed design unit;

    I.    The existing street improvements, including drainage structures;

    J.    Actual names for existing streets or highways and an identifying letter or name for proposed streets or highways;

    K.  A label or identifying note for existing or proposed easements other than streets or highways;

    L.   The approximate layout of lots, including approximate dimensions, areas and lot numbers and, where pads are proposed for building sites, the approximate finish grade and proposed slopes;

    M.  The approximate location of existing structures, shown to scale, within or immediately adjacent to the design unit, house numbers, and labeling of each structure with the proposed disposition thereof;

    N.  The general location of all proposed buildings and structures which are to be divided into units of air space, and the means of access thereto where the design unit consists of a condominium or community apartment project;

    O.  If necessary, a generalized plan of proposed development adjacent to the design unit, showing the compatibility of the proposed design unit with existing and future development in the neighborhood;

    P.   The name and address of the subdivider;

    Q.  The name, address and license or registration number of the person who prepared the tentative map or who directed the preparation of the tentative map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.04)

 

17.12.050 Written statements required.
    Each tentative map shall be submitted with written statements containing the following information and acknowledgements:

    A.  The name and address of the subdivider;

    B.   The name, address and license or registration number of the person who prepared the tentative map or who directed the preparation of the tentative map;

    C.   A statement by a person holding a proprietary interest in the parcel or parcels comprising the design unit, consenting to the submission of the tentative map;

    D.  The existing and proposed zoning;

    E.   The interest which the subdivider proposes to convey in parcels shown on the tentative map;

    F.   A copy of conditions, covenants and restrictions proposed by the subdivider, if any;

    G.  A statement detailing the arrangements which the subdivider proposes to make for the operation and maintenance of common parcels and easements, if any;

    H.  The source of water supply and the proposed method of sewage disposal;

    I.    A geological and/or soil report shall be required by the city engineer, prepared by a licensed geologist or registered civil engineer in the state, and based upon adequate test borings, stating the effect of geological or soil conditions or every division of land for which a final tract or parcel map is required. If such report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in a division of land may be required. Such report shall also recommend the corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problems exist. A division of land may be approved, or a portion thereof, where such soils problems exist if both the city engineer and director of community development determine that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and, as a condition to the issuance of any building permit, may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. The geological and/or soils report may be waived if both the city engineer and director of community development have determined that, due to their knowledge as to the soils qualities of the soils of the division of land, no such report is necessary;

    J.    Environmental impact information, as required by the city;

    K.  Preliminary title report;

    L.   Any of the information required by subsections A, B, C, D and H of this section may be shown on the tentative map, and the written statements required by this section shall become a part of the tentative map upon submission to the city planner. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.05)

 

17.12.060 Condominium or community apartment projects.
    Insofar as a condominium project or community apartment project is concerned for which a tentative tract map is required, the provisions of Section 66427, Article I, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act shall prevail. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.09)

 

17.12.070 Planned residential unit developments.
    A tentative tract map shall be filed and shall, in addition to the requirements set forth in this title, show the following:

    A.  The precise location and designation of all lots upon which single-family dwelling units are to be developed;

    B.   All lots to be owned in common which are designed to be developed and used exclusively for supplemental vehicular parking and storage, and for vehicular and pedestrian access from any improved public street to individual privately owned lots;

    C.   All lots to be owned in common which are designed to be developed, reserved and/or used exclusively for open-space and recreational purposes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.07)

 

17.12.080 Reversion to acreage.
    Real property may be reverted to acreage, provided such property was previously subdivided, and a tentative tract map shall be prepared and processed in accordance with the provisions of Article I, Chapter 6 of the Subdivision Map Act and with the provisions of this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9104.06)

 

17.12.090 Duration, expiration and extension of tentative maps.
    A.  A tentative tract map or tentative parcel map shall be valid for an initial period of two years from the date of approval and up to an additional period not to exceed one year if so approved by the approving authority.

    B.   Upon the application of a subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map, the time at which the map expires may be extended by the approving authority for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years. The period of extension shall be in addition to the period of time provided in subsection A of this section. Upon the filing of a proper request for extension, the map shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved or denied by the city council or planning commission. If the planning commission denies the subdivider’s application for an extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen days after the planning commission has denied the extension.

    C.   A tentative map may not be extended after its expiration date. The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed with the city council or division of land committee without first processing a new tentative map. Once a final map is delivered to the county surveyor or city engineer prior to the expiration date, subsequent actions including, but not limited to, processing, approving and recording, may lawfully occur after the date of expiration of the tentative map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.12.100 Criteria for approval, conditional approval or rejection.
    The provisions of Article I, Chapter 4, Sections 66473 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act shall serve as guidelines and criteria for the approval, conditional approval or rejection of all subdivision applications. The city planner, division of land committee and the advisory agency shall respectively make recommendations concerning these criteria and guidelines. The city council shall disapprove any tentative tract map when any of the provisions of said Article I, Chapter 4 apply, or it may condition approval where applicable in order to mitigate those circumstances which otherwise would be cause for disapproval. The provisions of Titles 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 18 of this code shall also serve as guidelines and criteria for the approval, conditional approval or denial of subdivision applications. The city council may deny a subdivision application which fails to meet the requirements of Titles 10, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 18 of this code. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.12.110 Environmental determination requirements and time limits.
    A.  The city planner, after accepting as complete an application for any tentative map approval, shall determine whether or not an environmental impact report or negative declaration is required. The final determination thereof shall be rendered by the division of land committee. The decision of the division of land committee shall be made within thirty days of receiving a complete application.

    B.   The planning commission or the city council shall prepare and certify an environmental impact report within one year from the date the application is determined complete. The planning commission or city council shall prepare a negative declaration within one hundred five days of the date the application is determined complete. The applicant and the city may extend these time limits by mutual consent. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.16 PROCESSING OF TENTATIVE TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS
Article I Tentative Tract Maps
17.16.008 Requirement of tract map.
    A tentative and final tract map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units except as provided in Government Code Section 66426. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.16.010 Submittal and distribution for review.
    The tentative tract map process commences when the applicant submits a completed subdivision application and information form to the city planner. The designated number of copies of the subdivision application and information form, tentative tract maps and required written statements shall be submitted to the city planner. The city planner shall distribute said copies and written statements to the following:

    A.  Each member of the division of land committee;

    B.   A city requesting extraterritorial review of tentative tract maps pursuant to Article 3, Chapter 3, of the Subdivision Map Act; and

    C.   Other agencies or school districts when, in the opinion of the city planner, pursuant to Article 3, Chapter 3, of the Subdivision Map Act, such agencies would have been an interest in the proposed division of land. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.01)

 

17.16.020 Determination of completed application.
    A.  Within thirty calendar days of the submission of an application to the city planner, the city planner shall notify the applicant whether the application is complete or incomplete. If the application is determined not to be complete, the written notice to the applicant shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete, including a list and thorough description of specific information needed to complete the application. The applicant may submit to the city planner further materials necessary to complete the application. Such additional information shall be submitted by the applicant within ninety days of the sending of the notice. The applicant may request, and the city planner may grant a longer time, upon a showing of good cause. If the additional information is not timely submitted, the application shall be deemed terminated.

    B.   Within thirty calendar days of receipt of the further materials, the city planer shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or incomplete. If the application is determined not to be complete, the applicant may, within fifteen days, make a written appeal of that determination to the planning commission. The planning commission shall determine the appeal of the applicant based upon written material submitted by the applicant. The planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing or take oral testimony from any party. The decision of the planning commission shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant within sixty days of the filing of the appeal by the applicant. The decision of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive.

    C.   The time periods and limitations in this section may be waived by mutual written consent of the applicant and city. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.16.025 Division of land committee review and recommendations.
    The division of land committee shall meet to review and make recommendations on tentative tract maps subsequent to the submission of a complete application. Division of land committee meetings shall be open to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent. The applicant, subdivider and/or any authorized representatives shall be notified a minimum of five days prior to the date of the meeting. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.02)

 

17.16.030 City planner’s report requirements.
    The city planner shall prepare a written report, setting forth recommendations of the division of land committee and the content of other reports submitted to the city planner at or prior to the division of land committee meeting. The city planner shall transmit said report together with a copy of the tentative tract map to the advisory agency. The city planner shall provide the subdivider with a copy of the division of land committee report three days prior to action on the tentative tract map by the advisory agency. In case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, each tenant of the subject property shall be provided the report of the city planner three days prior to any action on the tentative tract map by the advisory agency. If the subdivider or tenant or his or her authorized representative does not receive the report in person, this provision shall be deemed accomplished when the report is placed in the mail, bearing the proper postage, and directed to the subdivider or tenant at his or her designated address. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.03)

 

17.16.040 Advisory agency hearing and action.
    A.  Action on the subdivision application shall be made by the advisory agency after a noticed public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall include date, time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing body, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property which is the subject of the hearing. Notice shall be distributed as follows:

    1.   Posting in three public places, and in one public place near the location of the project at least ten days before the hearing;

    2.   Mailed or delivered to the owner of the property or the owner’s duly authorized agent, and the project applicant at least ten days prior to the hearing;

    3.   Mailed or delivered to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected, at least ten days prior to the hearing;

    4.   Mailed or delivered to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing at least ten days before the hearing. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection is greater than one thousand, the city may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing;

    5.   Published in one newspaper which is generally distributed within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing;

    6.   If the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, the notice shall also be given by United States mail to each tenant of the subject property, ten days prior to the hearing;

    7.   The public hearing may be continued by the advisory agency from time to time without further specific notice.

    B.   After closing the public hearing the advisory agency shall review the report of the division of land committee and report their findings and recommendations, by resolution, to the city council within fifty days after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration or a determination by the local agency that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.04)

 

17.16.050 City council hearing and action.
    A.  Action by the city council on the tentative tract map application shall be made after a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be made in the same time and manner as for the advisory agency.

    B.   After the public hearing the city council shall by resolution approve, conditionally approve or disapprove tentative tract maps within thirty days after the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of the advisory agency’s report with the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final.

    C.   When an environmental impact assessment is required for the subdivision application, the specified time periods shall commence after certification of the environmental impact report, adoption of a negative declaration, or a determination by the local agency that the project is exempt from the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.05)

 

17.16.060 Modifications authorized when.
    A.  The city council may grant minor modifications to the provisions of this chapter which it determines are warranted because of the size or shape of the division of land, unusual physical conditions, title restrictions, the proposed use of one or more parcels, or the nature of the interest to be conveyed in parcels created by the proposed division of land, or where street rights-of-way conform to existing rights-of-way and no dedication is necessary.

    B.   The city council shall only consider such modifications after it has reviewed the recommendations therefor of the division of land committee and advisory agency. The modifications and/or conditions shall be included in the city council action on the tentative map and shall become a part thereof. No modification shall be granted which has the effect of negating the provisions of an ordinance of the city other than the ordinance codified in this title, or that which is inconsistent with the provisions of state law. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.06)

 

17.16.070 Approval—Notice to Real Estate Commissioner.
    If a division of land contains five or more units or lots, the city council shall forward a copy of the conditions of approval of the tentative map to the State Real Estate Commissioner. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.09)

 

17.16.090 Time limits and extensions.
    The time limits for acting and reporting on tentative tract maps and appeals as specified in this title and by the Subdivision Map Act may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider or city planner or division of land committee or planning commission or city council, as the case may be. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9105.07)

 

Article II Parcel Maps
17.16.095 Final and tentative parcel map required.
    All parcel maps require a tentative and final parcel map except as may be otherwise provided in this title regarding waivers and certificates of compliance. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.16.100 Application conditions.
    Every application for tentative approval of a parcel map, other than for a boundary line adjustment, shall be subject to compliance with applicable provisions set forth in Chapters 17.12, 17.20, 17.28 and 17.32 of this title, and the subdivider shall submit the designated number of copies of a tentative parcel map. Parcel maps shall be processed in the manner set out in Sections 17.16.095 through 17.16.150. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9106.02)

 

17.16.105 Determination of completed application.
    A.  Within thirty calendar days of the submission of an application to the city planner, the city planner shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or incomplete. If the application is determined not to be complete, the written notice to the applicant shall specify those parts of the application which are incomplete and shall indicate the manner in which it can be made complete, including a list and thorough description of specific information needed to complete the application. The applicant may submit to the city planner further materials necessary to complete the application. Such additional information shall be submitted by the applicant within ninety days of the sending of the notice. The applicant may request, and the city planner may grant a longer time, upon a showing of good cause. If the additional information is not timely submitted, the application shall be deemed terminated.

    B.   Within thirty calendar days of receipt of the further materials, the city planner shall notify the applicant in writing whether the application is complete or incomplete. If the application is determined not to be complete, the applicant may, within fifteen days, make a written appeal of that determination to the division of land committee. The division of land committee shall determine the appeal of the applicant based upon written material submitted by the applicant. The division of land committee shall not be required to hold a public hearing or take oral testimony from any party. The decision of the division of land committee shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant within sixty days of the filing of the appeal by the applicant. The decision of the division of land committee shall be final and conclusive.

    C.   The time periods and limitations in this section may be waived by mutual written consent of the applicant and the city. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.16.110 Review and recommendations.
    The division of land committee shall meet to review and make recommendations on tentative maps subsequent to the submission of a complete application. Division of land committee meetings shall be open to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent. The applicant, subdivider and/or any authorized representatives shall be notified a minimum of five days prior to the date of the meeting. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9106.02 (A))

 

17.16.120 City planner’s report.
    The city planner shall prepare a written report, setting forth the recommendations of the division of land committee and the content of other reports submitted to the city planner at or prior to the division of land committee meeting. The city planner shall transmit said report together with a copy of the tentative tract map to the advisory agency. The city planner shall provide the subdivider with a copy of the division of land committee report three days prior to action on the tentative tract map by the advisory agency. In the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, each tenant of the subject property shall be provided the report of the city planner three days prior to any action on the tentative tract map by the advisory agency. If the subdivider or tenant or his or her authorized representative does not receive the report in person, this provision shall be deemed accomplished when the report is placed in the mail, bearing the proper postage, and directed to the subdivider or tenant at his or her designated address. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994: 9106.02 (B))

 

17.16.130 Advisory agency hearing and action.
    A.  Action on the subdivision application shall be made by the planning commission after a noticed public hearing at which the subdivider and/or his or her representatives may appear and present any relevant matters. Notice of the public hearing shall include date, time and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing body, a general explanation of the matter to be considered, and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property which is the subject of the hearing. Notice shall be distributed as follows:

    1.   Posting in three public places, and in one public place near the location of the project at least ten days before the hearing.

    2.   Mailed or delivered to the owner of the property or the owner’s duly authorized agent, and the project applicant at least ten days prior to the hearing.

    3.   Mailed or delivered to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected, at least ten days prior to the hearing.

    4.   Mailed or delivered to all owners of real property as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll within three hundred feet of the real property that is the subject of the hearing at least ten days before the hearing. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or delivered pursuant to this subsection is greater than one thousand, the city may provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing.

    5.   Published in one newspaper which is generally distributed within the city at least ten days prior to the hearing.

    6.   If the proposed subdivision is a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative project, the notice shall also be given by United States mail to each tenant of the subject property, ten days prior to the hearing.

    7.   The public hearing may be continued by the advisory agency from time to time without further specific notice.

    B.   The planning commission shall by resolution approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the parcel map. The decision of the planning commission shall be final unless timely appealed to the city council. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9106.02 (C))

 

17.16.140 Notice and appeal of parcel map decisions.
    A.  Within five days of the taking of action on any tentative parcel map, the city planner, on behalf of the planning commission, shall send written notice of their decision to the applicant.

    B.   The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city council in accordance with Chapter 17.40 of this code. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9106.02 (D))

 

17.16.150 Waiver of final parcel map.
    A.  The following tentative parcel maps shall be eligible for waiver of the requirement that a final parcel map be filed:

    1.   Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation as defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days’ notice in writing);

    2.   Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a final parcel map;

    3.   The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway, and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body;

    4.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway;

    5.   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to the public street or highway which compromises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths;

    6.   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

    B.   Final parcel map waiver requests shall be made in writing on a standardized form provided by the city planner. The request for waiver shall be filed with the division of land committee. The request shall include:

    1.   A request for waiver signed and acknowledged by all owners of record of the land comprising the tentative parcel map;

    2.   The description of each proposed parcel;

    3.   If requested by the division of land committee, a plat map, showing sufficient ties, dimensions and bearings to adequately establish the boundaries of the minor land division and of each proposed parcel. Record information, when available, may be utilized.

    C.   The division of land committee may require the submission of documentation or a preliminary title report, as it deems necessary to verify the information presented in the request for waiver. All submissions shall be legible and readily reproducible.

    D.  Before approval of a request for waiver, the subdivider shall complete or guarantee completion of the conditions of approval as if a final parcel map were to be filed.

    E.   The subdivider shall pay a sum of money equal to the amount required by law for filing with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the parcels comprising the subdivision.

    F.   Within twenty days after acceptance of a request for waiver, or within such additional time as may be necessary, the division of land committee shall waive the requirements that a final parcel map be filed, if it finds:

    1.   That the design of each parcel described in the request for waiver is in substantial accordance with the tentative parcel map, as approved;

    2.   That the proposed subdivision complies with all applicable requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood and water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of the subdivision map act and Title 17.

    G.  When a waiver is granted pursuant to this section, the division of land committee shall, within fifteen working days, cause a certificate of compliance, describing each approved parcel, to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall state that the requirement that a final parcel map be filed has been waived and that the parcels comprising division of land may be sold, leased, financed or transferred in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.18 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
17.18.010 Procedure.
    Whenever a provision of this title requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead by filed. The vesting tentative map shall be filed and processed in the same manner as a tentative map except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The filing of a vesting tentative map is permissive, and the city may not require the filing of a vesting tentative map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.18.020 Description required.
    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.” (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.18.030 Development entitlements required.
    A.  If a project requires additional zoning approval such as a conditional use permit or a precise plan of design approval, under the ordinances and resolutions effective on the date the tentative map application is complete, the conditional use permit, precise plan of design approval or other zoning entitlement must be obtained prior to or concurrent with the approval of a vesting tentative map.

    B.   A vesting tentative tract map project, which does not otherwise require the approval of a conditional use permit or any other zoning entitlement exclusive of a building permit, shall require precise plan of design approval prior to or concurrent with the approval of the vesting tentative tract map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.18.040 Vested rights.
    Approval of a vesting tentative map confers a vested right on the subdivider to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect on the date that the application for the vesting tentative map was complete. However, such vested rights of the subdivider may be denied only under the following circumstances:

    A.  Where recognition of the vested right would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both;

    B.   Recognition of the vested right would be a violation of state or federal law. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.18.050 Amendment of vesting tentative maps.
    A subdivider may apply for an amendment to a valid unexpired vesting tentative map to secure a vested right to proceed with ordinances, policies or standards, which were changed subsequent to the approval or conditional approval of the vesting tentative map. An application for such amendment shall clearly specify the changed ordinances, policies or standards for which the amendment is sought. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.18.060 Expiration of vesting tentative maps.
    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions established by this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.18.070 Duration of vested rights.
    The rights conferred by this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map. If the final map is approved, the rights conferred by this section shall be valid for the following periods of time after the recordation of the final map:

    A.  Where a single final map is recorded, two years;

    B.   Where multiple final maps are recorded, one year from the recordation of the final map for that phase;

    C.   If the subdivider submits a completed application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections A or B of this section, the time shall be extended until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of the permit granted by the city. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.20 FINAL TRACT AND PARCEL MAPS
17.20.010 Conformity to tentative map.
    The final tract and/or parcel map shall conform to the approved tentative map and to the requirements and conditions contained in the report or resolution approving the tentative map. No final tract map shall be accepted by the city engineer unless a tentative tract map has been approved by the city council, and no final parcel shall be accepted by the city engineer unless a tentative parcel map has been approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.03)

 

17.20.020 Time limit for preparation.
    Prior to expiration of a tentative tract or parcel map, a subdivider shall cause the proposed division of land to be accurately surveyed and a final tract or parcel map prepared for final approval by the city council for recordation in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.01)

 

17.20.030 Submittal for checking.
    Final tract maps and/or parcel maps shall be submitted for checking to the city engineer, accompanied by the appropriate fees. Sufficient number of copies of the final tract map and/or parcel map shall be provided by the subdivider to permit review by city officers and departments and other public agencies which may have an interest in said maps. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.04)

 

17.20.040 Form and contents—Preparation.
    The following general requirements shall apply:

    A.  Final tract maps and parcel maps shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act, commencing with Section 66434.

    B.   Final tract maps and parcel maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.

    C.   The division of parcels which are not abutting shall be shown on separate tract maps, unless such parcels are separated because of the interposition of a highway, street, alley, or railroad, public utility or flood control right-of-way.

    D.  Only an approved final tract or parcel map may be filed for record in the office of the county recorder. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.14)

 

17.20.050 Title sheet.
    A.  The title sheet of each map shall contain a title, consisting of the words “Tract No.” and the map number of a parcel map. The title shall also contain the words “In the City of Pico Rivera” or “partly in the City of Pico Rivera and partly in (here insert the name of the political division involved.)”

    B.   The title sheet shall also contain a subtitle, consisting of a description of all of the property being divided by reference to maps previously filed or recorded in the office of the county recorder, or previously filed with the county clerk pursuant to a final judgment in any action in partition or by reference to the plat of a United States Survey. Upon the title sheet of each map filed for the purpose of reverting subdivided land to acreage, the subtitle shall consist of the words “Being a Reversion to Acreage of. . .” (insert a legal description of the land being reverted.) Each reference in these subtitles must be spelled out and worded identically to the original record thereof. A complete reference to the book and page of the cited record must be included.

    C.   The title sheet for a parcel map shall contain the certificate or statement of the surveyor or engineer referred to in Section 66449, Article 3, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act. The title sheet for a final tract map shall contain the certificate or statement of the survey or engineer referred to in Section 66441, Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act. The title sheet or at least one map sheet shall contain a basis of bearings, making reference to a filed tract map, county surveyor’s map, or other record acceptable to the city engineer.

    D.  Required certificates, affidavits and acknowledgements, as required in the Subdivision Map Act, may be legibly stamped or printed on the title sheet of a final or parcel map with opaque ink. All required signatures shall be written with opaque ink. All such entries shall be readily reproducible by any normal method of reproduction. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.15)

 

17.20.060 Source of record data required.
    If a parcel map is compiled from record data, the source of information used shall be contained in a note on the title sheet of the map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.30)

 

17.20.070 Map sheet format.
    Each map sheet of a final tract map or a parcel map shall conform to the following format:

    A.  Each map sheet and the lettering thereon shall be oriented with the north point directed away from the reader and the map sheet number to be read most conveniently from the lower righthand corner of the sheet.

    B.   Each map sheet shall bear the main title of the map, the scale, north point and sheet number, and designation of the relation, if any, between the sheet and each other sheet comprising the final tract map or parcel map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.16)

 

17.20.080 Map boundaries and borders.
    The exterior boundary of a final tract map or parcel map shall be indicated by a border having a distinctive symbol acceptable to the city engineer, applied on the front side of the tracing and inside the exterior boundary line. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.20)

 

17.20.090 City boundary lines.
    Final tract and parcel maps shall show each city boundary line crossing or adjoining a division or reversion. Each such line shall be clearly designated and tied. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.27)

 

17.20.100 Evidence for surveyed boundaries.
    Each final tract map and each parcel map for which a survey is required shall show evidence found on the grounds of sufficient corners of prior surveys or such other evidence as may be suitable to precisely locate the boundaries of the division or reversion shown on the map. Each stake, monument or other object found shall be fully described and referenced. The method used to establish each point or line shall be clearly shown and explained on the map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.31)

 

17.20.110 Title evidence—Final tract maps.
    The evidence of title required for final tract maps by the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 2 of the Subdivision Map Act shall be by a policy of title insurance issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the state of California to write the same, showing the names of all persons having any record title interest in the land to be subdivided, together with the nature of their respective interests therein. In the event that land in the city is to be dedicated, the policy shall be dated and delivered upon request by the city engineer when the final tract map is ready for filing. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.34)

 

17.20.120 Title evidence—Dedications.
    Separate instruments of dedication shall be prepared by a title company or by the city engineer. When dedicating by separate instrument, the subdivider shall submit a title report, prepared in favor of the city which indicates who is required to sign the separate instrument to pass clear title to the city. This title report shall be kept up to date and the city shall be notified of any change until such time as the separate instrument is recorded. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.37)

 

17.20.130 Survey procedure and standards.
    A.  The procedure and practice for all survey work done for preparation of a final tract or parcel map shall conform to the standards and details set forth in Chapter 15, Division 3, of the Business and Professions Code (the Land Surveyor’s Act). The allowable error of closure on any portion of a final tract or parcel map shall be 1/10,000.

    B.   In the event that the county engineer, county road commissioner, the State Highway Engineer or city engineer shall have established the center line of any highway, street or alley shown on a final tract or parcel map, the map shall show such center line and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, the fact shall be stated upon the final tract or parcel map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.32)

 

17.20.140 Monument requirements.
    The following requirements shall apply:

    A.  Unless modified by the city engineer and subject to the provisions of Article 9, Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act, each final tract map and each parcel map for which a survey is required shall show durable monuments found or set at or near each boundary corner and at intermediate points, approximately one thousand feet apart, or at much lesser distances as may be made necessary by topography or culture to insure accuracy in the reestablishment of any point or line without unreasonable difficulty. The precise position and character of each such monument shall be not less substantial than an iron pipe of a two-inch outside diameter, not less than two and one-half feet in length, with plug and tack, and set at least two feet into the ground, or of such other character and stability as may be approved by the city engineer. For the purposes of this chapter, a lead and tack set in permanent concrete or masonry shall be considered as a durable monument. The approximate elevation of the top of each such monument with respect to the surface of the ground shall be shown on the map.

    B.   Whenever necessary, in the opinion of the city engineer, center line monuments shall be set to mark intersections of streets or intersections of streets with the map boundary, or to mark either the beginning and end of curves or the points of intersection of tangents thereof or other intermediate points. Each such monument shall be not less durable and substantial than:

    1.   In asphaltic concrete or cement pavements, a lead and tack;

    2.   In unsurfaced graveled or oiled surfaces a two-inch iron pipe set not less than twelve inches below the surface, or at such depth as may be approved by the city engineer;

    3.   In bituminous macadam pavements, a spike not less than six inches long.

    C.   All monuments set as required herein shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey was made.

    D.  For each center line monument set, the engineer or surveyor under whose supervision the survey has been made shall furnish to the city engineer a set of notes, clearly showing the ties between the monument and a sufficient number (normally four) of durable, distinctive reference points or monuments.

    E.   Such reference points or monuments may be leads and tacks in sidewalks, or two-inch by two-inch stakes set back of the curbline and below the surface of the ground or a substitute therefor which appears to be less likely to be disturbed.

    F.   Each set of notes submitted shall conform in all respects to the standardized office records of the city engineer. All such notes shall be indexed and filed by the city engineer as a part of the permanent public records of his or her office.

    G.  All boundary monuments shall be set prior to filing the final tract or parcel map unless grading operations or improvement work makes it impractical to set monuments. The city engineer shall determine the validity of all requests to defer the setting of permanent monuments until after the final tract or parcel map is filed. If the setting of boundary monuments is deferred, field notes showing the boundary survey may be required by the city engineer at the time the final tract or parcel map is submitted for checking. Interior street center line monuments may be set subsequent to filing of the final tract or parcel map. The final tract or parcel map shall show which monuments are in place and which are to be set. Prior to certification of the final tract or parcel map by the city engineer, the subdivider shall submit a written agreement in which he or she agrees that monuments deferred will be set within a specified time and that all notes required herein will be furnished within specified time.

    H.  All monuments shall be subject to inspection and approval of the city engineer.

    I.    The city council may require that all lot corners be perpetuated on the ground by a monument satisfactory to the city engineer. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.33)

 

17.20.150 Lot, block and boundary lines.
    The following requirements shall apply:

    A.  The bearing and length of each lot, block and boundary line shall be shown on a final tract or parcel map, except that, when bearings and lengths of lot lines in a series of lots are the same, the bearings or lengths may be omitted from each interior, parallel lot line of the series. Each required bearing or length shall be shown in full and no ditto mark or other designation or repetition shall be used.

    B.   The length, radius and total central angle or bearings of terminal radii of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve, or the central angle of each segment within each lot, shall be shown. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.19)

 

17.20.160 Lot numbers and area designation.
    The following requirements shall apply:

    A.  All lots shall be numbered. Lot numbers shall begin with the number “1” and continue consecutively without omission or duplication throughout the entire map. No prefix or suffix or combination of letter and number shall be used. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet.

    B.   Upon each lot containing an area of three-fourths of an acre or more shall be designated by the acreage of the lot to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.18)

 

17.20.170 Streets and other public ways—Widths and center lines.
    The following requirements shall apply:

    A.  Each final tract or parcel map shall show the center line, the total width, and the width on each side of the center line of each street, highway, alley or other way appearing on the map. The bearing and length of each tangent and the radius, central angle and length of each curve shall be shown on each center line.

    B.   Final maps shall also show the width of right-of-way to be dedicated on the map when only a portion of a street, highway, alley or way is within the map boundary. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.21)

 

17.20.180 Street and highway names.
    The following requirements shall apply:

    A.  Final tract and parcel maps shall show the name of each highway or street, other than a future street, appearing on the map. Street and highway names shall be shown in or arrowed to the right-of-way.

    B.   If only a portion of a street or highway is to be dedicated on the final map, the street or highway name shall be shown or arrowed into both the portion to be dedicated and the existing portion of the street or highway.

    C.   Street and highway names shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works.

    D.  The word “Avenue,” “Street,” “Place” or other street or highway designation shall be spelled out in full. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.23)

 

17.20.190 Private and future streets and alleys.
    The following requirements shall apply:

    A.  Final tract and parcel maps shall show sufficient mathematical data to clearly indicate the portion of each lot which is within private or future streets or alleys in addition to the width and center line detail required by Section 17.20.170 of this chapter.

    B.   Right-of-way lines for private or future streets or alleys shall be dashed.

    C.   Each private or future street or alley shall be clearly identified as such. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.22)

 

17.20.200 Sewer and drain easements.
    If sewers or drains or both are required for the general use of lot owners in a division of land and such sewers or drains are not to be installed within public highways, streets or alleys, all necessary easements shall be granted. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.12)

 

17.20.210 Easements—Information to be shown.
    Unless otherwise waived by the city council, all final tract and parcel maps shall show all easements which are a burden upon lots in the division or reversion or which are required as a condition precedent to filing the final map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.25)

 

17.20.220 Easements—Map requirements.
    Easements appearing on a final tract map or parcel map shall conform to the following requirements:

    A.  The sidelines of each easement shall be shown. Widths, center lines, center line or sideline data, and ties shall be shown as necessary to definitely locate each easement.

    B.   Easement sidelines shall be shown as fine dashed lines.

    C.   Distances and bearings on the sidelines of lots which are cut by easements shall be arrowed or otherwise shown so as to clearly indicate the actual length of each lot line.

    D.  Each easement shall be clearly labeled and identified and, if of record, the record reference shall be shown thereon. If an easement is to be granted by separate instrument, the record reference shall be shown on the map prior to the time of filing.

    E.   Notes or figures pertaining to easements shall be subordinated in form and appearance to other notes or figures on the map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.26)

 

17.20.230 Easements—Certificate or statement for final tract maps.
    Final tract maps on which easements are offered for public use shall have written thereon, in addition to or as a part of any other certificate or statement required, a certificate or statement signed by all persons claiming an interest in the lands included within the division or reversion shown on the map, other than an interest which cannot ripen into a fee, in substantially the following form:

 

WE HEREBY CERTIFY THAT EXCEPT AS SHOWN ON A COPY OF THIS MAP ON FILE IN THE OFFICE OF THE CITY ENGINEER WE KNOW OF NO EASEMENT OR STRUCTURE EXISTING WITHIN THE EASEMENTS HEREBY OFFERED FOR DEDICATION TO THE PUBLIC, OTHER THAN PUBLICLY OWNED WATER LINE, SEWERS OR STORM DRAINS: THAT WE WILL GRANT NO RIGHT OR INTEREST WITHIN THE BOUNDARIES OF SUCH EASEMENTS OFFERED TO THE PUBLIC EXCEPT WHERE SUCH RIGHT OR INTEREST IS EXPRESSLY MADE SUBJECT TO SAID EASEMENTS.

(Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.36)

 

17.20.240 Dedications—Basic specifications.
    Dedications or grants of easements required as a condition precedent to filing a final tract or parcel map pursuant to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, shall be made on such final maps. All such dedications shall be subject to the specific provisions set forth in Article 3, Chapter 4 of said Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.06)

 

17.20.250 Dedications—Streets and other public ways.
    Except as otherwise provided by this section, streets, highways, alleys and other vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way, or portions thereof, which are required as a condition precedent to filing a final tract or parcel map, shall be offered for public use, and shall be subject to the specific provisions set forth in Article 3, Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.08)

 

17.20.260 Dedications—Future streets and alleys.
    Future streets and alleys shall be offered for public use, which offer shall remain open for an indeterminate period of time until the city council determines that the opening of the street or alley is warranted. The owners of the underlying fee to any portion of a future street or alley shall retain the right of any and all ordinary uses of such land, except the erection or construction thereon of any structure not originally placed in public streets or alleys, until such time as the city council opens the street or alley for public use. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.09)

 

17.20.270 Dedications—Access rights.
    Access rights to major and secondary highways and to one street for double frontage lots and corner lots, shall be dedicated unless those lots are to be used for commercial or industrial development or unless otherwise approved by the city council. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.10)

 

17.20.280 Reservation of land for public use.
    Subject to the provisions set forth in Article 4, Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act, the city may require that areas of real property within a division of land be reserved for parks recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries or other public uses. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.39)

 

17.20.290 Natural watercourses—Location shown.
    In the event that dedication of right-of-way for storm drainage purposes is not required, the appropriate advisory agency may require that a final tract map or parcel map show the location of any natural watercourse, stream, channel, swale or creek which traverses the map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.29)

 

17.20.300 Natural watercourses—Right-of-way dedication.
    In the event that a division of land is traversed by a major watercourse, channel, stream, swale or creek, the city council may require that an adequate right-of-way be dedicated for storm drainage purposes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.13)

 

17.20.310 Areas subject to flood or geological hazard.
    If any portion of a lot shown on a final tract or parcel map is subject to flood hazard, inundation or geological hazard, and the hazard is not to be removed as a condition precedent to filing the map, the hazard area and a prominent note identifying the hazard shall be shown on the map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.28)

 

17.20.320 Railroad, transmission line and flood control rights-of-way.
    Final tract maps and parcel maps shall show the width and location of each railroad or transmission line right-of-way, flood control channel, or other similar rights-of-way appearing on the map. Rights-of-way which appear on a map as a lot or a series of lots shall be shown as provided in Sections 17.20.050 and 17.20.150. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.24)

 

17.20.330 Dedications—Restricted use areas.
    The right to restrict the erection of buildings or other structures within those portions of lots which are shown as being subject to flood hazard, inundation or geological hazard on a final tract map or parcel map shall be dedicated. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.11)

 

17.20.340 Dedications—Reversion to acreage.
    The city council may require dedications as a condition precedent to filing a final tract map for the purpose of reverting to acreage land previously subdivided, and subject to the provisions of this title and Article I, Chapter 6 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.07)

 

17.20.350 Planned residential unit developments.
    In addition to the requirements set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply to planned residential unit developments:

    A.  Building Permit Conditions. No building permit shall be issued for any lot within the boundaries of a planned residential unit development unless and until a final subdivision tract map has been recorded.

    B.   Approval Conditions. Any final map which deviates from the conditions imposed by the conditional use permit and/or conditional approval of a tentative tract map shall not be approved for recordation. For requirements pertaining to the division, sale or separation of lots or parcels of land, the regulations set forth in Chapters 17.04 and 17.28 of this title shall apply.

    C.   Title Page Statement. The title page of the final tract map or maps, as the case may be, shall contain the following statement pertaining to the sale or separation of lots upon which single-family dwelling units are to be developed:

 

NO LOT IN THIS TRACT MAP UPON WHICH SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS ARE TO BE BUILT, CONSTRUCTED, DEVELOPED OR OTHERWISE OCCUPIED, SHALL BE CONTRACTED TO SELL, SOLD, GRANTED, DEEDED, CONVEYED, TITLE TRANSFERRED OR OTHERWISE SEPARATED IN OWNERSHIP, INCLUDING SUBSEQUENT HEIRS AND OWNERS IN INTEREST, OR ENCUMBERED SEPARATELY FROM AN UNDIVIDED INTEREST IN LOTS APPURTENANT THERETO SO DESIGNATED ON THIS TRACT MAP FOR VEHICULAR AND PEDESTRIAN ACCESS AND IN ALL LOTS ON THIS TRACT MAP AND SUBSEQUENT TRACT MAPS APPURTENANT HERETO FOR PERMANENT OPEN-SPACE.

(Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.38)

 

17.20.360 Written consent of parties in interest.
    No final tract or parcel map shall be filed for final approval and/or recordation without the written consent of all parties having any record title interest in the real property contained in such final tract or parcel map, except as set forth in Section 17.20.370 of this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.02)

 

17.20.370 Signature waiver conditions.
    A.  If the owner of an easement in a right-of-way offered for public use on a final tract map, parcel map or boundary line adjustment, other than one held by a public utility or public entity, who has no other interest whatever in any part of the lands included within the division of land, refuses to make his or her easements subject to the right-of-way offered to the public, but the final tract map, parcel map or boundary line adjustment in all other respects complied with this chapter, with the Subdivision Map Act, and with other applicable statutes and ordinances, and the city council division of land committee or city planner, as the case may be, finds that the subdivider has in good faith attempted to obtain the necessary signature from the owner and has been unable to do so and that a refusal to accept the final tract map, parcel map or boundary line adjustment for filing would work an undue hardship on the subdivider, then by a majority vote of all its members, the city council, division of land committee or city planner, as the case may be, may accept the final map.

    B.   When easements held by public utilities or entities exist within the boundaries of the final tract map, parcel map or boundary line adjustment, the subdivider must provide the city council, division of land committee or city planner, as the case may be, with evidence from the affected public utility or entity that the division of land will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of their easement, and shall consent to the waiver of signatures at the discretion of the applicable approving body. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.35)

 

17.20.380 Compliance report requirements.
    Each officer or department shall report in writing to the city engineer as to the compliance or noncompliance of the map with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. Such report shall be complete within fifteen days after receipt of a print of a final tract or parcel map. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.05)

 

17.20.390 City council action.
    The legislative body shall, at the meeting at which it receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, approve or disapprove the map for recordation subject to the provisions set forth in Sections 66458 and 66462, Article 4, Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.40)

 

17.20.400 Correction and amendment conditions.
    After a final tract or parcel map has been filed in the office of the county recorder, such maps may be corrected and amended only as set forth in Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9109.17)

Chapter 17.24 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
17.24.010 Application, review and approval conditions.
    A.  An application for lot line adjustment shall be made on such form and in such detail as prescribed by the city planner for each case. The city planner shall approve the application upon a finding that the application is clearly within the intent of California Government Code, Title 7, Division 2, Subdivision Map Act, Section 66412(d), and the requested adjustment would not result in or be violative of any provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or Titles 17 and 18 of this code. Or, the city planner in any individual case may declare that public policy, based on a showing of substantial evidence, necessitates a filing for parcel map or final map proceedings.

    B.   The city planner may require such maps, legal description, title reports and other relevant information as may be necessary to sustain findings of conformance to such codes and to establish parties of interest. No application may be approved without consent of all parties of interest except beneficiaries of rights-of-way or easements for public utilities or similar uses when the proposed adjustment would not impair or interfere with such easements.

    C.   The city planner shall limit his/her review and approval to a determination of whether or not the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to local zoning and building ordinances. The city planner shall not impose conditions or exactions on the approval of a lot line adjustment except to conform to local zoning and building ordinances, or except to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements. No tentative map, parcel map or final map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment. No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code.

    D.  Approval shall be in the form of a waiver of parcel map and issuance of a certificate of compliance on a form provided by the city, and shall be effective upon filing for record with the recorder of Los Angeles County. The lot line adjustment shall also be reflected in a deed, which shall be recorded. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9112.01)

Chapter 17.26 CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE AND NOTICES OF VIOLATION
17.26.010 General provisions.
    The provisions of Section 66499.34, 66499.35 and 66499.36 of the Subdivision Map Act pertaining to notices of violation and certificates of compliance shall govern this chapter except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.26.020 Reserved.
 

17.26.030 Certificate of compliance.
    A certificate of compliance shall be used for the following purposes:

    A.  For the recordation of a waiver of parcel map;

    B.   For the recordation of a lot line adjustment;

    C.   To determine compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17 upon the application of any person owning real property or a vendee of that person pursuant to a contract of sale;

    D.  To establish a violation of or a correction of a violation of the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.26.040 Certificate of compliance procedures.
    A.  Applications for the issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be submitted to the city planner. Applications for issuance of a certificate of compliance shall be made in writing on a standardized form provided by the community development department. The city planner may require the submission of such supporting information as it deems necessary to determine compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17. All submissions shall be legible and readily reproducible.

    B.   Within thirty days of deeming the application complete, the city planner shall make a written finding whether the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17.

    C.   If the city planner determines that the real property complies with the Subdivision Map Act and Title 17, it shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for recordation with the recorder of Los Angeles County. The certificate of compliance shall give the street address and legal description of the real property and shall state that the division of land thereof complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17.

    D.  If the city planner determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17, it shall issue a conditional certificate of compliance or a notice of intention to record a notice of violation.

    E.   If the city planner issues a conditional certificate of compliance it may impose conditions upon the certificate which will bring the property into compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17 as follows:

    1.   If the applicant was the owner of the property at the time the violation of the Subdivision Map Act or Title 17 occurred, then conditions may be imposed which would bring the property into compliance with the current provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and of Title 17.

    2.   If the owner obtained his or her interest in the property subsequent to the violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of Title 17, then the conditions imposed may be only those conditions which would bring the property into compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision ordinance of the city in effect at the time the applicant obtained his or her ownership interest in the property.

    F.   Upon making the determination that a conditional certificate of compliance shall be issued, and establishing the conditions, the city planner shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the recorder of Los Angeles County. The certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of these conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with the conditions shall not be required until the time which a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property is issued by the city.

    G.  The issuance of a permit or grant of approval for development of real property, or with respect to improvements that have been completed prior to the time a permit or grant of approval for development was required by local ordinance in effect at the time of the improvement, or with respect to improvements that have been completed in reliance upon a permit or grant of approval for development, shall constitute real property which has been approved for development, and upon request by the person owning the real property, the local agency shall issue a certificate of compliance for the affected real property. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.26.050 Notices of violation.
    A.  Any city official having knowledge of a possible violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or of Title 17 shall direct such information to the planning director.

    B.   If the city planner, either on his or her own initiative or upon investigation or information received from another source, determines that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of this title, he/she shall issue a report to the planning commission.

    C.   If the planning commission determines that there is a reasonable possibility that the real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or of Title 17, it shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current owner of record of the property a notice of intention to record a notice of violation. The notice shall describe the real property in detail, naming the owners and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence at a meeting with the planning commission. The notice shall specify a time, date and place for the meeting. The notice shall also contain a description of the violations and an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not deemed to be in compliance pursuant to Section 66412.6 of the Subdivision Map Act.

    D.  The meeting shall take place no sooner than thirty days and not later than sixty days from the date of mailing the notice of intention. If, within fifteen days of receipt of the notice, the owner of the real property fails to inform the planning commission of his/her objection to recording the notice of violation, the planning commission shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder. If, after the owner has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the planning commission shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the planning commission determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the planning commission shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property.

    E.   All decisions of the planning commission shall be in writing and mailed to the property owner within five days of the decision. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.26.060 Appeals for certificates of compliance and notices of violation.
    An applicant may appeal a decision concerning a certificate of compliance or notice of violation in accordance with Chapter 17.40 of this code. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.28 DESIGN STANDARDS
17.28.010 Access requirements.
    Access to a design unit or to any lesser unit thereof, if more than one parcel map or final map is to be filed on a design unit, shall be by means of an improved public or private street or highway, approved by the director of public works. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.01)

 

17.28.020 Highways—General plan compliance.
    If the circulation element of the general plan shows a highway so located that any portion thereof lies within a design unit, that portion of the highway which is within the design unit shall be included in the design of the division of land unless the city council determines at the hearing on the tentative map or appeal that there is a reasonable probability that the general plan will be amended to remove or relocate the highway so that it is no longer within the design unit. If the city council determines that the present acceptance and construction of a highway or portion thereof is not warranted, the highway or portion thereof shall be included in the design of the division of land as a future street. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.02)

 

17.28.030 Highway alignment criteria.
    If a center line has been established for a highway, the alignment of the highway shall conform to the established center line. If no center line has been established, the alignment shall conform to the following requirements:

    A.  The alignment shall be substantially as shown on the circulation element of the general plan;

    B.   The center line curve radius of a major highway shall be not less than one thousand five hundred feet;

    C.   The center line curve radius of a secondary highway shall be not less than one thousand feet;

    D.  In no case shall the length of the center line curve be less than one hundred feet;

    E.   Highways shall intersect with streets and other highways as nearly at right angles as is practical. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.03)

 

17.28.040 Highway widths.
    Major highways shall have a minimum width of one hundred feet and secondary highways shall have a minimum width of eighty feet unless a greater width is indicated in the circulation element of the general plan. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.04)

 

17.28.050 Right-of-way and roadway widths.
    All streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of fifty-eight feet, and have a minimum roadway width improved to not less than thirty-six feet, except that such right-of-way and roadway widths may be modified by the city planner, the planning commission or the city council in the same manner as set forth in Section 17.16.060 of this title. All alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way of twenty feet improved to full width. Dead-end alleys shall have a minimum turn-around radius of twenty-six feet improved to full width. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.06)

 

17.28.060 Future streets and alleys.
    The city council may require that future streets and alleys be provided for the future division of lots shown on a tentative map and for the development of adjoining property. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.07)

 

17.28.070 Street alignment criteria.
    A.  The alignment of streets shall be such so as to provide the minimum amount of frontage for each lot specified for the zone classification in which a lot or parcel is located, as set forth in Title 18 of this code. Lots which abut major or secondary highways, to which access rights are to be relinquished or dedicated, shall be provided with frontage on a service road or other local street.

    B.   Alignment of streets shall be subject to the following requirements:

    1.   Center line offsets of one hundred fifty feet or less shall be avoided whenever practical;

    2.   On any street, no center line curve radius of less than two hundred feet shall be permitted. A center line having an arc length of less than one hundred feet shall not be permitted unless the center line radius is greater than three thousand feet;

    3.   Streets shall intersect with other streets and highways as nearly at right angles as practical. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.05)

 

17.28.080 Cul-de-sac length.
    A.  Cul-de-sacs shall be designed for not more than seven hundred feet in length when serving land zoned for industrial or commercial use or when serving land zoned for residential uses having a dwelling unit density of more than four dwelling units per net acre of land, unless the director of public works recommends that a greater length would be acceptable.

    B.   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the approval of a division of land utilizing frontage on an existing cul-de-sac of more than the maximum permitted length nor shall it be construed to prohibit the division of land committee or planning commission, as the case may be, from reducing the length of a proposed cul-de-sac to less than the maximum length permitted by this section, or requiring the elimination of a proposed cul-de-sac in order to provide for the efficient circulation of traffic, the future development of the neighborhood street system, or the deployment of emergency services. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.09)

 

17.28.090 Corner cutoffs at road intersections.
    Intersections of road right-of-way lines, where one or both streets are local residential, shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of fifteen feet. Intersections of road right-of-way lines, where both streets are highways or one of the streets serves a commercial or industrial development, shall be rounded with a curve having a radius of twenty-five feet. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.10)

 

17.28.100 Alleys—Required when.
    The city council may require that an alley be provided at the rear of all lots in any division of land, subject to the prior review and recommendation of the division of land committee and planning commission. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.08)

 

17.28.110 Alleys—Intersections.
    Whenever two alleys are proposed to intersect or whenever an alley or street are proposed to intersect, there shall be a corner cutoff provided at the intersection of the intersecting rights-of-way. Such corner cutoff shall be not less than an angular ten feet, measured from the point of right-of-way intersection. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.11)

 

17.28.120 Lots—City boundaries.
    No lot shall be divided by a city boundary line, and such boundary line shall be made a lot line. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.13)

 

17.28.130 Lots—Design specifications.
    The design of all lots shall be subject to the following requirements:

    A.  Each lot in a division of land shall have the lot width and lot area of not less than is required for the zone classification in which the lot is located, as set forth in Title 18 of this code. Strips of land for the use only as vehicular access shall not be included in calculating the width or area. The required width and area shall be the same as those terms as are used and defined in the zoning code.

    B.   If a lot is in more than one zone classification, the property development regulations required for the most restrictive zone shall be required for the entire lot.

    C.   This section does not apply to any lot which the subdivider offers to deed or dedicate to the public.

    D.  In all cases where practical, the side lot lines of lots shall be at an approximate right angle to the street upon which such lots front. Where lot lines front on curved portions of streets, lot lines shall be radial where practical.

    E.   Divisions of property abutting rights-of-way for freeways, railroads, electrical transmission easements and flood control channels shall be designed so as to create lots which back up to such rights-of-way.

    F.   The minimum length of the front lot line of a lot fronting onto a cul-de-sac or knuckle shall be not less than forty feet or as provided in the zoning code or adopted specific plan. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.12)

 

17.28.140 Planned residential unit developments.
    In addition to the information required to be shown on the tentative and final tract maps relative to the division of lots or parcels, where such lots or parcels are to be sold or separated in ownership from other property in a planned residential unit development, or applicable phase thereof, the respective maps shall also designate the boundaries of lots or parcels of land to be sold or separated in ownership. In no case shall the subdivision of land create any lot or parcel having less than the minimum required area as set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this code. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9107.14)

 

17.28.150 Provisions for natural heating.
    The design of a subdivision shall provide, to the extent feasible, for the future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.32 IMPROVEMENTS
17.32.010 Conditions for compliance.
    A.  Improvements required to be installed by a subdivider as a condition precedent to the filing of a final tract or parcel map shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. Such improvements shall be provided and developed in accordance with the conditions imposed as a condition of approval of the tentative map, in accordance with any agreement or bond made or entered into by the subdivider for that purpose, and in accordance with the standards and specifications set by administrative regulations and ordinances of the city applicable at the time to the tentative map. All requirements of Article 3.5, Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act relative to public access to public resources shall be complied with, and such requirements shall be made a part of this chapter.

    B.   All improvements, rights-of-way, easements and other appurtenances required as a condition of the tentative map shall be dedicated to the city, or to the appropriate agency as determined by the city, at no cost to the city or such agency, unless otherwise specifically provided by state law. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.01)

 

17.32.020 Plans and specifications—Submittal for approval.
    Plans, profiles and specifications for on-site improvements, other than for streets and highways, shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to the time a final tract or parcel map is submitted for checking and certification. Such plans shall show all details of the proposed improvements and site development needed for approval of such plans by the city engineer. Such details shall include requirements of other governmental agencies whose jurisdiction some portion of the plans may encompass. Preliminary plans may be approved by the city engineer when sufficient engineering data is furnished by the subdivider to demonstrate that the preliminary design meets the city’s requirements, is practical from a maintenance standpoint, is consistent with sound engineering practices, and that the final plans will conform to the preliminary plans with only minor changes or modifications. Final plans for such improvements and site development must be approved by the city engineer prior to transmitting the final tract map or parcel map to the city council and/or planning commission, respectively, for approval. If the subdivider applies for a reimbursement agreement and/or another governmental agency, whose approval of the plans is required, the city engineer shall not approve preliminary or final plans until and unless such agreement and agency approval has been consummated. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.02)

 

17.32.030 Street and highway requirements.
    Plans, profiles and specifications for all street and highway improvements shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. Such plans shall be furnished to the city engineer not later than the time of submitting the final tract or parcel map to the city engineer for checking, and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer before any such map shall be certified by the city engineer. Such plans, profiles and specifications shall show full details of the proposed improvements, and shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of the city. Such plans shall also include a design grade for an existing highway or for a future street, provided the city engineer determines that such grade is necessary to properly locate slope and drainage easements and/or facilities, if any. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.03)

 

17.32.040 Map to show street structures.
    If streets, highways or other public ways are to be dedicated or granted in fee on a final tract or parcel map or by separate instrument prior to filing such maps, and the subdivider is required to grade, pave or install curbs, gutters or sidewalks within such easements, the subdivider shall provide a copy of the final tract or parcel map, as the case may be, which delineates all structures within such easements, except publicly owned storm drains, water lines, sewers and other drainage or sanitary facilities. Such maps shall be submitted to the city engineer when highway improvement plans are submitted for approval. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.04)

 

17.32.050 Highway improvements.
    Each highway shall be improved with full-width grading, cement concrete curbs and gutters, full-width roadway paving, installation of drainage facilities incidental thereto, street signs, and such other improvements for traffic and drainage needs as are required for the appropriate developments of the division of land. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.05)

 

17.32.060 Street improvements.
    Each street, whether public or private, shall be improved with full-width grading, Portland cement concrete curbs and gutters, full-width roadway paving, drainage facilities incidental thereto, and street signs. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.06)

 

17.32.070 Existing streets or highways—Remodeling.
    The city council may require the remodeling of an existing street or highway. Such remodeling shall be in accordance with the improvement requirements specified in Sections 17.32.050, 17.32.060 and 17.32.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.08)

 

17.32.080 Existing streets or highways—Adjacent areas.
    If a portion of an existing street or highway constitutes any portion of the boundary of the division of land and such street or highway is unimproved, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve such street or highway as specified herein and as set forth in Sections 17.32.050, 17.32.060 and 17.32.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.07)

 

17.32.090 Future streets.
    Except for full-width grading, the subdivider shall not be required to improve streets or highways shown on a final tract or parcel map as future streets. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.09)

 

17.32.100 Water mains and fire hydrants.
    A.  The subdivider shall install or agree to install water mains and fire hydrants in a division of land for the general use of the lot owners and for fire protection. The installation of such water mains and fire hydrants shall comply in all respects with all statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to water mains and fire hydrants. In the absence of such statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations, required domestic water flows shall be determined by the city engineer, and required fire flows, duration of required fire flows, and fire hydrant type and location shall be determined by the fire chief.

    B.   Water mains and fire hydrants may be required on existing streets or highways adjacent to or within the division of land, provided the existing improvements are insufficient for the general use and/or fire protection of the lot owners. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.21)

 

17.32.110 Sanitary sewers.
    The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers to serve each lot in a division of land. Such sewers shall be designed in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer, and the outlet to be used for the sewers shall be designated by the city engineer. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.16)

 

17.32.120 Drainage facilities.
    The subdivider shall provide such drainage improvements and facilities as are considered necessary by the city engineer for the drainage requirements of a division of land and for tributary areas. Such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with such standards and specifications approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.12)

 

17.32.130 Flood or geological hazard protection.
    The city council may require such structures to be installed as are necessary for the proper functioning and maintenance of the improvements required to remove a flood or geological hazard and as are necessary for the protection of property adjacent to the division of land. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.11)

 

17.32.140 Underground utilities.
    Utility lines, including but not limited to electric, communications, street lighting and cable television, shall be required to be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and he or she shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of such facilities. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.15)

 

17.32.145 Cable television.
    The subdivider shall provide one or more appropriate cable television systems an opportunity to construct, install and maintain on land identified on the map as dedicated or to be dedicated to public utility use, any equipment necessary to extend cable television services to each residential parcel in the subdivision. This section shall not apply to the conversion of existing dwelling units to condominiums, community apartments or stock cooperatives. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.32.150 Sidewalks.
    The subdivider shall install concrete sidewalks not less than four feet wide along both sides of all streets and highways within or adjacent to the division of land. Sidewalks shall be installed adjacent to the curb only if the city council so specifies. Such sidewalk widths shall be minimum unless otherwise required by the city engineer, city planner, planning commission or city council, as the case may be. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.17)

 

17.32.155 Telephone service.
    The planning commission or the city council may require the design of a subdivision to provide for the availability of individual household telephone service to each residential parcel in the subdivision. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.32.160 Street lighting system.
    The subdivider shall provide an ornamental street lighting system in each division of land. Plans for the installation of the system shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.18)

 

17.32.165 Defense of lawsuits.
    The planning commission or the city council may require, as a condition for a tentative, parcel or final map application or approval, that the subdivider defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city or its agents, officers and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its agents, officers or employees to attack, set aside, avoid or annul an approval of the city council or the planning commission or any other city, agency or board concerning a subdivision, which action is brought within the time period provided for in Section 66499.37 of the Subdivision Map Act. Any condition imposed pursuant to this section shall include the requirement that the city promptly notify the subdivider of any claim, action or proceeding and that the city cooperate fully in the defense. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

 

17.32.170 Street trees and plants.
    The subdivider shall plant trees in the parkway of streets and highways and/or adjacent to a division of land. The type, species and location of such trees shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works and city planner. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.20)

 

17.32.180 Landscaping maintenance.
    Whenever a lot on a final map is to be owned in common by a number of persons or by an association comprised of a number of persons, the subdivider shall form a landscape maintenance district, or establish an alternate landscape maintenance procedure satisfactory to the city prior to filing a final map to assure continual maintenance of common areas. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.19)

 

17.32.190 Fences or walls adjacent to highways.
    If lots in a division of land abut a street or highway and the subdivider has relinquished or dedicated access rights to such street or highway, a masonry wall not less than six feet in height shall be required to be installed and constructed along the property line of the lots contiguous to the street or highway, unless such lots are designed to front onto such street or highway and are served by a dedicated and improved alley. In any case, a building permit shall be obtained for the erection and construction of such wall. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.13)

 

17.32.200 Fencing of watercourses or drainage facilities.
    The subdivider shall provide a fence or wall not less than six feet high along each side of any portion of a dedicated right-of-way for any watercourse or drainage facility within a proposed division of land if the city engineer finds that the location, shape, slope, width, velocity of water therein, or other characteristics of the watercourse or drainage facility makes the fencing of the right-of-way necessary for the protection of the general public. Such fencing shall have an adequate number of gates to facilitate cleaning and maintenance and shall not contain apertures below the fence in excess of four inches vertical. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.14)

 

17.32.210 Temporary improvements.
    Temporary improvements may be required prior to, or concurrent with, permanent improvements. In such instances, the temporary improvements shall be installed in a manner approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.10)

 

17.32.220 Partial improvements.
    A.  Whenever a division of real property, by sale, lease or otherwise, has taken place which requires compliance with the provisions of this title, but approval has not been obtained as provided herein, and the purchaser of one or more of the parcels so divided has been refused a building permit or a certificate of occupancy, or has attempted to file a parcel map on his or her property but has been refused same by reason of noncompliance herewith, the city council may, pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.16.060 of this title, direct the city planner to accept a parcel map for filing relating to such purchaser’s property only, provided that such purchaser agrees to construct improvements and dedicate areas as may be required to comply with the provisions hereof.

    B.   The city council, prior to such direction to the city planner, must make the following finding of facts:

    1.   That the purchaser at the time of his or her purchase of the property was unaware of the application of the provisions of this title to his or her property; and

    2.   That the purchaser has unsuccessfully attempted to obtain the approval and concurrence of the other purchasers, property owners and/or his or her vendor in the filing of a parcel map covering all of the property divided without compliance with this title; and

    3.   That to refuse to accept a parcel map relating to the property of the injured purchaser only, will work an undue hardship upon such purchaser; and

    4.   That the public interest will be furthered by permitting such filing.

    C.   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to relieve any owner, purchaser or vendor of any real property from the filing of a parcel map, nor shall it be deemed to waive or modify the requirements for such filing on all remaining portions of property so divided. The city council shall not approve or direct the filing of a parcel map if it determines that the parcel map was filed for the purpose of avoiding compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.24)

 

17.32.230 Costs of improvements.
    A.  Improvements required by this chapter shall be installed and constructed by the subdivider at his or her expense, and shall not be paid for by any special assessment, lien, tax, bonded indebtedness, or other charge against the land or real property within the division, except as follows:

    1.   The cost of installing pipes and other facilities for the transmission of water may be paid for in whole or in part from revenues collected from the customers served at regular established water rates for the water purveyor, pursuant to the regulations of the Public Utilities Commission where applicable, or by a public agency (as defined in Section 4401 of the California Government Code) from the net operating income only, as payment for the sale of water thereto; and

    2.   As provided in Article 6, Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act or other reimbursement, improvement or maintenance enabling acts.

    B.   All outstanding or remaining assessments on the land of the division established for improvements constructed under special assessment district proceedings shall be paid by the subdivider. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.23)

 

17.32.240 Improvement completion agreement.
    If a required improvement is not completed before a final tract or parcel map is filed, the subdivider shall enter, as contractor, into an agreement with the city to complete the improvement within the time specified by such agreement, and subject to the provisions of Chapter 5 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9108.22)

Chapter 17.36 FEES, DEPOSITS AND BONDS
Article I Filing, Checking, Inspection and Improvement Security Fees
17.36.010 Tentative tract map fees.
    Upon submission of a tentative tract map, the subdivider shall pay to the city all necessary fees in accordance with the city’s adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.01)

 

17.36.020 Final tract map checking and filing fees.
    Upon submission of a final tract map for checking, the subdivider shall pay to the city a final map checking fee in accordance with the city’s adopted fee schedule in addition to all other fees and charges required by law. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.03)

 

17.36.030 Tentative parcel maps.
    Upon submission of a tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall pay to the city all necessary fees in accordance with the city’s adopted fee schedule. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.02)

 

17.36.040 Parcel map checking and filing fees.
    Upon submission of a final parcel map for checking, the subdivider shall pay to the city a final map checking fee in accordance with the city’s adopted fee schedule in addition to all other fees and charges required by law. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.04)

 

17.36.050 Plan checking fees.
    A.  A subdivider shall pay the following plan checking fees to the city for checking improvement plans:

    1.   For plans for sewers and appurtenant facilities, the fee required by the city ordinance entitled “Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance”;

    2.   For other improvements plans, a fee equal to the cost of checking the plans.

    B.   Upon submission of plans to the city, the subdivider shall deposit an amount estimated by the appropriate city officer to be adequate to cover the cost of checking the plans. If at any time subsequent to making the deposit the actual funds expended exceed the amount of the deposit, the subdivider shall make an additional payment equal to the deficiency. Excess deposits, if any, shall be returned to the subdivider after completion of plan checking. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.05)

 

17.36.060 Monuments—Performance bond or deposit.
    The agreement referred to in subsection G of Section 17.20.140 will be accompanied by a bond or cash deposit guaranteeing the faithful performance of the agreement in an amount estimated by the director of public works equal to the cost of setting monuments and furnishing notes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.14)

 

17.36.070 Inspection—Deposits before construction.
    Before commencing construction or installation of a required improvement, the subdivider shall deposit with the city:

    A.  For inspection of sewers and appurtenant facilities, the sum required by the city ordinance entitled “Sanitary Sewer and Industrial Waste Ordinance”;

    B.   For inspection of other improvements, a sum estimated by the city engineer to be adequate to cover the actual cost of inspection. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.06)

 

17.36.080 Inspection—General deposits.
    In lieu of making the special deposits required by Section 17.36.070, the subdivider may make and maintain with the city a general deposit in an amount determined by the officer with whom the deposit is made to be sufficient to protect the city’s interest. The general deposit shall be held and used for the same purposes as a special deposit. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.07)

 

17.36.090 Improvement agreement securities.
    Except as provided in Section 17.36.110, the improvement agreement required by Section 17.32.240 shall be secured by an improvement security subject to the provisions of Chapter 5 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.08)

 

17.36.100 Water mains—Improvement security conditions.
    If a subdivider shows to the satisfaction of the director of public works that he or she has entered into a contract with a water utility to construct water mains in which such contract makes the city a party thereto and provides that the contract may not be modified or rescinded without the consent of the city, except as required by the Public Utilities Commission, and has deposited with the water utility security for the payment of the water utility which the director of public works finds adequate, the subdivider need not accompany an agreement to install water mains with an improvement security. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.09)

 

17.36.110 Improvement security—Amount and purpose.
    An improvement security shall be for the following amounts:

    A.  An amount estimated by the director of public works to be equal to the cost of improvements covered by the security, guaranteeing the faithful performance of the improvement work;

    B.   An amount estimated by the director of public works to be equal to the cost of the improvements covered by the security, securing payment to contractors and subcontractors and to all persons renting equipment or furnishing labor or materials to them or the job site. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.10)

 

17.36.120 Improvement security—Bonds and deposits.
    Improvement securities shall be:

    A.  A bond or bonds issued by a surety company authorized to write the same in the state of California;

    B.   A deposit with the city of cash, negotiable bonds, letters of credit, or savings and loan certificates or shares. Savings and loan shares or certificates shall be assigned to the city. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.11)

 

17.36.130 Improvement security—Reduction conditions.
    When a portion of an improvement has been fully completed, the director of public works may at his or her discretion authorize a reduction in an improvement security given for faithful performance equal to the estimated cost of the completed portion of the improvement. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.12)

 

17.36.140 Improvement security—Forfeiture conditions.
    Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete an improvement within the time specified in an agreement, the city council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person, firm or corporation signing the contract and the surety or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty days served by certified mail, addressed to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing the contract and the surety, determine that the improvement work or any part thereof is uncompleted, and may cause to be forfeited to the city the portion of the sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of the work, or may cash savings and loan certificates or shares deposited and assigned to assure the faithful performance of the work, or may cash savings and loan certificates or shares deposited and assigned to assure the faithful performance of the work to complete the improvement work. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.13)

 

Article II Park Land Dedication or In-Lieu Fees
17.36.150 Statutory authority and city rules.
    The authority for the dedication of land and/or the payment of fees for park and recreation facilities is granted pursuant to Section 66418, Article 2, Chapter 1, and Section 66477, Article 3, Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act, and the provisions therefor are set out in this article. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15)

 

17.36.160 General requirements.
    As a condition of approval of a final tract map the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or both, at the sole option of the city, for park and/or recreation purposes in accordance with the provisions of this article, except where a division of land contains fifty lots or less, only the payment of fees may be required. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (A))

 

17.36.170 Basis for requirements.
    It is found and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, safety and general welfare require that land within a subdivision to be developed for residential dwellings be donated to local park and recreation purposes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (B))

 

17.36.180 Exemptions—Commercial and industrial divisions.
    This article does not apply to commercial or industrial subdivisions or to condominium projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of air space in an existing apartment building which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (J))

 

17.36.190 Formula for land dedication.
    A.  Whenever a park or other recreation facility has been designated for such in the general plan and is located in either whole or in part within the division of land to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents thereof, the subdivider shall dedicate land for a local park sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of such division of land. The amount of land to be dedicated shall be the greater of:

    1.   .008 acres per resident of the subdivision. The number of residents of the subdivision shall be calculated by multiplying the number of residential units times the average number of persons per household. The presumption contained in Section 66477 of the Subdivision Map Act may be used to calculate the average number of persons per household.

    B.   Dedication of land for park and/or recreation purposes shall be made in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 17.36.260 of this article. (Ord. 876 § 3, 1995; Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (C))

 

17.36.200 Formula for fee payment in lieu of land dedication.
    If there is no park or other recreation facility designated in the general plan to be located either in whole or in part within the division of land to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents thereof, or if the subdivision consists of fifty lots or less, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land therefor, pay a fee equal to the value of land prescribed for dedication in Section 17.36.190 hereof in an amount determined in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.36.230.

    The subdivider may receive a credit of fifty percent of the value of private open space provided that such space meets the criteria established in Section 17.36.250. (Ord. 876 § 4, 1995; Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (D), (1))

 

17.36.210 Both dedication and fees required when.
    If a division of land is subdivided into more than fifty lots, the subdivider shall dedicate land and pay a fee in lieu thereof in accordance with the following formula:

    A.  Portion of Land for Dedication and Payment of Fees. Whenever only a portion of a park or other recreation facility has been designated for such in the general plan as a local park site, such portion shall be dedicated for local park purposes and fees computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.36.230 shall be paid for any additional land that would have been required to have been dedicated pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.36.190 hereof.

    B.   Major Portion of Land Already Acquired by City and Payment of Fees. Whenever a major portion of a local park or recreation site has already been acquired by the city and only a small remaining portion of land is needed from a division of land to complete such park or recreation site, such remaining portions shall be dedicated for local park purposes and a fee computed pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.36.230 shall be paid in an amount equal to the value of the land which would otherwise have been required to be dedicated pursuant to the provisions of Section 17.36.190 hereof.

    C.   The subdivider may receive a credit of fifty percent of the value of private open space provided beyond the required designated park area subject to criteria established in Section 17.36.250. (Ord. 876 § 5, 1995; Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (E))

 

17.36.220 Determination of dedication or payment—Criteria.
    A.  The city council or planning commission shall determine whether land shall be dedicated for local park purposes or require the payment of fees, or both the dedication of land and payment of fees, based upon the following considerations:

    1.   The public facilities element of the general plan;

    2.   The topography, geology, access and location of land available for dedication;

    3.   The size, shape area of the division of land and the land available for dedication;

    4.   The feasibility of dedication;

    5.   The compatibility of dedication with the provisions of the general plan; and

    6.   The availability and improvements of previously acquired land for park and recreation purposes.

    B.   The determination of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (G))

 

17.36.230 Amount of fee—Basis.
    Whenever a fee is required to be paid in lieu of dedication of land, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the average fair market value for the city, and such fair market value figure shall be adjusted annually by the city to keep current with property appreciation. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (F))

 

17.36.240 Fee use restrictions.
    The fees collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall only be used for the purposes of providing park and recreation facilities reasonably related to serving the residents of a division of land by purchasing necessary land or if deemed by the city council that sufficient land is already available, such fees may be used for improvements of such available land for park and recreation purposes. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (D)(2))

 

17.36.250 PUD zones—Credit for private open space.
    Whenever private open space for park and recreation purposes is provided in a division of land for a planned residential unit development and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents thereof, fifty percent of the value of such private open space as determined by Section 17.36.230 may be credited toward the requirement of dedicating land and/or payment of fees in lieu thereof, provided that the city council finds that it is in best interests of the public welfare to do so subject to the following requirements:

    A.  No yard, court area, setback or any other similar open area required to be maintained that is regulated by the zoning code or by the city building laws shall be included in the computation of such private open space, except for open space required by a planned residential unit development;

    B.   The private ownership and maintenance of such private open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, covenant, condition or restriction, in which approval of the city is a part thereof;

    C.   The use of the private open space is restricted to park and recreation purposes only by recorded covenant, conditions or restriction, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of interest in common, which cannot be separated or eliminated without the express approval of the city;

    D.  The use of the private open space is reasonably acceptable for park and recreation purposes, taking into consideration such factors as may bear upon such use therefor;

    E.   The facilities provided for the private open space and substantially conform to the provisions and objectives of the public facilities element of the general plan. (Ord. 876 § 6, 1995; Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (H))

 

17.36.260 Dedication or payment—Council determination.
    The city council, or planning commission, at the time of approval of a tentative tract map, shall determine in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.36.220 the land to be dedicated and/or fees to be paid by the subdivider. At the time of filing the final tract map, the subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the city council. Open-space covenants, conditions or restrictions for park or recreation facilities qualifying for private open space credit shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final tract map and shall be recorded prior to such final tract map or concurrently therewith. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (I))

 

17.36.270 Commencement of park land development.
    The city council, at the time of approval of a final tract map, shall develop a schedule specifying how, when and where it will use the land or fees, or both, to develop park or recreational facilities to serve the residents of the subdivision. Any fees collected under this article shall be committed within five years after the payment of such fees or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they, without any deductions, shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in the same proportion that the size of their lot bears to the total area of all lots within the subdivision. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9110.15 (K))

 

Article III School Dedications
17.36.280 Schools.
    As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, a subdivider who develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within a school district within the city maintaining an elementary school may be required to dedicate to the school district such lands as the city council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate elementary school service.

    A.  The requirement of dedication shall be imposed at the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map. If within thirty days after the requirement of dedication is imposed by the city, the appropriate district does not offer to enter into a binding commitment with the subdivider to accept the dedication, the requirement shall be automatically terminated. The required dedication may be made anytime before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after the filing of the final subdivision map or any portion of the subdivision.

    B.   The school district shall, if it accepts the dedication, repay the subdivider or his or her successors the original cost to the subdivider of the dedicated land, plus a sum equal to the total of the following amounts:

    1.   The cost of any improvements to the dedicated land since acquisition by the subdivider;

    2.   The taxes assessed against the dedicated land from the date of the school district’s offer to enter into the binding commitment to accept the dedication;

    3.   Any other costs incurred by the subdivider in the maintenance of such dedicated land, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering such land.

    C.   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to a subdivider who has owned the land being subdivided for more than ten years prior to the filing of the tentative subdivision maps. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 17.40 APPEALS
17.40.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions and regulations for any person aggrieved by the decisions of the city planner or the planning commission to appeal said decisions. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9111.01)

 

17.40.020 Filing procedures.
    Any interested person who is not satisfied with or who is aggrieved by the decisions made relative to the administration and enforcement of this title, may file an appeal in the manner as hereinafter set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9111.02)

 

17.40.030 Appeal from city planner.
    Any person dissatisfied with the actions and decisions of the city planner resulting from the administration of this title wherein the city planner is vested with the authority therefor, may file an appeal therefrom with the planning commission at any time not more than ten days after the decision of the city planner has been rendered. Said appeal shall be made in the following manner:

    A.  Application and Fees. Any person appealing the decision of the city planner shall file with the city planner an application therefor on forms prescribed thereby, accompanied by an application filing fee as set forth in the city’s adopted fee schedule. The application shall set forth and include any information as the city planner may require. Upon the filing of a verified application, the city planner shall transmit the application forthwith to the planning commission, and the planning commission shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony from and on behalf of the applicant, and render its findings and decisions on the matter.

    B.   The planning commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the appeal within thirty days after the filing of the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 17.16.040 of this code.

    C.   Announcement of Planning Commission Decision. The planning commission shall announce its decisions by formal written resolution within seven days after conclusion of its public hearing on the matter. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the facts, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the planning commission make upholding, reversing or modifying the actions and decisions of the city planner or planning commission considered necessary to assure that due process and justice has been done, and shall uphold, reverse or modify same. The planning commission shall forthwith give the applicant, city planner or division or land committee and/or any other person having a vested interest therein, written notice of its actions and decisions together with a copy of said resolution. The actions and decisions of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9111.03)

 

17.40.050 Appeal from planning commission decisions.
    Any person dissatisfied with the actions and decisions of the planning commission rendered on a tentative parcel map or notice of violation may file an appeal therefrom with the city council at any time not more than ten days after the decision of the planning commission has been rendered. The appeal shall be made in the following manner:

    A.  Application and Fees. Any person appealing the decision of the planning commission shall file with the city clerk an application therefor on forms prescribed thereby, accompanied by an application filing fee as set forth in the city’s adopted fee schedule. The application shall set forth and include any information as the city clerk may require. Upon the filing of a verified application, the city clerk shall transmit the application forthwith to the city council, and the city council shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony from and on behalf of the applicant, and render its findings and decisions on the matter.

    B.   The city council shall hold a noticed public hearing on the appeal within thirty days after the filing of the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 17.40.060 of this code.

    C.   Announcement of City Council Decision. The city council shall announce its decision by formal written resolution within seven days after conclusion of its public hearing on the matter. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the facts, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the city council, make upholding, reversing or modifying the actions and decisions of the planning commission considered necessary to assure that due process and justice has been done, and shall uphold, reverse or modify same. The city council shall forthwith give the applicant, planning commission and/or any other person having a vested interest therein, written notice of its actions and decisions together with a copy of the resolution. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9111.05)

 

17.40.060 City council decisions final.
    Upon the rendering of any action on an appeal matter, the actions and decisions of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 855 § 3, 1994; prior code § 9111.06)

Title 18 ZONING
Chapter 18.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 18.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 18.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 18.08 ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
Chapter 18.10 O-S OPEN SPACE ZONE
Chapter 18.12 R-E SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONE
Chapter 18.14 S-F SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Chapter 18.15 R-I RESIDENTIAL INFILL ZONE
Chapter 18.16 PUD PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Chapter 18.17 SPECIFIC PLAN 301
Chapter 18.18 R-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL VARIABLE DENSITY ZONE
Chapter 18.19 SPECIFIC PLAN 400
Chapter 18.20 PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE
Chapter 18.22 P-A PROFESSIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ZONE
Chapter 18.24 C-N NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
Chapter 18.26 C-C COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE
Chapter 18.28 C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
Chapter 18.30 CPD COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Chapter 18.32 C-M COMMERCIAL/ MANUFACTURING ZONE
Chapter 18.33 MIXED USE OVERLAY ZONE
Chapter 18.34 I-L LIMITED INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Chapter 18.36 I-G GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE
Chapter 18.37 IPD INDUSTRIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Chapter 18.38 P PARKING ZONE
Chapter 18.39 EMERGENCY SHELTERS OVERLAY ZONE
Chapter 18.40 LAND USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.42 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.43 RECYCLING SPACE ALLOCATION
Chapter 18.44 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Chapter 18.46 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
Chapter 18.47 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Chapter 18.48 PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.49 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Chapter 18.50 ANIMALS, POULTRY AND LIVESTOCK
Chapter 18.52 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Chapter 18.54 NONCONFORMING USES
Chapter 18.56 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Chapter 18.58 MOVING BUILDINGS AND RELOCATION PERMITS
Chapter 18.60 VARIANCES
Chapter 18.61 TEMPORARY USES
Chapter 18.62 AMENDMENTS AND ZONE RECLASSIFICATION
Chapter 18.64 APPEALS
Chapter 18.66 AMENDMENTS—PROCEDURES AND EXAMPLES
Chapter 18.67 REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING ACT

Chapter 18.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
18.02.010 Title for citation.
    Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall hereinafter be known as “Title 18, The Comprehensive Zoning Code of the City of Pico Rivera.” Said Title 18 may also be referred to simply as “the zoning code”; provided, however, that such reference is not in conflict with any other codes or ordinances. In event there is any doubt or confusion, or should any conflict arise, the full title of this title shall be cited as set forth herein. (Prior code § 9201.01)

 

18.02.020 Statutory authority.
    Authority for planning and zoning and the adoption of the zoning code set out in Title 18 is hereby granted and established pursuant to the provisions of Chapters 3 and 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California, and as may thereafter be amended. (Prior code § 9202.02)

 

18.02.030 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this title is to establish and set forth such regulations and procedures that will, when properly administered, cause the effectuation and implementation of the goals, provisions and objectives of the city’s comprehensive general plan, more specifically as follows:

    A.  By regulating the use of land, buildings and other structures, and other facilities for commerce, trade, industry and other functions and uses, as may be necessary and required by the community;

    B.   By regulating, among other matters, the location, height and size of buildings and other structures, yards, courts and concentration, and the environmental quality and balance of the various zone classifications established within the city;

    C.   By dividing and segregating the city into various land use zone classifications of such size, shape, number and variety best suited to carry out the goals, provisions and objectives of the comprehensive general plan and this division, and providing for the administration and enforcement thereof;

    D.  By influencing, encouraging, promoting, protecting, maintaining, and perpetuating the best interests of the city’s environmental quality and the public health, peace, safety, order and general welfare; and

    E.   By recognizing the need to constantly consider and effectively deal with the physical appearance, image, identity, character, atmosphere, environment and ecology of the city, which can be attributed as a valuable resource contributing to the overall growth, economic welfare and urban development of the community. (Prior code § 9201.02)

 

 

18.02.040 Administration and enforcement—Police powers.
    The intent and purpose of Sections 18.02.020, 18.02.040 and 18.02.060 is to establish the legality of the police power of the city to regulate the development and uses of public and private land through the administration and enforcement of planning and zoning. (Prior code § 9202.01)

 

18.02.050 Necessity of regulations.
    The regulations set out in Title 18 are necessary in order to provide the best comprehensive planning program consistent with the principles and practice of land use planning, and to assure consistency with the comprehensive general plan, more specifically as follows:

    A.  To encourage, classify, designate, regulate, restrict and segregate to the greatest degree the highest and best locations for the most appropriate uses of land;

    B.   To promote, conserve, stabilize, protect, maintain and perpetuate the economic and environmental value of property and uses of land;

    C.   To provide adequate conservation of open space, public safety, environmental welfare, and other elements and conditions in the best interests of the community; and

    D.  To adequately control the distribution of population, commerce, trade and industry. (Prior code § 9201.03)

 

18.02.060 Severability of provisions.
    If any chapter, section, subsection, clause, phrase, sentence or word of this title is for any reason held or declared to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this title as a whole, or any remaining parts or portions thereof other than that which has been specifically so held or declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior code § 9202.03)

Chapter 18.04 DEFINITIONS
18.04.004 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to define certain words, terms, phrases, and headings affecting the scope and nature of carrying out the intent and purpose of this title. Such words, terms, phrases and headings contained in this chapter and appearing elsewhere in this title, and for the purposes of zoning only, shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them, and in all cases shall preempt any dictionarial reference made thereto. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.01)

 

18.04.008 Definitions generally.
    The following words, terms, phrases and headings are categorized and defined as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02)

 

18.04.012 Accessory.
    “Accessory,” when used in reference to a building, structure or use of land, means one which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the main building, structure or use of land located on the same premises. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(3))

 

18.04.016 Adult arcade.
    “Adult arcade” shall mean a business establishment as defined in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.020 Adult retail store.
    “Adult retail store” shall mean a business establishment as defined in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.024 Adult booth/individual viewing area.
    “Adult booth/individual viewing area” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.028 Adult business.
    “Adult business” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.032 Adult cabaret.
    “Adult cabaret” shall mean a business establishment as defined in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

18.04.036 Adult hotel/motel.
    “Adult hotel/motel” shall mean a hotel or motel as defined in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.040 Adult live entertainment.
    “Adult live entertainment” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.044 Adult modeling studio.
    “Adult modeling studio” shall mean a business establishment as defined in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.048 Adult motion picture theater.
    “Adult motion picture theater” shall mean a business establishment as defined in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.052 Adult-oriented material.
    “Adult-oriented material” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.056 Advertising, off-site.
    “Off-site advertising” means the location of a sign or other advertising on a lot, parcel of land or premises not pertaining to the use of land or serving an advertising purpose for such lot, parcel of land or premises upon which such sign is located. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(6))

 

18.04.060 Advertising, on-site.
    “On-site advertising” means the location of a sign or other advertising on the same lot, parcel of land, property or premises with the building, structure and/or use for which such sign or advertising is intended to serve. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(9))

 

18.04.064 Alley.
    “Alley” means a publicly dedicated and improved right-of-way, not exceeding a uniform width of twenty feet, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access from a street or highway to abutting private property. (See Diagram No. 1 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(12))

 

18.04.068 Amendment.
    “Amendment” means a change or modification in the wording, context or substance of this Title 18 or any portion thereof, and including the official zone map. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(15))

 

18.04.072 Antique shop.
    “Antique shop” means a person, firm or corporation predominantly engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in antiques. “Antique” means a work of art, collections in illustration of the progress of the arts, works of bronze, marble, terra cotta, parian, pottery, porcelain, objects of ornamental character, educational or intrinsic value, or items referred to as curios and collectibles due to their historical or cultural significance. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(18))

 

18.04.076 Amateur radio antenna.
    “Amateur radio antenna” means an antenna utilized by a federally licensed operator to permit amateur radio communication. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 745 § 1, 1988; prior code § 9203.02(A)(16.1))

18.04.080 Antenna.
    “Antenna” means the arrangement of wires or metal rods used in the sending and receiving of electromagnetic waves. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 745 § 1, 1988; prior code § 9203.02(A)(16))

 

18.04.084 Antenna height.
    “Antenna height” means the overall vertical length of the antenna and antenna support structure above grade, or, if such system is located on a building, then the overall vertical length includes the height of the building upon which the structure is mounted. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 745 § 1, 1988; prior code § 9203.02(A)(16.2))

 

18.04.088 Antenna support structure.
    “Antenna support structure” means any structure, mast, pole, tripod or tower utilized for the purpose of supporting an antenna or antennas for the purpose of transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves by federally licensed amateur radio or citizens band radio operators. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 745 § 1, 1988; prior code § 9203.02(A)(16.3))

 

18.04.092 Apartment.
    “Apartment” means a building or group of buildings in which each such building contains three or more dwelling units. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(21))

 

18.04.096 Automated teller machine.
    “Automated teller machine” means a point of sale terminal designed to facilitate financial transactions. Services provided include, but may not be limited to, cash withdrawals, deposits, transfers, payments and other similar financial transactions. Architectural enhancements or additional landscaping for such units may be required subject to the approval of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 2, 1994)

 

18.04.100 Automobile service station.
    “Automobile service station” means a use of land for which a building or group of buildings or other structures have been designed for the purpose of dispensing motor fuels, oils, lubricants and other petroleum products directly to the users of motor vehicles, and including other sales and repair activities which are clearly minor in nature, incidental and subordinate to the scope of the primary function. Activities involving automobile or truck body repairing, painting and/or other major mechanical repairing and servicing of any portion or part of the basic engine unit or drive train assembly of any type whatsoever are not included. (Prior code § 9203.02(A)(24))

 

18.04.104 Automobile storage.
    “Automobile storage” means the temporary storage of “live” (operative) or “dead” (inoperative) automobiles pending transfer to another location and does not involve the business operator assuming title to any of the vehicles. No junk yard, parts salvage or sale, or similar type of use permitted as part of storage operations. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 886 § 2, 1996)

 

18.04.108 Automobile trailer.
    “Automobile trailer” means a vehicle incapable of movement under its own motor power, designed to be drawn or towed for the purpose of carrying or transporting property, but specifically excluding the use for human habitation or the transportation thereof or for dwelling purposes. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(27))

 

18.04.112 Automobile wrecking.
    “Automobile wrecking” means the dismantling and/or wrecking of vehicles and/or trailers of any type or kind whatsoever, or parts or portions thereof, including storage and/or sales related thereto. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(30))

 

18.04.116 Automotive related sales and installation.
    “Automotive related sales and installation” means retail sales of various automotive accessories such as stereos, telephones, alarms and other similar accessories including installation. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 3, 1994)

 

18.04.120 Bath house.
    “Bath house” means an establishment or business which provides the services of all kinds, including all forms and methods of hydrotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by the state. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 611 § 1, 1979; Ord. 610 § 1, 1979; prior code § 9203.02(A)(32))

 

18.04.124 Block.
    “Block” means all property abutting or having frontage along one side of the right-of-way of a public street or highway between a street or highway and a railroad right-of-way or waterway, terminus or dead-end street or highway, or city boundary. An intersecting street or highway shall only determine the boundary of the block on the side of the street or highway which it intersects. (See Diagram No. 2 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(33))

 

18.04.128 Boardinghouse.
    “Boardinghouse” means a residential building having not more than five guest rooms where lodging and meals are provided for compensation, for not more than ten persons, but shall specifically exclude rest homes, convalescent homes, sanitariums or similar such facilities. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(36))

 

18.04.132 Bona fide charitable institution.
    “Bona fide charitable institution” means and include those organizations and institutions which qualify for a tax-exempt certificate pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 23701(d). (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 640 § 1, 1981; prior code § 9203.02(A)(37))

 

18.04.136 Bona fide political organization.
    “Bona fide political organization” means and includes any political organization which qualifies for a tax-exempt certificate pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code, Section 23701(d), or any political group, organization or person whose activities or proceeds are used exclusively for the benefit of a political candidate or issue, and which activities do not include dancing. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 640 § 1, 1981; prior code § 9203.02(A)(38))

 

18.04.138 Brewery.
    “Brewery” means an establishment that ferments and manufactures specialty beers. A brewery may sell alcohol fermented and manufactured on the business’s licensed premises for on-sale or off-sale consumption. Tasting rooms may be included in conjunction with the manufacturing. (Ord. 1126 § 7, 2018)

 

18.04.140 Building.
    “Building” means a roofed structure supported by columns or walls, built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, vehicles or other property of any kind or type whatsoever, but excluding any and all forms of other vehicles which could be used for human habitation even though immobilized or mobilized. (Prior code § 9203.02(A)(39))

 

18.04.144 Building area.
    “Building area” means that portion of land surface upon which may be physically occupied by a building or structure. (See Diagram No. 3 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(42))

 

18.04.148 Building coverage.
    “Building coverage” means that certain portion of land surface which is or may be occupied by a building, but excluding roof eaves or cantilevered roof projections which do not extend beyond three feet from a supporting wall or column, and those permitted projections as set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title; in addition as balconies, roof decks, patios, swimming pools, and cabanas with protective roof covering and with one side remaining open are defined as part of the outdoor living space, these structures do not count as part of the building coverage. (See Diagram No. 3 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 2, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(45))

 

18.04.152 Building height.
    “Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the average finished land grade to the highest point of the building, including any roof attachments or projections. (See Diagram No. 3 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(48))

 

18.04.156 Building laws.
    “Building laws” means the various laws and provisions contained in Chapter 12.44 and Chapters 15.04 through 15.40 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(51))

 

18.04.160 Building, main.
    “Main building” means a building in which there is conducted the principal use of a lot or parcel of land upon which it is located. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(54))

 

18.04.164 Building-mounted.
    “Building-mounted” means mounted to the side of a building or to another structure such as a water tank, billboard, church steeple, transmission tower, freestanding sign, etc. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.168 Building official.
    “Building official” means the director of building and planning of the city of Pico Rivera, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(57))

 

18.04.172 Building setback.
    “Building setback” means that certain portion of land upon which no portion of any building or structure shall be located, and shall include yards. (See Diagram No. 3 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(60))

 

18.04.176 Building site.
    “Building site” means the ground area of a lot or parcel of land upon which a building or group of buildings may be erected, together with all yards and other open spaces as required by this title, and the provisions of Chapter 12.44 and Chapters 15.04 through 15.40 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(63))

 

18.04.180 Business or commerce.
    “Business” or “commerce” means the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, service, substance or commodity for livelihood or profit, or the management of office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises, or the maintenance and use of offices, buildings and premises by professions and trade rendering services. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(66))

 

18.04.184 Camper.
    “Camper” means a structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle, and may provide facilities and be used for human habitation only for temporary camping or other recreational purposes, but specifically excluding use thereof for dwelling occupancy. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(69))

 

18.04.188 Carport.
    “Carport” means a building open on one or more sides used or intended to be used for the shelter, parking and/or storage of an automobile or vehicle. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(72))

 

18.04.192 Certificate of zoning compliance.
    “Certificate of zoning compliance” means a certificate issued by the city planner which certifies that a development or plans therefor comply with all applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(75))

 

18.04.196 Check cashing establishment.
    “Check cashing establishments” are defined under the California Civil Code Section 1789.31 as a person or entity that for compensation engages, in whole or in part, in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose as a check. It also includes a person or entity that defers deposits whereby the entity refrains from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date pursuant to a written agreement, as described in Section 1789.33 of the California Civil Code. Check cashing does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial loan company nor a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of selling consumer goods, including consumables, to retail buyers, that cashes checks or issues money orders for a fee not exceeding two dollars as a service to its customer that is incidental to its main purpose or business. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1057 § 7, 2009)

 

18.04.200 Child care center.
    “Child care center” means the same as day care center. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(78))

 

18.04.204 Citizen band antenna.
    “Citizen band antenna” means an antenna utilized by a citizen band radio communications system. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 745 § 1, 1988; prior code § 9203.02(A)(82))

 

18.04.208 City.
    “City” means the city of Pico Rivera, California. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(84))

 

18.04.212 City council.
    “City council” means the elected city council of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(87))

 

18.04.216 City engineer.
    “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city of Pico Rivera, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(90))

 

18.04.220 City planner.
    “City planner” means the city planner of the city of Pico Rivera, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(93))

 

18.04.224 Coin-operated game.
    “Coin-operated game” means any amusement machine or skill-testing device which is operated or put into operation in whole or in part by the insertion of a coin, token or similar object. This definition does not include coin-operated weighing machines, stamp vending machines, photograph, music or motion picture machines, or any coin-operated vending or other machine vending personal property, food or drink or performing cleaning, repair or other services. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 652 § 2, 1982; prior code § 9203.02(A)(94))

 

18.04.228 Colocation.
    “Colocation” means the locating of wireless telecommunications equipment from more than one provider on a single building-mounted, roof-mounted or monopole-mounted structure. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.232 Community.
    “Community” means the same as “city.” (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(96))

 

18.04.236 Community care facility.
    “Community care facility” means any facility, place, or building that is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, day treatment, adult day care, or foster family agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the physically handicapped, mentally impaired, incompetent persons, and abused or neglected children, and includes the types of facilities listed in the California Health and Safety Code Sections 1500 through 1518 (California Community Care Facilities Act). (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.240 Compatible use.
    “Compatible use” means a use of land that may not be specifically listed as a permitted use in any zone, but which, upon review and written determination by the zoning administrator, is similar to and possesses the characteristics of those uses first permitted in a zone that it would be most closely associated and identifiable therewith. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(99))

 

18.04.244 Concurrent sale of alcoholic beverages and motor vehicle fuels.
    “Concurrent sale of alcoholic beverages and motor vehicle fuels” means the sale of alcoholic beverages such as beer and wine and motor vehicle fuels including gasoline on the same lot, parcel, premises or location. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 752 § 2, 1989; Ord. 751 § 2, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(100))

 

18.04.248 Condominium.
    “Condominium” means the same as set forth in Section 783 of the Civil Code of the state of California. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(102))

 

18.04.252 Conforming building.
    “Conforming building” means a building which has been designed and constructed in full compliance with the city building laws relative to its use and the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(105))

 

18.04.256 Conforming use.
    “Conforming use” means a use of land which fully conforms to the provisions of this title with respect to the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(108))

 

18.04.260 Dance, private.
    “Private dance” means a dance conducted by the persons legally residing in a private residence for themselves, their immediate family, relatives and guests, and which is not for profit or a commercial purpose, and to which the public is not admitted or allowed to participate, and to which the public is not invited or solicited by any form of invitation or advertisement, and for which no admission is required or accepted, and for which no offering, contribution, collection, consideration, or anything of value is required, requested or accepted for admission or participation. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 640 § 1, 1981; prior code § 9203.02(A)(317))

 

18.04.264 Dance, public.
    “Public dance” means any dance other than a “private dance.” (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 640 § 1, 1981; prior code § 9203.02(A)(322))

 

18.04.268 Day care center.
    “Day care center” means an establishment providing facilities and conducting such programs for the daytime care of children, properly licensed by the county and state, and conducted in accordance with county and state regulations applicable thereto. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(111))

 

18.04.272 Design review board.
    “Design review board” means the design review board of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(114))

 

18.04.276 Director of building and planning.
    “Director of building and planning” means the director of building and planning of the city of Pico Rivera, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(117))

 

18.04.280 Director of public works.
    “Director of public works” means the director of public works of the city of Pico Rivera, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(120))

 

18.04.284 Distribution plant.
    “Distribution plant” means a warehousing facility and operation wherein only storage of products takes place and where no manufacturing or fabrication of any type whatsoever occurs, and is limited only to the dissemination of such stored products through acceptable transportation modes and means where such products are of a transient nature only. Storage and/or parking of commercial vehicles limited to “private carrier” vehicles and storage of occupant owned trailers. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9203.02(A)(123))

 

18.04.288 Drapery shop.
    “Drapery shop” means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of draperies, curtains and related products including ancillary on-site production of drapes and curtains made to order for individual retail customers. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 5, 1994)

 

18.04.292 Drive-in business establishment.
    “Drive-in business establishment” means any business or portion thereof (other than an automobile service station) catering activities and functions directly to the occupant of a vehicle where such occupant is not required to leave the vehicle for a rendered service. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(126))

 

18.04.296 Driveway.
    “Driveway” means improved vehicular access from a public street or alley to off-street parking facilities. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(129))

 

18.04.300 Dwelling.
    “Dwelling” means a building designed and constructed exclusively for residential human habitation purposes, but specifically excluding hotels, motels and similar such commercial facilities. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(132))

 

18.04.304 Dwelling, multiple-family.
    “Multiple-family dwelling” means a building designed and constructed exclusively for the occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, and containing three or more separate dwelling units. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(135))

 

18.04.308 Dwelling, single-family.
    “Single-family dwelling” means a detached building located on a separate lot or parcel of land, designed and constructed exclusively for the use and occupancy by one family for living purposes. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(138))

 

18.04.312 Dwelling, two-family.
    “Two-family dwelling” means a building designed and constructed exclusively for the use and occupancy by not more than two families living independently of each other, and containing not more than two separate dwelling units. This term may and shall also mean and be referred to as “duplex.” (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(141))

 

18.04.316 Dwelling unit.
    “Dwelling unit” means a room or group or combination of rooms having kitchen and bathroom facilities in a building designed exclusively for the use and occupancy by one or more persons constituting a family or household for living and sleeping purposes. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(144))

 

18.04.320 Dwelling unit, second.
    “Second dwelling unit” means a second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. A secondary unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.324 Educational institution, private.
    “Private educational institution” means a school or other institution in which instruction or general academic instruction in the several branches of learning is taught, controlled and operated solely by a private agency, and may include elementary and secondary levels of academic education, colleges and universities, as may be governed by the regulations of the State Education Code. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(147))

 

18.04.328 Educational institution, public.
    “Public educational institution” means the same as private educational institution, except that such public institution is controlled and operated by a public agency. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(150))

 

18.04.332 Electric distribution substation.
    “Electric distribution substation” means an assembly of equipment, including microwave facilities, which is part of a system for distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage for general consumer use. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(153))

 

18.04.336 Electric generating facility.
    “Electric generating facility” means an assembly of equipment, including microwave facilities, which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at very high voltage from its source of generation by means of a network of high-voltage lines and transformed to lower subtransmission voltage for purposes of supplying electric power to large individual consumers, interchange connections with other power producing agencies, or electric distribution substations for transformation to lower voltage for distribution to smaller individual users. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(156))

 

18.04.340 Emergency shelter.
    “Emergency shelter” means a facility that provides immediate and short term housing and supplemental services to homeless per-sons or families. Supplemental services may include food, counseling, and access to other social programs. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.344 Energy support facilities.
    “Energy support facilities” means an installation containing prime movers, electric generators, auxiliary equipment, fuel storage, and microwave facilities, incorporated as part of the installation for converting mechanical and chemical energy into electric energy. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(159))

 

18.04.348 Family.
    “Family” means one or more persons related or unrelated, living together as a single integrated household in a dwelling unit. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(162))

 

18.04.352 Family day care home.
    “Family day care home” means a home which regularly provides care, protection and supervision of fourteen or fewer children in the provider’s own home for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day while the parents or guardians are away per California Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78 and includes the following:

    1.   “Large family day care home” means a home which provides family day care to seven to fourteen children including children under the age of ten who reside at home.

    2.   “Small family day care home” means a home which provides family day care to eight or fewer children including children under the age of ten who reside at home. (Ord. 1089 §§ 3, 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 3, 1989)

 

18.04.356 Farm.
    “Farm” means the noncommercial use of property for the purposes of cultivating, raising and producing agricultural crops, including orchards and field and gardening crops, and in which such crops may be produced on a wholesale basis only, and shall specifically exclude the raising of animals, poultry and/or fowl or any livestock whatsoever. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(165))

 

18.04.360 Fence.
    “Fence” means a vertical structure that, when erected, may separate and/or enclose a space open from the ground to the sky, and which permits the passage of more than seventy-five percent light, air and ventilation through its vertical surface. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(168))

 

18.04.364 Financial institutions.
    “Financial institutions” means establishments primarily engaged in accepting monetary deposits from the general public, lending funds, financial transactions, financial liquidations, making mortgage and real-estate loans, and change in ownership of financial assets and/or in facilitating financial transactions. These establishments must be federally or state chartered. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 934 § 4, 1999)

 

18.04.368 Fire chief.
    “Fire chief” means the forester and fire warden of the county of Los Angeles, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(171))

 

18.04.372 Floor area, gross.
    “Gross floor area” means the total space in a building enclosed by exterior walls. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 4, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(174))

 

18.04.376 Floor area, net.
    “Net floor area” means the total space in a building enclosed by exterior walls, excluding the exterior walls, stairwells, elevator shafts, equipment rooms, utility rooms, common hallways, restrooms and other similar areas as determined by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 5, 1989)

 

18.04.380 Flower tower.
    “Flower tower” means a structure that integrates a monopole into a tapered light pole or similar utility pole, utilizing curved support arms for the antennas. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.384 Fortunetelling business.
    “Fortunetelling business” means and includes every person engaged in the activity of, or advertising by sign, circular, handbill, newspaper, periodical, magazine or other publication, or by any other means whatsoever, the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures or furnishing any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary processes of knowledge, for or without pay, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries or magic of any kind or nature, or engaging in, practicing or carrying on any art, profession or business, the advertisement and practice of which is regulated by Titles 17 and 18 of this code. However, excluded from the provisions of this section are:

    A.  Entertaining the public by demonstrations of mindreading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings, at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered, as part of such entertainment, except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers, when not conducted in connection with the business of telling fortunes;

    B.   Conducting or participating in any religious ceremony or service, when such person holds a certificate of ordination as a minister, missionary, medium, healer or clairvoyant from any bona fide church or religious association maintaining a church and holding regular services and having a creed or set of religious principles that is recognized by all churches of like faith; provided, further, that the fees, gratuities, emoluments and profits thereof shall be regularly accounted for and paid solely to or for the benefit of the church or religious association; provided, further, that the person holding a certificate of ordination from such bona fide church or religious association, as set forth in this section, shall, before practicing the profession specified in this title, file with the city clerk a certified copy of his or her certificate of ordination with his or her name, age and street address in this city where he or she intends to carry on the business. Such bona fide church or religious association, as defined in this section, may, however, pay to its ministers, missionaries, mediums or workers a salary or compensation based upon a percentage basis, provided that the agreement between the church and the minister, missionary, medium or worker is embodied in a resolution and transcribed in the minutes of such church or religious association;

    C.   The art of reading tea leaves in any bona fide, regularly established restaurant, for the purpose of amusement to the patrons of the restaurant, where no charge for such readings is made. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 710 § 2, 1985; prior code § 9203.02(A)
(176))

 

18.04.388 Foster care home.
    “Foster care home” means a single-family residential dwelling appropriately licensed for the daytime care of not more than six children at any one time, with or without compensation. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(177))

 

18.04.392 Frontage.
    “Frontage” means that portion of a lot or parcel of land which abuts the right-of-way of an improved public street. (See Diagram No. 6 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(180))

 

18.04.396 Fuel cell generator.
    “Fuel cell generator” means a public utility facility operating a fuel cell that generates electricity by converting the chemical energy in fuel directly into current electricity by means of an electrochemical process, and includes an inverter that converts direct current electricity to alternating current electricity. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(183))

 

18.04.400 Game arcade.
    “Game arcade” means any number of coin-operated games of skill or amusement where such constitutes the primary use of the premises, or four or more coin-operated games of skill or amusement when accessory to another use at the same place of business. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 652 § 2, 1982; prior code § 9203.02(A)(184))

 

18.04.404 Garage.
    “Garage” means an entirely enclosed accessory building, either attached to or detached from a main building, designed and to be solely used for the shelter, parking and/or storage of automobiles. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(186))

 

18.04.408 Garage sale/yard sale.
    “Garage sale/yard sale” means any sale held for the purpose of selling, trading or otherwise disposing of unwanted, used household furnishings, personal goods or other tangible properties of the person holding such sale and conducted on premises in a residential zone. This includes moving sales, estate sales, rummage sales, community yard sales, neighborhood yard sales and the like. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1066 § 5, 2011; Ord. 765 § 5, 1989)

 

18.04.412 Gas metering and control station.
    “Gas metering and control station” means a facility operated by a public utility to measure, regulate and limit pressure in a natural gas transmission or distribution pipeline system. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(189))

 

18.04.416 General plan.
    “General plan” means the Comprehensive General Plan of the City of Pico Rivera, duly adopted and in full force and effect. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(192))

 

18.04.420 Grade.
    “Grade” means the average of the finished ground level or elevation of a lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(195))

18.04.424 Guest house.
    “Guest house” means a dwelling designed and constructed for the use and occupancy by guests only, containing a dwelling unit without kitchen facilities, and not rented or leased under any circumstances whatsoever. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(198))

 

18.04.428 Hazardous waste.
    “Hazardous waste” means any waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristic may cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or may pose a substantial risk or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous waste may be toxic, corrosive, flammable or an irritant. Hazardous waste includes a wide range of wastes from household wastes such as pesticides, paint and industrial wastes such as cleaning solvents and plating shop waste. Hazardous waste includes all materials defined as hazardous waste in Appendix 1D of the Los Angeles County hazardous waste management plan dated September 1988. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 785 § 2, 1990)

 

18.04.432 Headings.
    “Headings” means the words, terms and phrases ascribed to this title, and chapters, sections, and/or subsections, and the effect of such headings shall not be deemed to limit, modify, govern or in any manner af-fect the scope, meaning or intent of this title or any chapter, section or subsection contained therein. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(201))

 

18.04.436 Health officer.
    “Health officer” means the health officer of the county of Los Angeles, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(204))

 

18.04.440 Highway.
    “Highway” means the same as street. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(207))

 

18.04.444 Home occupation.
    “Home occupation” means the use of a residential dwelling for the purposes of maintaining a mailing address for business and business license purposes only, which is clearly incidental to the residential use and which does not change the character of or adversely affect the permitted uses of the zone in which it is located. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(210))

 

18.04.448 Hospital.
    “Hospital” means an institution specializing in clinical, temporary and emergency care services of a medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, licensed in accordance with the laws of the state, providing facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics and other general medical care practices, and may include diagnostic, pharmaceutical and research facilities under the direct control of the hospital administration. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(213))

 

18.04.452 Hospital, animal.
    “Animal hospital” means the same as “hospital,” except that it shall be controlled and operated by a veterinarian licensed by the state and shall apply to the treatment of animals only. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(216))

 

18.04.456 Hotel.
    “Hotel” means a commercial building or group of buildings designed, constructed and used for the purpose of occupancy by transient persons, containing six or more guestrooms or suites of rooms, or a combination thereof, and which may contain other incidental commercial uses and services as may be permitted in the zone in which it is located, but excluding dwelling units. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)
(219))

 

18.04.460 Household, integrated.
    “Integrated household” means one or more persons living together who function as a united group. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.464 Household pets.
    “Household pets” mean domesticated dogs, cats, canaries, parrots, and such other similar kindred birds and animals as may be kept as household pets. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(222))

 

18.04.468 Kitchen.
    “Kitchen” means any room or space within a building designed and used for the purposes of cooking, storage and/or preparation of food. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(225))

 

18.04.472 Landscaping.
    “Landscaping” means a mixture of organic and inorganic plant elements including any combination of trees, turf, artificial turf, shrubs, vines, groundcover and seasonal color may be planted within landscaped areas. In addition, landscape treatment may include walkways and lighting. Hardscape consisting of planting borders, decorative stones, fountains and similar decorative features shall also be permissible, provided that these features are incorporated within the organic plant elements. (Ord. 1089 §§ 4, 6, 2014; Ord. 830 § 2, 1993)

 

18.04.476 Livestock.
    “Livestock” means and includes all types, kinds and species of domesticated animals, poultry and fowl whatsoever. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(228))

 

18.04.480 Live/work development.
    “Live/work development” means an integrated housing unit and work space designed to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work/business activity. The “live” component must be a permitted dwelling unit, and the “work” component conducted by a person or persons making the dwelling unit their principle residence. (Ord. 1089 § 5, 2014)

 

18.04.484 Lot.
    “Lot” means a parcel of real property shown, delineated and designated as a numbered lot on a parcel or tract map or record of survey recorded in the office of county recorder of Los Angeles County, containing not less than the minimum area and dimensions required by the zone in which it is located, and abutting at least one improved street or highway. The provisions of Section 18.08.100 of this title shall also apply. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(231))

 

18.04.488 Lot area.
    “Lot area” means the total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 6, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(234))

 

18.04.492 Lot, corner.
    “Corner lot” means a lot located at and abutting the intersecting rights-of-way of two or more streets. (See Diagram No. 4 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(237))

 

18.04.496 Lot coverage.
    “Lot coverage” means the amount of land surface of a lot permitted to be covered by all buildings, as regulated by the zone in which such is located. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(240))

 

18.04.500 Lot depth.
    “Lot depth” means the horizontal distance measured between the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(243))

 

18.04.504 Lot, interior.
    “Interior lot” means a lot other than a corner or reverse corner lot. (See Diagram No. 4 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(246))

 

18.04.508 Lot, key.
    “Key lot” means an interior lot where its side lot line is congruent with the rear lot line of a reverse corner lot, whether or not it is or may be separated therefrom by an alley. (See Diagram No. 4 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(249))

 

18.04.512 Lot, landlocked.
    “Landlocked lot” means a lot having no frontage along a public street or access from a private street. (See Diagram No. 4 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(252))

 

18.04.516 Lot line, front.
    “Front lot line” means, in the case of an interior lot, that boundary of the lot congruent with the street or highway; and, in the case of a corner or reverse corner lot, the shortest boundary of such lot congruent with the street or highway. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(255))

 

18.04.520 Lot line, rear.
    “Rear lot line” means that boundary of a lot which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and may consist of one or more lot lines. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(258))

 

18.04.524 Lot line, side.
    “Side lot line” means any other lot lines of a lot which are not a front or rear lot line. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(261))

 

18.04.528 Lot of record.
    “Lot of record” means a lot as shown on maps in the office of the county recorder of Los Angeles County which legally existed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this zoning code. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(264))

18.04.532 Lot, reverse corner.
    “Reverse corner lot” means a corner lot where its rear lot line is congruent with the side lot line of a key lot, whether or not it is or may be separated therefrom by an alley. (See Diagram No. 4 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(267))

 

18.04.536 Lot, through.
    “Through lot” means any lot not having a rear lot line but which has two front lot lines opposite each other. (See Diagram No. 4 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(270))

 

18.04.540 Lot width.
    “Lot width” means the horizontal distance measured between the midpoints of the side lot lines. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(273))

 

18.04.544 Marquee.
    “Marquee” means a permanent cantilevered roof structure attached to and solely supported by a building wall and which projects over public rights-of-way. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(276))

 

18.04.548 Massage parlor.
    “Massage parlor” means an establishment or business which provides the services of massage and body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all forms and methods of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical practitioner or professional physical therapist licensed by the state. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 611 § 1, 1979; Ord. 610 § 1, 1979; prior code § 9203.02(A)(277))

 

18.04.552 May.
    “May” means permissive. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(279))

 

18.04.556 Medical laboratories.
    “Medical laboratories” means establishments primarily engaged in providing professional analytic or designated services to the patient of a physician. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 857 § 3, 1994)

 

18.04.560 Microcell.
    “Microcell” means a small wireless telecommunication sending and receiving base station, typically involving one or two small antennas less than one square foot in size attached to an existing utility pole, traffic signal or light pole within the public right-of-way that is typically connected to either a fiber optic cable located along the public right-of-way, or a wire telephone line. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.564 Mixed use development.
    “Mixed use development” means the combination of commercial and residential uses in the same structure, where the residential component and residential component is located either above, (vertical mixed-use) or behind (horizontal mixed-use) the non-residential component. (Ord. 1089 § 5, 2014)

 

18.04.568 Mobilehome.
    “Mobilehome” means a vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed and equipped to contain one or more dwelling units to be used without a permanent foundation, and which is in excess of either eight feet in width or in excess of forty feet in length. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 664 § 1, 1983; prior code § 9203.02(A)(282))

 

18.04.572 Mobile home.
    “Mobile home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, when erected on a site, measures eight body feet or more in width and thirty-two body feet or more in length, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 664 § 2, 1983; prior code § 9203.02(A)(283))

 

18.04.576 Mobilehome, foundational.
    “Foundational mobilehome” means:

    A.  A mobilehome which is installed on a permanent foundation and is manufactured and certified as being in compliance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974; or

    B.   A mobile home or modular housing unit or manufactured housing unit, or any comparable housing unit not built on-site which is installed on a permanent foundation system. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 664 § 3, 1983; prior code § 9203.02(A)(284))

 

18.04.580 Mobilehome park.
    “Mobilehome park” means a lot or parcel of land designed and used exclusively for the residential occupancy of mobilehomes. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(285))

 

18.04.584 Monopole.
    “Monopole” means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas and related communication equipment. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.588 More-restrictive uses.
    “More-restrictive uses” means, as employed in this title, those uses of land first permitted in the lowest numerical order of the sequence of zones as set forth in Section 18.08.030 and Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 of this title. All other uses of land first permitted in the next subsequent numerical order of the sequence of zones shall be considered less restrictive; i.e., the uses of land first permitted in the C-C zone are most restrictive, and those uses of land first permitted in the C-G zone are least restrictive. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(288))

 

18.04.592 Motel.
    “Motel” means a commercial building or group of buildings designed, constructed and used for the purpose of occupancy by transient persons, containing separate guestrooms, suites of rooms, guest houses, dwelling units, or any combination thereof, where not more than twenty percent of the total number of facilities provided are dwelling units, and where the name and address of all guests, their vehicle make, year, license number and state of registration are obtained and recorded pursuant to the State Health and Safety Code, and where all utility services are provided by a single master metering system only. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(291))

 

18.04.596 Motorhome.
    “Motorhome” means a vehicle capable of movement under its own power, designed and constructed exclusively as a motor vehicle, providing facilities for human habitation and used for recreation and vacation purposes only, but specifically excluding any use thereof for a dwelling occupancy. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(294))

 

18.04.600 Nonconforming use.
    “Nonconforming use” means a use of land, building, and/or a condition that legally existed at the time the ordinance codified in this zoning code was adopted, but which, because of this zoning code application thereto, no longer conforms or complies with the regulations of the zone classification in which such use, building and/or condition exists, or is located or no longer conforms or complies with any other provisions hereof applicable thereto. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(297))

 

18.04.604 Nurseries, landscape plant material only.
    “Landscape plant material only nurseries” means those plant nurseries which are primarily retail in character, but allowing associated wholesale and growing operations which are clearly subordinate to the primary use. In no case shall the wholesale or growing operations encompass more than thirty percent of the gross lot area of nursery use. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 7, 1989)

 

18.04.608 Nurseries, wholesale.
    “Wholesale nurseries” means a use for the growing and raising of plants for wholesaling purposes only with no retail sales of plant materials allowed except as permitted by Chapter 18.61, Temporary Uses. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 7, 1989)

 

18.04.612 Off-site hazardous waste facility.
    “Off-site hazardous waste facility” means operations involving the handling, treatment, storage or disposal of a hazardous waste in one or more of the following situations:

    A.  The hazardous waste is transported via commercial railroad, a public-owned road or public waters, where adjacent land is not owned or leased to, the producer of the waste;

    B.   The hazardous waste is at a site which is not owned by, or leased to, the producer of the waste;

    C.   The hazardous waste is at a site which receives hazardous waste from more than one producer. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 785 § 3, 1990)

 

18.04.616 Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments.
    “Off-sale alcoholic beverage establishments” means any establishment which has obtained an alcoholic beverage control license type 20 (off-sale beer and wine) or type 21 (off-sale general), selling alcoholic beverages in an unopened container for consumption off the premises. Typical off-sale uses include, but are not limited to, the following establishments: food markets, supermarkets, drugstores, liquor stores and convenience markets. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 752 § 2 1989; Ord. 751 § 2, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(298))

 

18.04.620 On-site hazardous waste facility.
    “On-site hazardous waste facility” means operations involving handling, treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste on land owned by, or leased to, a waste producer, and which receives hazardous waste produced only by that producer. An operation that occurs after waste is transported by commercial railroad, or on public waters or on a public road is considered to be an on-site operation only if the producer of the waste owns or leases at least ninety percent of the linear site and the area where the hazardous wastes are generated are on the same contiguous property. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 785 § 4, 1990)

 

18.04.624 On-sale alcoholic beverage establishments.
    “On-sale alcoholic beverage establishments” means any establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for consumption on the premises including but not limited to any facility which has obtained an alcoholic beverage control license type 40 (on-sale beer eating place), type 41 (on-sale beer and wine eating place), type 42 (on-sale general bar), type 51 (club), type 52 (veteran club) and type 63 (beer and wine hospital). Typical on-sale uses include, but are not limited to, the following establishments: beer bars, restaurants, ballrooms, dance bars, piano bars, billiard and/or game parlors, night clubs, or other private clubs, and veterans clubs. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 752 § 2, 1989; Ord. 751 § 2, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(299))

 

18.04.628 Outdoor living space.
    “Outdoor living space” means any usable area designed and/or to be used for outdoor living, recreation or landscaping which shall be unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward to the sky except for landscape materials. In addition, outdoor living space may include an unenclosed balcony, roof deck, patio, swimming pool and open cabana in single-family zones as long as one side of the structure remains entirely open. Rear and side yard areas located within the space devoted to outdoor living may be included within outdoor living space, except where such side and/or rear yard is less than twice the required yard width and except for single-family zones where the minimum dimensions of rear and side yard widths necessary to be included in the outdoor living space computation shall be ten feet regardless of special side or rear yard setback requirements. Driveways, rubbish storage areas, pedestrian accessways to buildings, and off-street parking spaces shall not be considered as outdoor living space except for single-family zones where driveways, and pedestrian accessways may be included in the outdoor living space computation, provided that they are located in the rear of the required front yard setback line. Rubbish storage areas may not be included in the computation of outdoor living space. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 8, 1989; prior code § 9203.02(A)(300))

 

18.04.632 Packaging.
    “Packaging” means the packaging or repackaging of previously manufactured end products into a final package or unit. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 6, 1994)

 

18.04.636 Parcel of land.
    “Parcel of land” means the same as “Lot.” (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)|(303))

 

18.04.640 Personal service shops and associated retail sales.
    “Personal service shops and associated retail sales” means establishments primarily engaged in the retail sale of specialized lines of merchandise, not elsewhere classified. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 7, 1994)

 

18.04.644 Places of public assembly.
    “Places of public assembly” means a use of land, building and/or portion of a building used for the gathering and/or assembly of fifty or more persons for purposes such as, but not limited to, deliberation, educational instruction, entertainment, amusement, awaiting transportation, and on-premises consumption of foods and beverages (including alcoholic beverages). (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(306))

 

18.04.648 Planned residential unit development (PUD).
    “Planned residential unit development” or the acronym “PUD,” as may hereinafter be referred to in Titles 17 and 18 of this code, means the development and arrangement of single-family residential dwellings on property, subdivided interest in commonly owned property, and in which such dwellings are either detached and located on separate lots or clustered in a group of two or more attached dwellings each of which is located on separate but contiguous lots, and in which such dwellings are distinct, noncommunicating, and separated by either open space or by individual exterior walls or partition walls, and which comply with the provisions of Section 18.08.030 and Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(309))

 

18.04.652 Planning commission.
    “Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(312))

 

18.04.656 Porte cochere.
    “Porte cochere” means an accessory roofed structure open on two or more sides and attached to the side or wall of a dwelling through which vehicles pass, and designed for the convenience of loading and unloading of passengers and property from a vehicle, but shall not be construed in any way as providing required off-street parking facilities or outdoor living space. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(315))

 

18.04.660 Precise plan of design (PPD).
    “Precise plan of design” means a discretionary application that is processed administratively by the zoning administrator per Chapter 18.48 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.664 Professional offices.
    “Professional offices” means offices maintained and used as a place of business, conducted and operated by persons engaged in the recognized professions, and others whose business activity consists principally of rendering services rather than the dispensing of commodities. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(318))

 

18.04.668 Property line.
    “Property line” means the boundary of a lot closed by lot lines. (See Diagram No. 5 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(321))

 

18.04.672 Public utility service yard.
    “Public utility service yard” means any building, lot, parcel of land or premises used for offices and warehousing, storage, servicing and maintenance of vehicles and equipment, testing and development of materials and equipment, and including microwave and communications facilities and associated equipment in the conduct of public utility servicing and business. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(323))

 

18.04.676 Rabbits and small animals.
    “Rabbits and small animals” means and includes hares, hamsters, chinchillas, guinea pigs, domestic mice and rats, and any other types of rodents and similar animal species whatsoever. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(326))

 

18.04.680 Ranch.
    “Ranch” means a noncommercial use of property for the purposes of raising and producing livestock for personal use and enjoyment thereof, but shall specifically exclude a farm. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A) (327))

 

18.04.684 Recycling area.
    “Recycling area (areas for recycling)” means space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for recyclable materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for those who deposit as well as those who collect and load any recyclable materials placed therein. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.688 Recycling facility.
    “Recycling facility” means an activity which collects used “recyclable materials” for the receipt, storage, separation, sorting, processing and/or distribution purposes. No less than ninety-five (95) percent of all materials collected by a recycling facility shall be “recycled materials.” A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, manufacturing or public facility use that is used solely for the recycling of material generated by said residential, commercial, industrial or public facility. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.692 Recycling facility, certified or registered.
    A “certified recycling facility” means any activity certified or registered by the California Department of Conservation and/or Integrated Waste Management Board as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. For this chapter, recycling facility shall mean a certified or registered recycling facility. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.696 Recycling collection facility.
    “Recycling collection facility” means a facility established to receive presorted redeemable beverage containers from residents and consumers for redemption. Recyclable beverage containers are not collected from vendors. These facilities are composed of reverse vending machine(s), collection storage unit(s) or a mobile recycling unit.

    A.  Reverse Vending Machine(s). “Reverse vending machine(s)” are automated mechanical devices which accept one or more empty beverage containers made of glass, plastic, aluminum, bimetal, and other beverage containers meeting the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986; issuance of a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state is permitted. A reverse vending machine may sort and crush containers mechanically; provided, that the entire process is enclosed within the machine.

    B.   Collection Storage Unit(s). “Collection storage unit(s)” are storage containers manufactured specifically for the purpose of receiving redeemable beverage containers and redeemable paper without the use of power-driven processing equipment. Collection storage units fitted with reverse vending machines will be considered as collection storage unit facilities.

    C.   A “mobile recycling unit” is an automobile, truck, trailer, or van licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable (redeemable) beverage containers. A “mobile recycling unit” shall also mean metal bins, or containers transported by truck, vans or trailer that are used for the collection of recycled materials. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.700 Recyclable materials.
    “Recyclable materials” means the nature and class of materials, including:

    A.  Newspapers;

    B.   Stationery, scrap, index and ledger paper;

    C.   Brown paper;

    D.  Computer cards and paper;

    E.   Corrugated cardboard;

    F.   Phone books;

    G.  Bottle glass and plastic bottles;

    H.  Scrap metal, including, but not limited to, copper wire and pipe, tin cans, aluminum cans, foil and window frames;

    I.    Recyclable motor vehicle oil;

    J.    Nonbiodegradable recyclable materials as deemed appropriate by the planning commission; and

    K.  Materials, containers and other items determined to be recyclable by the Department of Conservation or California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986, and the city of Pico Rivera.

    L.   Recyclable materials shall not include hazardous and/or biodegradable materials, including but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical and dental waste, syringes, needles, pesticides, batteries and other similar materials. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.704 Recycling plant.
    “Recycling plant” otherwise known as a “processing plant,” means a totally enclosed building or structure within which the receipt, storage, processing, and/or collection for redistribution or sale of presorted paper, iron, metal, glass, plastic, newspaper, and other nonbiodegradable recyclable materials deemed appropriate by the planning commission, can occur for the purpose of reutilization of such materials. Recyclable materials may not be directly purchased from consumers. Purchases from drop-off collection program operators, curbside program operators, community service program operators, vendors, recycling centers and other similarly managed agencies are permitted. Hazardous and biodegradable materials including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides, and other similar materials shall not be brought into or handled by a recycling plant. Processing shall mean the preparation of recycled material for efficient shipment by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, conversion, flattening, grinding, crushing, separation, sorting, shredding, smelting, cleaning, or any other similar activity. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.708 Recycling station.
    “Recycling station” means a totally enclosed facility operation designed and operated to receive, purchase, store and redistribute presorted recyclable materials not intended for disposal. Purchases from consumers, drop-off collection program operators, curbside program operators, community service program operators, vendors, and other similar entities are permitted. No processing is allowed; the outdoor temporary storage of prepackaged or enclosed recycled materials is permitted if screened from public view. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 5, 1998)

 

18.04.715 Religious place of worship.
    “Religious place of worship” means any facility operated for the principal use of worship and organized religious services by a religious organization including, but not limited to, churches, temples, mosques or synagogues. Permitted ancillary uses include business offices, multi-purpose rooms, classrooms for religious instruction and daycare centers. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 968 § 5, 2001)

 

18.04.716 Residence.
    “Residence” means the same as “single-family dwelling.” (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 6, 1998; prior code § 9203.02(A)(330))

 

18.04.720 Residential.
    “Residential” means a group of dwellings clustered in an area or areas of the city, or other areas in the city so designated therefor as shown on the general plan, and as may be referred to from time to time relative to housing for human habitation and occupancy. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 912 § 6, 1998; prior code § 9203.02(A)(333))

 

18.04.724 Residential zone.
    “Residential zone” shall mean any property within the city which carries a zoning designation permitting the location of a residence, including R-E single-family residential estate zone, S-F single-family residential zone, PUD planned residential unit development zone, R-M multiple-family residential variable density zone and those portions of Specific Plan 301 which allow for residential housing. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.728 Restaurant.
    “Restaurant” means a bona fide public eating place, as specifically defined in Section 23038 of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, effective November 8, 1967. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(336))

 

18.04.732 Rest home.
    “Rest home” means the use of land for a convalescent home, guest home, or any other facility operating similar to a boardinghouse for the temporary housing of and caring for ambulatory, aged, infirm or invalid persons, and in which nursing, dietary and incidental convalescent and medical care is furnished to residents thereof, and where no housing is furnished for persons suffering from contagious or communicable diseases, and where no surgery, physical therapy, maternity or other similar treatments are performed that are customarily provided in a hospital. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(339))

 

18.04.736 Retail store.
    “Retail store” means a building in which a commercial business is located and conducting the selling of goods, wares or other merchandise, where fifty-one percent or more of the dollar volume gross receipts are retail sales to the ultimate consumer. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(342))

 

18.04.740 Roof.
    “Roof” means a supported structure designed and constructed in such a manner so as to cover a space, preventing the vertical passage through its surface of fifty percent or more light, air and ventilation. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(345))

 

18.04.744 Roof-mounted.
    “Roof-mounted” means located above the eave line of a building. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.748 Room.
    “Room” means all subdivided portions of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, hallways, entries and service porches. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(348))

 

18.04.752 School.
    “School” shall mean any institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and/or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the Board of Education of the State of California. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Education. For the purposes of this section, “school” does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.756 Screening.
    “Screening” means the effect of locating the object(s) to be screened behind a building, wall, fence, landscaping, berm, and/or other specially designed device so that view of the object(s) from adjoining and nearby public rights-of-way and private properties is precluded or minimized. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.760 Self-storage facilities.
    “Self-storage facilities” means a use in which secure self-storage spaces are rented and/or leased to clients for the storage and retrieval of personal property, and may include “public storage facilities” containing individual storage areas that are one thousand square feet in size or greater and “mini storage facilities,” containing individual storage areas that are less than one thousand square feet in size. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1018 § 6, 2006)

 

18.04.764 Senior citizen housing.
    “Senior citizen housing” means housing or dwelling units established for exclusive occupancy by persons sixty-two years of age or older and/or by physically handicapped persons of adult age, or by a spouse of any such person. Resident manager(s) of adult age may also reside therein. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(350))

 

18.04.768 Setback, front yard.
    “Front yard setback” means an open yard area from the ground to the sky, extending across the full width of a lot between the front lot line and a line parallel with the distance thereto measured at right angles to the front lot line, and equal to the required depth as regulated by each applicable zone classification. (See Diagram No. 6 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(351))

 

18.04.772 Setback, rear yard.
    “Rear yard setback” means an open yard area from the ground to the sky, extending across the full width of a lot between the rear lot line or lines and a line or lines parallel with and distant therefrom measured at right angles to the rear lot line or lines a distance equal to the required depth as regulated by each applicable zone classification. (See Diagram No. 6 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(354))

 

18.04.776 Setback, side yard.
    “Side yard setback” means an open yard area from the ground to the sky extending across the full depth of a lot between the front and rear yard setbacks and between the side lot line and a line parallel with and distant therefrom measured at right angles to the side lot line, and equal to the required width as regulated by each applicable zone classification. (See Diagram No. 6 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(357))

 

18.04.780 Sexually-oriented merchandise.
    “Sexually-oriented merchandise” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.784 Sign.
    “Sign” means a display board, screen, structure, object, or portion thereof, used to announce, declare, demonstrate, display and/or otherwise advertise and attract the attention of the public, constructed of any material whatsoever, and maintained, erected, installed, painted and/or placed on a building or structure or property for the principal purpose of identification of property, business, services, the sale of goods and wares or any other merchandise, fully intended to serve as the principal means of advertisement and identification. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(360))

 

18.04.788 Sign area.
    “Sign area” means the combined total of each sign face consisting of the surface space within a single contiguous rectangle containing words, letters, figures, or symbols, together with any frame, material or color forming an integral part of the display but excluding support structures, face of building, and incidental parts not drawing attention to the subject matter. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 802 § 6, 1991)

 

18.04.792 Sign structure.
    “Sign structure” means a structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign. A sign structure may be a single pole or may or may not be an integral part of the building. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 802 § 6, 1991)

 

18.04.796 Single-room occupancy (SRO) unit.
    “Single-room occupancy unit,” also known as an efficiency unit and considered a type of transitional housing, means housing consisting of single-room dwelling units typically with no more than four hundred square feet of habitable space that is the primary residence of its occupant or occupants. The unit must contain either food preparation or sanitary facilities (and may contain both). An accessory structure (i.e., garage) does not qualify as an SRO. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.800 Specified anatomical areas.
    “Specified anatomical areas” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.804 Specified sexual activities.
    “Specified sexual activities” shall be defined as set forth in Section 5.22.020. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 988 § 3, 2002)

 

18.04.808 State.
    “State” means the state of California. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(363))

 

18.04.812 Stealth design.
    “Stealth design” means the installation of structures or equipment in such a manner as to architecturally blend into a building or other structure so as not to be seen or recognized. As applied to wireless telecommunication facilities, examples would include structures disguised as church or clock towers, roof-mounted equipment located behind a parapet wall that appears as a normal architectural appendage, or building-mounted panels that are architecturally compatible with the existing structure and painted to match the building. Visible roof-mounted panel antennas or monopole type structures are not considered to be of stealth design. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.816 Story.
    “Story” means that portion of the entire interior space between the exterior walls of a building and between the upper surface of any floor and the surface of a ceiling and floor next above. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(366))

 

18.04.820 Street, public.
    “Public street” means a publicly owned or controlled way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting private property. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(369))

 

18.04.824 Street, private.
    “Private street” means a privately owned or controlled way which affords the principal means of vehicular access to abutting private property. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(372))

 

18.04.828 Street right-of-way.
    “Street right-of-way” means the legal boundary separating a street from abutting private property. (See Diagram No. 6 at the end of this chapter.) (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(375))

 

18.04.832 Structure.
    “Structure” means anything constructed or built, any edifice or building of any kind whatsoever, or any piece of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, or anything else so constructed or built in the ground or erect-ed, which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something located on the ground or in the ground. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(378))

 

18.04.836 Structural alteration.
    “Structural alteration” means any change in the supporting members of a building or structure, such as, but not limited to, foundations, bearing walls, nonbearing walls, partition walls, columns, beams, floor, ceiling or roof joists, girders, rafters or trusses, or any change or addition in the dimensions of a building or structure. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(381))

 

18.04.840 Superintendent of streets.
    “Superintendent of streets” means the director of public works. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(384))

 

18.04.844 Supportive housing.
    “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.848 Tenses, singular and plural, gender.
    “Tenses” means that the present tense includes and means the future tense, and the reciprocal thereof; that the singular tense includes and means the plural, and the reciprocal thereof; that the singular number includes and means the plural number, and the reciprocal thereof; and, that the masculine gender includes and means the feminine gender, and the reciprocal thereof. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(387))

 

18.04.852 Trade schools.
    “Trade schools” means a business conducted for profit consisting of a place for training and instruction in a specific field, skill, trade or occupation including business colleges, vocational schools and similar facilities. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 765 § 9, 1989)

 

18.04.856 Trade schools, industrial oriented.
    “Trade schools, industrial oriented” means a business consisting of a place for training and instruction in a specific field, skill, trade or occupation for which employment would be conducted in an industrial setting or would use equipment normally associated with industrial businesses including but not limited to welding, machining, material handling and processing, metal working and heavy equipment repair. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 973 § 4, 2001)

 

18.04.860 Trailer.
    “Trailer” means any wheeled vehicle incapable of movement under its own power, designed to be drawn or towed by a motor vehicle for the purpose of carrying or transporting property and/or chattels of any kind whatsoever, but specifically excluding the use for human habitation and/or the transporting thereof. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(390))

18.04.864 Transitional housing.
    “Transitional housing” and “transitional housing development” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 4, 2014)

 

18.04.868 Unclassified use.
    “Unclassified use” means any use of land or building or both which is not specifically designated or contained in Section 18.08.030 and Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 as a use of land permitted in a zone classification, but which requires the issuance of a conditional use permit or precise plan of design pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.56 and Article I of Chapter 18.48, respectively, of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(393))

 

18.04.872 Variance.
    “Variance” means the procedure by which major and/or minor modifications of the property development regulations of a zone classification may be granted by the planning commission and/or city council pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.06 of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(396))

 

18.04.876 Vehicle.
    “Vehicle” means and includes automobile, truck, tank truck, tractor, trailer, wagon, cart, and any and all other contrivances used or capable of being used as a means of transportation of persons or property that move or roll on one or more wheels. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)
(399))

 

18.04.880 Wall.
    “Wall” means a vertical structure forming a physical barrier, when erected, enclosing a space open from the ground to the sky, and which prevents the passage of less than twenty-five percent air and ventilation through its vertical surface. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(402))

 

18.04.884 Wall, common.
    “Common wall” means a wall five feet or greater in length designed and/or constructed in such a manner so as to form a physical barrier separation between two or more spaces in a building or buildings. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(405))

 

18.04.888 Warehouse.
    “Warehouse” means a building storage facility wherein the operation thereof is limited to only the storage of stock and products for subsequent distribution, and expressly excludes manufacturing or fabrication of any type whatsoever and storage and/or parking of commercial transportation vehicles limited to “private carrier” vehicles and storage of occupant owned trailers. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 8, 1994; prior code § 9203.02(A)(408))

 

18.04.892 Window sign.
    “Window sign” means a professionally painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed sign within fifteen feet of a window designed to be viewed from adjoining streets or parking lot entrances, relating to the business name, services rendered, sales and available products. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 802 § 6, 1991)

 

18.04.896 Wholesale sales.
    “Wholesale sales” means establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, construction contractors or professional business users; or to other wholesalers. Includes the on-site storage of material and branch or sales offices (but not retail sales or stores). (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 852 § 9, 1994)

 

18.04.900 Wireless communications.
    “Wireless communications” means a broad range of telecommunication services that enables people and devices to communicate regardless of location, via radio frequency signals. Current wireless communication technologies include cellular communications, personal communication services (PCS) and enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR). These technologies all utilize a system of interconnecting geographic areas (cells), each containing an antenna. As used in this title, the term does not include radio and television signals, noncommercial antennas (such as amateur radio antennas), and noncommercial satellite dishes. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.904 Wireless telecommunications facility.
    “Wireless telecommunications facility” means an unmanned facility which consists of equipment for the reception, switching and transmission of radio frequency signals. Such facility may include elevated transmitting and receiving antennae, base station equipment and interconnection equipment. Facility types include roof-mounted, building-mounted or freestanding structures. Such facilities form the infrastructure to support wireless communications. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

 

18.04.908 Yard.
    “Yard” means any open space unoccupied or unobstructed, except for natural landscaping materials, from the ground surface above to the sky, and also except for occupied or obstructed projections as may be permitted elsewhere in this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(411))

 

18.04.912 Zone.
    “Zone” means the land use category or classification as set forth in Section 18.08.030 and Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(414))

 

18.04.916 Zone reclassification.
    “Zone reclassification” means a change in the zone classification of property pursuant to the provisions of Article III of Chapter 18.62 of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(417))

 

18.04.920 Zoning administrator.
    “Zoning administrator” means the zoning administrator of the city of Pico Rivera, or representative duly authorized to act in his or her stead. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; prior code § 9203.02(A)(420))

 

18.04.924 Zoning consistency review (ZCR).
    “Zoning consistency review,” or ZCR, means the standard planning review form for ministerial applications. They are used to determine whether nondiscretionary construction or installation proposals are in accordance with the Pico Rivera zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1089 § 6, 2014; Ord. 893 § 3, 1997; Ord. 892 § 3, 1997)

Chapter 18.06 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
18.06.010 Contents of chapter.
    Regulations governing the administration and enforcement of the provisions and regulations of Title 18 of this code shall be as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9212.01)

 

18.06.020 Purpose of provisions.
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to set forth and establish such regulations as deemed necessary and essential to effectively carry out and implement the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title. (Prior code § 9212.01 (A))

 

18.06.030 Zoning administrator powers and duties.
    A.  Responsibility. The zoning administrator, under the direction of the director of building and planning, shall be responsible for the administration of the zoning code, as hereinafter set forth.

    B.   Office Created. Pursuant to the authority of Article 2, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, the office of zoning administrator is created and established, and the zoning administrator shall function, serve and perform as follows:

    1.   Powers and Duties. The zoning administrator shall be vested with the power and it shall be his or her duty and responsibility to administer the provisions of this title.

    2.   Zoning Permit and Entitlement Approval. No zoning permits and/or other entitlements relative thereto shall take effect until a fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council has been paid and until such permits or entitlements have first been granted, issued or otherwise approved by the zoning administrator.

    3.   Investigations. The zoning administrator shall make and/or cause to be made such investigations considered necessary to perform his or her administration of the provisions of the zoning code, and shall conduct public hearings on such zoning matters as may be required and set forth elsewhere in this title.

    4.   Findings. Whenever the zoning administrator is required to render actions and decisions on zoning permits and other entitlements, as may be set forth elsewhere in this title, he or she shall make such findings and determinations as deemed necessary and as may be required through course of processing such permits and entitlements.

    5.   Announcement of Findings, Notice, Finality and Decisions. The zoning administrator shall announce his or her findings and decisions by formal written declaration of findings and decisions. Such declaration shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, reasons, conditions and other matters which, in the zoning administrator’s opinion, will make the approval, conditional approval, or denial of any zoning permit or other entitlement considered necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of this title, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny same. The zoning administrator shall forthwith give written notice of his or her findings and decisions to all parties concerned accompanied by his or her declaration of findings and decisions, and actions thereon. The actions and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title.

    C.   Development or Sign Plan Approval. Prior to the acceptance of any development or sign plans by the building and safety division for plan check or permit issuance, such plans shall first be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval of zoning compliance.

    D.  For residential occupancies only, and upon the recommendation of the building official, the zoning administrator may extend or renew any zoning permit or zoning entitlement for the purpose of completing a residential structure for which zoning approvals and building permits had been previously issued. (Ord. 852 § 50, 1994; Ord. 765 § 46, 1989; prior code § 9212.01 (B)(1), (2))

 

18.06.040 Enforcement—Authority and limitations.
    A.  It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator, under the direction of the director of building and planning, to enforce the provisions or any portion of the zoning code, and may be assisted in this duty by the building inspector.

    B.   No oversight or dereliction on the part of the zoning administrator or building inspector, or any other authorized assistants of any official of the city vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses, shall legalize, authorize, waive or excuse the violation of any provisions of this title. No permit or license for any use, building or purpose whatsoever shall be issued by any official or employee of the city if same would be in conflict with or in violation of this title. Any permit, license or other entitlement shall first be subject to the provisions of this title, and if same is issued in violation thereof such permit, license or other entitlement shall automatically be declared null and void. (Prior code § 9212.01 (C)(part))

 

18.06.050 Director of building and planning duties.
    Enforcement of this title shall also be extended to the administration thereof, as set out in this section and Sections 18.06.060 and 18.06.070; in order to further assure full compliance with all provisions of this title it shall also be the duty and responsibility of the director of building and planning to assist in the administration and enforcement of the zoning code in the following manner:

 

    A.  Issuance of Permits. No building permit, or electrical, plumbing or mechanical permit bearing on the development of property, and/or building permit related thereto, and/or additions or revisions, shall be issued unless and until approved by the director of building and planning or his or her designated representative, therefor. The director of building and planning shall withhold any final approval for occupancy and release of utilities until approved for zoning compliance. (Prior code § 9212.01 (C)(part), (1))

 

18.06.060 Director of finance authority.
    The director of finance shall not issue or authorize the issuance of any business license, business occupation permit or any other permit until approved by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 830 § 3, 1993; prior code § 9212.01 (C)(2))

 

18.06.070 Compliance—Duty of city officers.
    All departments, officials, agencies, boards, commissions and public employees vested with the duty, responsibility or authority to issue permits or licenses when required by law or any of the provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code shall comply with all the provisions of this title as may be applicable thereto. (Prior code § 9212.01 (C)(3))

 

18.06.080 Provisions as minimum requirements.
    The following interpretation and penalties set out in this section and Section 18.06.130 shall apply relative to the administration and enforcement of this title. The interpretation and application of this title shall be held to the minimum requirement consistent with the intent and purpose set forth in Chapter 18.02 of this title. This title is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. However, when this title imposes greater restrictions upon the uses of buildings or land, including property development regulations, than those imposed or required by other provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of the zoning code shall prevail and control. (Prior code § 9212.01, (1))

 

18.06.090 Interpretation of ambiguities.
    Regulations governing ambiguities and interpretations of the provisions of this title shall be as set out in Sections 18.06.100 through 18.06.110. (Prior code § 9212.02)

 

18.06.100 Ambiguities—Criteria for interpretation.
    It is the intent and purpose of this section and Section 18.06.110 to establish criteria, rules and regulations governing any ambiguities and interpretations which may arise during the course of administration and enforcement of this title. (Prior code § 9212.02 (A))

 

18.06.110 Ambiguities—Reconciliation procedure.
    The following criteria, rules and regulations shall be used as the procedure for reconciling ambiguities and interpretations:

    A.  Application and Interpretations. Whenever, during the course of administration and enforcement of this title, the zoning code or the appropriate zone classification for a particular use of land, or an ambiguity arises or exists with respect to matters of zone boundary locations or unforeseen circumstances, including technological changes in processing and manufacturing of materials, any person, firm or corporation may file an application for interpretation of ambiguity with fees in an amount established by a resolution of the city council with the zoning administrator to ascertain all pertinent facts and shall set forth his or her findings and interpretations by formal declaration.

    B.   Evaluation and Performance Standards. For purposes of arriving at determinations pursuant to this section, or to meet any other need for classifying any use of land as first permissible in any zone classification set forth in Chapter 18.40, the degree of compatibility of any such use of land to any other land use shall be fully evaluated. Insofar as technical evidence and scientific means of measurement are available, such evidence and measurement shall be considered in determining the form and intensity of performance standards typically associated with any identifiable type of land use. The term “performance standards” as employed herein means and refers to such conditions, effects or results which flow from the maintenance or operation of any primary use, including but not limited to:

    1.   The flow of sound measured in decibels;

    2.   Ambient level of sound;

    3.   Vibrations above and below the auditory range;

    4.   Odors, fumes, smoke or other emissions, whether toxic or nontoxic;

    5.   Incidence of hazard, including explosion or contamination;

    6.   The identification and classification in terms of chemical composition of the emissions generated from any type of land use, whether industrial, commercial or domestic;

    7.   The traffic-generating capacity, both in terms of freight and passengers, the volume of either or both, and the time or times of daily cycle that represent peak flow or minimum flow;

    8.   The consuming capacity of and need for electrical energy, natural gas, oil and fuel, water, sewage disposal and transportation facilities, including highway, rail, and air.

    C.   Review and Determination by Zoning Administration. Upon receiving an application for interpretation of ambiguity, the zoning administrator shall make and/or cause to be made such investigations and evaluations which, in his or her opinion, are necessary, and in accordance with subsection B of this section, to properly review and make the appropriate determination during the course of interpreting ambiguities.

    D.  Findings by Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator, after review of the application for interpretation of ambiguity and upon ascertaining all pertinent facts relative thereto, shall by declaration set forth his or her findings and interpretations.

    E.   Announcement of Findings—Notice—Finality—Decisions of Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator shall announce his or her findings and decisions by formal written declaration of findings and decisions within fifteen days after receipt of an application for interpretation of ambiguity. Such declaration shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, reasons, conditions, determinations, evaluations, specific performance standards, and other matters which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, will make such interpretation of ambiguities considered necessary to carry out and implement the purpose and provisions of this title. The zoning administrator shall forthwith give written notice of his or her findings and decisions to all parties concerned accompanied by his or her declaration of findings and decisions, and actions thereon. The actions and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Ord. 765 § 47, 1989; prior code § 9212.02 (B))

 

18.06.120 Inspection of premises.
    During the course of administration and enforcement of this title, any duly authorized official or employee of the city shall have the authority to enter any building or premises, for the purpose of conducting investigations and inspections; provided, however, that the hereinabove referred to right of entry shall only be exercised during the daylight hours; and provided further, that no dwelling shall be entered without the consent of the occupant unless a twenty-four-hour notice of intention to enter shall have been served upon such occupant. No person shall refuse to permit an inspection or investigation of premises after service of such notice. (Prior code § 9212.01 (C)(4))

 

18.06.130 Violation—Penalty.
    Penalties for any violation of this title shall be as follows:

    A.  Violation of Zoning Code—Misdemeanor. Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this title or any conditions imposed on discretionary applications shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months, or both such fines and imprisonments. Failure to comply with any of the conditions imposed on discretionary applications shall also be subject to revocation proceedings as set forth in this title.

    B.   Each Day Considered a Separate Offense and Nuisance. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, shall be deemed a separate violation and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in subsection A of this section, and such violation shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 830 § 4, 1993; prior code § 9212.01 (D)(2))

Chapter 18.08 ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
18.08.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish general provisions dealing with certain elements of zoning that cannot otherwise be effectively provided elsewhere in this title, and attempt to eliminate the degree of uncertainty which may tend to arise from time to time. (Prior code § 9204.01)

 

18.08.020 Applicability and conformance.
    Except as provided for in this title, no building or other structure shall be erected, reconstructed, structurally altered, nor shall any building, other structure or land be used for any purpose whatsoever except as may be specifically provided for and allowed in this title. The regulations contained in this title shall be deemed to be minimum and not all inclusive. (Prior code § 9204.08)

 

18.08.030 Zones established.
    The intent and purpose of Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 is to establish, designate and classify zones which divide and segregate the city into various categories of land use development, and which are also shown on and made a part of the Official Zone Map. (Prior code § 9205.01)

 

18.08.040 Purpose of zones.
    In order to classify, divide, segregate, regulate and restrict the uses of land, buildings and other structures, location, height and size of buildings and other structures, yards, courts and other open spaces, amount of land coverage, population concentration and density, and the environmental quality, sixteen classes of use zones, as set forth in Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 are hereby established and made a part of this title. (Ord. 799 § 2, 1991; prior code § 9204.02)

 

18.08.050 Conversion of zones.
    The zoning maps and zone classifications of the city of Pico Rivera heretofore established, existing and in effect as a part of Ordinance No. 1 commencing with Section 9310 et seq., as amended, are hereby converted and shall hereafter be in effect and exist pursuant to and as a part of this zoning code and shall hereafter be known by the zoning symbols and designations in accordance with the following conversion table:

 

ZONE CLASSIFICATION

CONVERSION TABLE

 

EXISTING ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS

NEW ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS

B Buffer Zone (publicly owned or controlled land only)

O-S Open Space Zone

B Buffer Zone (privately owned land only)

P Parking Zone

R-A Single-family Residential Limited Agriculture Zone

R-E Single-family Residential Estate Zone

R-1 Single-family Residential Zone

S-F Single-family Residential Zone

R-1 PD Residential Planned Development Zone

S-F Single-family Residential Zone

(None)

PUD Planned Residential Unit Development Zone

R-2 Limited Multiple-family Residential Zone

R-M 3000 Multiple-family Residential Variable Density Zone

R-3 Multiple-family Residential Zone

R-M 3000, Multiple-family Residential Variable Density Zone

R-4 Unlimited Multiple-family Residential Zone

R-M 3000 Multiple-family Residential Variable Density Zone

R-M Residential Multiple Zone

R-M 3000 Multiple-family Residential Variable Density Zone

Civic Center District

Civic Center Zone

P-A Professional Administrative Zone

P-A Professional and Administrative Zone

(None)

C-N Neighborhood Commercial Zone

C-H Restricted Highway Business Zone

C-C Community Commercial Zone

C-2 General Commercial Zone

C-G General Commercial Zone

(None)

CPD Commercial Planned Development Zone

(None)

R-D Research and Development Zone

M-1 Light Manufacturing Zone

I-L Limited Industrial Zone

M-2 General Manufacturing Zone

I-G General Industrial Zone

R-D Research and Development Zone

C-M Commercial Manufacturing Zone

 

(Prior code § 9204.10)

 

18.08.060 Official Zone Map—Adopted.
    A further refinement of the land use element, and other such elements which may be applicable hereto, of the comprehensive general plan, a comprehensive land use plan, which may consist of one or more diagrams, known as “The Official Zone Map of the City of Pico Rivera,” is hereby adopted and made a part of this title pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 9201.04)

 

18.08.070 Official Zone Map—Subdivision into units for amendments.
    For the purposes of more readily identifying areas on the Official Zone Map, such map may, for convenience, be divided into parts and each such part be subdivided into units, and such parts and units may be separately employed for the purposes of amending the map or for any official reference thereto. (Prior code § 9204.04)

 

18.08.080 Official Zone Map—Zone locations and boundaries.
    The location and boundaries of the various zones, as contained in Chapters 18.10 through 18.38, shall be as shown and delineated on “The Official Zone Map of the City of Pico Rivera.” (Prior code § 9204.03)

 

18.08.090 Changes in zone boundaries.
    Changes in and/or the establishment of zone boundaries shall be made by ordinance amending the provisions of this title, and by amending the Official Zone Map, as set forth in Article III of Chapter 18.62, and such amendment or amendments shall become a part of this title. (Prior code § 9204.05)

 

18.08.100 Interpretation of uncertain boundaries.
    Wherever uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zone, the following rules shall apply:

    A.  Where such zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following public street and alley right-of-way or lot lines, such right-of-way or lot lines shall be construed to be such zone boundaries;

    B.   In the case of unsubdivided property, and where a zone boundary divides a lot or parcel of land, the location of such zone boundary or boundaries, unless otherwise indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the Official Zone Map;

    C.   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated street or alley shall automatically acquire the zone classification of the property to which it reverts. (Prior code § 9204.06)

 

18.08.110 Legally existing lots of record.
    Any legally existing lot of record which is vacant and/or otherwise unimproved and is only considered to be substandard by reason of lot area, shall be considered to be in compliance with the lot area requirements of the zone classification with respect to development thereof. (Prior code § 9204.09)

 

18.08.120 Classification of annexed land.
    A.  Any property which, for any reason whatsoever, is not designated on the Official Zone Map as being classified in any of the zone classifications as established in Chapters 18.10 through 18.38, shall be deemed to be unclassified and shall not be developed or used for any purpose whatsoever except as may otherwise be so determined pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.54 of this title.

    B.   Any land hereinafter annexed to the city shall be deemed to be unclassified in a zone pursuant to the provisions of Article III of Chapter 18.62 of this title, or prezoned pursuant to the provisions of Section 65859, Article 2, Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Prior code § 9204.07)

Chapter 18.10 O-S OPEN SPACE ZONE
18.10.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “O-S open space zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.02)

 

18.10.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the O-S zone are:

    A.  To principally designate and classify certain lands within the city for providing both interim and permanent open-space areas;

    B.   To recognize those other open-space lands generally oriented to public interests and owned or controlled by a governmental or quasi-public agency;

    C.   To recognize and restrict development and uses to such functions that primarily serve the interest of the community as a whole; and

    D.  To function and serve as the instrument by which the preservation and conservation of open space areas can be attained. (Prior code § 9205.02 (A))

 

18.10.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The O-S zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the environmental and public facilities elements of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on land as a separational transition between heavy and light land use intensities, and for the purpose of providing permanent open-space lands such as public schools, parks, recreational facilities, and other publicly oriented uses.

    B.   Application of the O-S zone must be clearly defined within the scope and purpose qualifying land for an open-space function, and must be protected from the encroachment of land uses and development not performing such overall function and purpose.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the O-S zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.02 (B))

 

18.10.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the O-S zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.02 (C))

 

18.10.050 Property development conditions.
    Because of the unique character and nature of the O-S zone, the use and development of property therein shall be determined by and subject to a precise plan of design as set forth in Chapter 18.48 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.02 (D))

 

18.10.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the O-S zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.02 (E))

 

18.10.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the O-S zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.02 (F))

Chapter 18.12 R-E SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ESTATE ZONE
18.12.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “R-E single-family residential estate zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.03)

 

18.12.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the R-E zone is to principally designate, classify and distinguish certain residential areas within the city that may best facilitate the development and use of single-family homes on large acreage parcels of land in conjunction with only the private use and maintenance of limited agricultural and animal husbandry activities. (Prior code § 9205.03 (A))

 

18.12.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The R-E zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the residential land use, housing and environmental elements of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on selective areas of the community where a rural character and atmosphere can be maintained and preserved in an urban setting.

    B.   Application of the R-E zone must be clearly defined within the scope and purpose of qualifying land for a rural function, and must be protected from the encroachment of land uses and development that do not exhibit or possess those characteristics of a rural nature.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the R-E zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.03 (B))

 

18.12.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the R-E zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.03 (C))

 

18.12.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the R-E zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.03 (D))

 

18.12.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the R-E zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.03 (E))

 

18.12.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the R-E zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.03 (F))

Chapter 18.14 S-F SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
18.14.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “S-F single-family residential zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.04

 

18.14.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the S-F zone is to principally designate and classify certain residential areas within the city that may best facilitate the development of single-family residential neighborhoods, and where the lifestyles and environmental characteristics, under a controlled distribution of population, lend themselves to the attainment of individual family living in an urban setting. (Prior code § 9205.04 (A)

 

18.14.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The S-F zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the residential land use and housing elements of the general plan. It is one of the most selective of residential zone classifications, designed to provide for one single-family dwelling unit on a separate lot, and to be applied on selective areas of the community that possess sufficient environmental characteristics most conducive to single-family lifestyles.

    B.   Application of the S-F zone may include such recreational, religious and educational facilities, when deemed to be essential elements of a balanced neighborhood, but it must also be clearly protected from the encroachment of land uses that do not perform a residential neighborhood function.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the S-F zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.04 (B)

 

18.14.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the S-F zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.04 (C)

 

18.14.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the S-F zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.04 (D)

 

18.14.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the S-F zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.04 (E)

 

18.14.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the S-F zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.04 (F)

Chapter 18.15 R-I RESIDENTIAL INFILL ZONE
18.15.010 Establishment.
    There is established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “R-I residential infill zone,” which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the R-I zone is to principally designate and classify certain residential areas within the city that may best facilitate smaller sized medium density residential developments that are well planned and allow for sufficient design flexibility in order to utilize unique physical land characteristics while preserving the nature of single-family neighborhoods. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    The R-I zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the residential land use, housing and implementation elements of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on selective areas of the community where land is of appropriate size, shape and configuration, and possesses the characteristics to warrant such a designation. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the R-I zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the R-I zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the R-I zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in this zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.080 Minimum regulations—Additional conditions.
    The regulations set forth in this title, and those set forth in Title 17 of this code governing residential development, are deemed to be minimum and not all inclusive. The planning commission and/or city council may establish conditions as may be deemed necessary to maintain, preserve, protect, perpetuate and promote not only the public health, safety and welfare, but the integrity of residential neighborhoods as well. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

 

18.15.090 Scope of development—Comprehensive planning.
    The scope and complexity of development shall be of such a nature that it provides achievement in conformity with the intent and purpose of the R-I zone. The overall plan of development shall be comprehensive, embracing interrelationships of land, structures and other environmental characteristics. The development must also be well related to existing and planned land uses and circulation patterns of adjoining and neighboring properties. (Ord. 922 § 4, 1999)

Chapter 18.16 PUD PLANNED RESIDENTIAL UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE
18.16.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “PUD planned residential unit development zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.05)

 

18.16.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the PUD zone is to principally designate and distinguish certain areas within the community that can best be utilized to attain the following:

    A.  To create a better living environment;

    B.   To promote the achievement of residential land use amenities that could not otherwise be obtained under more conventional methods and development;

    C.   To achieve greater design flexibility of residential acreage than could otherwise be possible through the application of more conventional residential zone regulations;

    D.  To encourage well-planned developments through more creative, innovative and imaginative planning principles, practice and techniques;

    E.   To reserve a greater proportion of open-space land for recreation, conservation, park and other similar kinds of use facilities than is otherwise required by more conventional residential zone regulations;

    F.   To provide for a more efficient, appropriate and desirable use of land which is sufficiently unique in its physical characteristics and other circumstances to warrant special methods of development;

    G.  To provide areas of natural scenic beauty, vistas, landmarks, promontories and other environmental features through integrated land planning, design, and unified control of physical development patterns; and

    H.  To set forth use regulations and property development regulations that will best assure that the intent and purpose of this chapter are carried out. (Prior code § 9205.05 (A))

 

18.16.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The PUD zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the residential land use, housing and environmental elements of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on selective areas of the community where the land is of sufficient size, shape and configuration, and possesses the characteristics to warrant a planned residential unit development.

    B.   Application of the PUD zone must clearly qualify in accordance with the intent and purpose established herein, and must also be protected from the encroachment of land uses and development that would tend to oversaturate land capabilities.

    C.   Uses of land and development which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the PUD zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.05 (B))

 

18.16.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the PUD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.05 (C))

 

18.16.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the PUD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.05 (D))

 

18.16.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the PUD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.05 (E))

 

18.16.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the PUD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.05 (F))

 

18.16.080 Minimum regulations—Additional conditions.
    The regulations set forth in this title, and those set forth in Title 17 of this code governing planned residential unit developments in the PUD zone, are deemed to be minimum and not all-inclusive. The design review board, planning commission and/or city council may establish conditions or requirements as may be deemed necessary to maintain, preserve, protect, perpetuate and promote not only the public health, safety, environment and general welfare, but the integrity of the PUD zone as well. (Prior code § 9205.05 (G))

 

18.16.090 Scope of development—Comprehensive planning.
    The scope and complexity of development shall be of such a nature so as to effect an integral land-planning unit that provides achievement in conformity with the intent and purpose of the PUD zone. The overall plan of development shall be comprehensive, embracing all interrelationships of land, buildings, and other environmental features and characteristics, and shall attain a whole, three-dimensional concept. The development must also be well-related to existing and planned land uses and circulation patterns (both pedestrian and vehicular) of adjoining properties, and must not constitute a disruptive element with regard to adjacent community neighborhood areas. Internal vehicular circulation systems shall not be a dominant feature in the overall design, but must, however, be so designed for the efficient and safe movement and flow of vehicles without having a disruptive influence on the characteristics, features, activities and functions of the facilities to be provided. (Prior code § 9205.05 (H))

 

18.16.100 Environmental features—Location of facilities.
    In the PUD zone, environmental design features shall be compatible and consistent with the elements, goals and objectives of the general plan. Recreational facilities must be located throughout the development in order to obtain maximum dispersion and be in close proximity to all dwelling units, or easily accessible thereto. Various community facilities shall be grouped in areas well-related to open spaces, designed as focal points of overall development features, and easily accessible thereto by the residents of the development. (Prior code § 9205.05 (I))

 

18.16.110 Development progress schedule.
    A.  The conditional use permit granted for establishment of a planned residential unit development shall include an approved progress schedule indicating the development of open-space lands related to the construction of residential dwelling units. Such progress schedule shall become a condition of conditional use permit approval.

    B.   Planned residential unit development projects proposed to be developed in more than one phase shall be designed so that each successive phase will independently comply with the regulations specified herein.

    C.   The conditional use permit may include approval of development in more than one phase, provided the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the proposed development will be a better project within the intent and purpose of the PUD zone. In event more than one phase is approved, the applicant shall provide a tentative tract map and plan of development indicating the cumulative allocation and utilization of land for each successive phase of development. (Prior code § 9205.05 (J))

Chapter 18.17 SPECIFIC PLAN 301
Note
*   Prior ordinance history: Ord. 864.

 

18.17.010 Establishment.
    There is established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “Specific Plan 301 Zone,” (SP-301 Zone) and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. All development in this zone requires the approval of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.020 Scope and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the Specific Plan 301 zone is to provide a comprehensive set of guidelines, regulations and implementation programs to guide the future development of a 12.84 acre site located at the southeast corner of Rosemead Boulevard and Washington Boulevard. The primary objective of this specific plan is to ensure that the future development of this area mirrors the city’s land use and development objectives outlined in the city’s general plan. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.030 Land use development concepts.
    A.  Specific Plan 301 provides for four distinct development components:

    1.   A single-family neighborhood composed of one hundred thirteen single-family detached dwellings on 8.13 net acres;

    2.   A common recreation area which should serve the single-family residential development consisting of approximately fourteen thousand square feet;

    3.   A senior housing development consisting of up to four stories and one hundred twenty eight units located within a 1.93-acre parcel; and

    4.   An existing commercial retail use located on a 0.28-acre at the corner of Washington and Rosemead Boulevards should be retained and any future commercial use should be consistent with the requirements and standards outlined in this specific plan.

    B.   Design Concepts.

    1.   Density Transitions. Density increases should be transitioned from the streetscape to ensure that the scale of the development is compatible with the neighborhood streetscape. New development should be consistent in density and form with existing specific plan area.

    2.   Respect Setbacks. Residential infill on vacant parcels should respect existing setbacks along the streetscape.

    3.   Design Compatibility. New infill developments should be designed to be compatible with surrounding development so as to enhance and not detract from the character of the existing neighborhood.

    4.   Bungalow Theme. Residential development should combine aspects of a contemporary planned development with aspects of neighborhoods established in California during the early decades of the twentieth century. The architectural style of the California Craftsman Bungalow should be used as the model for development due to its inherent attractiveness, informality, elegance, and compatibility with contemporary housing. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.040 Single-family development standards.
    A.  Density Standards. The maximum density applicable to the one hundred thirteen single-family units should not be permitted to exceed fourteen units per net acre. However, surplus density entitlement will be transferable to the senior development so that the overall net density of Specific Plan 301 shall not exceed the highest density residential designation outlined in the land use element (thirty units/acre).

    B.   Permitted Uses. Land uses permitted within this portion of the planning area are restricted to single-family detached residential homes and the open space areas used for landscaping and common recreation. Single-family homes refer to a detached structure located on a separate lot or parcel of land that has been designed and constructed exclusively for the use and occupancy of one household for living purposes. Limited accessory uses may be permitted when that use is clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary structure and use. Accessory uses may include terraces, decks, spas, barbecue areas, patios, etc.

    C.   Lot Size and Dimensions. Except as otherwise approved by an amendment of this specific plan, no further division of parcels should be allowed beyond those contemplated under Specific Plan 301. The maximum lot coverage is fifty percent for all structures. The minimum lot size permitted is two thousand six hundred square feet, the minimum lot depth is sixty-three feet, and the minimum lot width is forty-two feet. In cases where these standards cannot be complied with due to physical constraints, the minimum lot depths and lot widths should be established through a conditional use permit.

    1.   Buffers. Buffers (berms, landscaping, etc.) between commercial and residential areas should be required to reduce potential land use-related conflicts. A parkway area with a variable depth of four feet to eight feet should be landscaped within the Washington Boulevard and Rosemead Boulevard frontages.

    2.   Setback Requirements. Specific Plan 301 setback standards for front yard setbacks, side yard setbacks, and rear yard setbacks are as follows:

    (a) Front yard areas refer to the open yard area extending across the full width of a lot between the front lot line to the front of the housing unit. The front of the housing unit is defined as that portion of the unit containing the main entryway and the garage entryway. The minimum front yard setback is ten feet excluding the porch, except those lots fronting a street radius. In such cases, the front yard setback be no less than seven feet to the residence. In addition, an average eighteen-foot setback to the garage should be provided.

    (b) Rear yard refers to the open rear yard area extending from the rear of the lot line to the wall of the structure opposite the front wall. The minimum rear yard setback be no less than fifteen feet for fifty percent of the rear yard area. The minimum setback in the remaining fifty percent of the rear yard area be no less than twelve feet. Projections are excluded from these requirements.

    (c) Side yard setback refers to the open area extending across the full depth of a lot between the front yard and rear yard setbacks, between the side lot line and the side wall of the housing unit. The minimum side yard setback is four feet (a minimum separation of eight feet should be provided between adjacent housing units).

    D.  Maximum Building Height. Building heights of the single-family detached homes be no greater than two stories or twenty-eight feet, whichever is less. No structures or accessory structures should be allowed to exceed this standard.

    E.   Projections Permitted into Front Yards. A covered porch may project into the front yard, but in no instance may the projection exceed three feet.

    F.   Projections Permitted into Side Yards. Fireplaces and/or chimneys may encroach into the side yard setback, though in no case can this encroachment exceed one foot.

    G.  Projections Permitted into Rear Yards. The following may project into the rear yard setback area: open-sided roofed patios, barbecues, terraces, decks, and spas. Patios should maintain a five-foot rear yard setback (inclusive of overhang). Patio coverage not exceed fifty percent of the rear yard area.

    H.  Exterior Fences, Hedges, and Walls. A six-foot high block wall should be required along the perimeter of the subdivision. The masonry wall should consist of earth-tone slumpstone with select locations of stucco with randomly placed river rock in the wall facing street frontages. River rock pilasters should be placed at a minimum of eighty-foot intervals. The balance of the project perimeter should be provided with a six-foot-high tan precision block wall.

    I.    Interior Fence. Interior fences should be consistent with the overall California Bungalow design theme established in Specific Plan 301. The maximum permitted height is six feet from the finished grade of the subject property. Fences within front yard areas are prohibited.

    J.    Parking Requirements. Two enclosed parking spaces should be provided for each single-family dwelling unit, with no less than an eighteen foot by nineteen foot interior space provided within the garage area, and no obstructions should be permitted.

    K.  Signage. Signage should conform to Chapter 18.46 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    L.   Animals, Poultry, and Livestock. With the exception of Section 18.50.030 of the city of Pico Rivera Municipal Code, property owners and/or occupants should conform to all regulations set forth in Chapter 18.50 of the code. No more than two dogs or cats, or any combination of the two being more than three months of age, are permitted. The keeping of pigeons or outdoor aviaries are prohibited.

    M.  Home Occupations. Property owners and/or occupants should conform to Chapter 18.52 of the city of Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    N.  Architectural Elements.

    1.   Doors and Entryway. Proper use of roof elements, columns, feature windows and architectural forms contribute to the overall impact of the entry. The entry may serve as a living activity area (i.e., porch or veranda) and still has an important function as a semi-private transition between the public walkway and the private interior.

    a.   The entire door assembly should be treated as a single design element including surrounding frame, molding and glass side lights.

    b.   The door should be covered by an overhead element or recessed into the wall plane and single or double doors may be used.

    c.   The color of the door may match or contrast the accent trim, but should be differentiated from the wall color.

    d.   Typically, wood should be used for the entry door. Metal entry doors, if used, should have the appearance of wood grain and panels.

    2.   Roof Form. The following standards apply to the architectural design of the roof and upper floor elevations. These standards discuss allowable roof pitch, roof types, colors, and other design elements.

    a.   The principal roof forms should have a pitch between 4:12 and 5:12. A single roof pitch should be used on opposite sides of a ridge. This shallower pitch should lessen the apparent building mass.

    b.   Low pitched (4:12) gabled roof with eave overhangs and elaborate exposed rafters tails should be provided and decorative beams and braces under the gables should be used.

    c.   Primarily horizontal wood siding, shingles and stucco; stone or brick used for the porch base, lower half of columns and chimney.

    d.   Colors should range from earth tones to pastels, with low contrasts between colors and materials.

    e.   Horizontal groups of three or more windows on second floor should be provided.

    3.   Window Treatment. Window placement and organization should positively contribute to the architectural character of the individual homes. Windows greatly enhance the elevation through vertical or horizontal groupings and coordination with other design elements. Windows are to be used as a focal point to decrease the visual impact of the garage door, draw attention to the entry or emphasize some other element of the building. Greater design emphasis should be given to windows on the sides and second-story rear windows.

    a.   A visual hierarchy of windows which relate and complement one another should be used as a design element. Within the window hierarchy, the front window should create the dominate theme or form and act as a strong visual focal point.

    b.   Bronze anodized aluminum frames or those complementary to the color pallet may be used. Natural, silver or gold anodized frames should not be used.

    c.   Aluminum frames windows should be accentuated with other design elements including wood trim, stucco surrounds, shutter or recessed openings.

    d.   The placement of windows in architectural projection or recesses incorporated with gable, hip or shed roof overhangs should be used where practical to create visual focal points.

    e.   Overhangs and projections should be used to shade windows with south and west exposures.

    f.    If utilized, skylights should be weatherproofed. The skylight be designed to appear as an integral part of the roof plane. Skylights be clear or bronzed with the framework matching the roof or trim color.

    4.   Garage Doors. Care needs to be taken so the garage doors do not dominate the front elevation and streetscape. Utilizing a variety of garage types, door designs, and siting techniques should lessen the impact of repetitious garage doors lining the residential streets. The visual impact of the garage door shall be mitigated by any of the following measures:

    a.   The overall width of the unit should be great enough to allow the living area to be wide enough to minimize the impact of the garage.

    b.   The second floor level should have a strong elevation.

    c.   The living area, porch or stoop element be forward of the garage; and emphasis be placed on the design and impact of the front door and windows.

    d.   The architectural and site design utilize second story feature windows above the garage and strong architectural entry elements.

    e.   The development should incorporate eight-foot setbacks between adjacent garages where possible.

    f.    Garage doors be recessed six to twelve inches from the face of the building to decrease the impact of the door.

    g.   Sectional garage doors should be used to maximize the availability of usable driveway length.

    h.   Metal doors may only be used when they include either texture or raised panels.

    i.    The design of garage doors reflect the theme or style of the overall unit design.

    j.    Accent colors complement the architecture and provide visual variety along the streetscape.

    k.   The door design break up the expanse of the door plane while not being so excessively decorative as to draw attention away from the unit’s architectural elevation.

    5.   Accessory Elements.

    a.   It is important that both columns and posts project a substantial and durable image.

    (i) Posts should be of wood, not less than six inches in diameter, and may be built up from multiple pieces. Use of four inch posts and metal pipe columns is prohibited.

    (ii) The post supported on a masonry base should typically be used as it is most representative of the Craftsman Bungalow style. Columns may be clad in masonry or stucco. They should be square, rectangular, or round and should be at least fourteen inches wide with a height of approximately four to five times the width.

    b.   The type of exterior railing used on balconies, deck and stairs, creates a significant impact on the elevation. An extensive variety of rail types are available including closed stucco, open wrought iron and wood picket.

    (i)   Choice of rail type should be consistent or be historically correct for the Bungalow style. Functional equipment be covered or designed as integral visual element.

    (ii)  Exposed gutters should be colored to match fascia material. Exposed downspouts should be likewise colored to match the surface to which they are attached unless copper is used.

    (iii) All mechanical equipment should be screened from public view. Air conditioning pad placement should be within the rear yard to minimize impact on yard use layout.

    c.   Properly designed and located chimneys can serve as a major design element and focal point for the building elevation. It is frequently the major architectural element on an exposed side or a rear elevation. The use of steps and banding on the shaft and capital have major visual impact against the sky and roof plane.

    (i)   Fireplaces shall be provided for no less than fifty percent of the homes. Chimneys shall be finished with unpainted masonry or the dominant wall material.

    (ii)  Any chimney accent materials or cap design shall be historically correct for the Bungalow style.

    d.   Building plans allow space for the later addition of usable patio covers within the buildable envelope and setbacks. Patio covers, trellises, pergolas and other exterior structures reflect the character, color and materials of the building to which they are related.

    (i)   Supports, columns, and posts to be architecturally compatible to the residence.

    (ii)  The materials for the horizontal elements should be limited to either wood or the dwelling’s roof material. The pitch of the patio roof may be less than the adjacent building.

    (iii) The side elevation of the patio structure should not be enclosed except in the case where a wall of the dwelling forms a natural enclosure.

    (iv) Patio additions cannot exceed fifty percent of the usable rear yard area.

    (v)  Awnings of solid accent color may be permitted with moderation. Metal awnings are prohibited.

    e.   Individual and group mailboxes reflect the architectural and community theme. This can be either the theme of the entire project or of the individual architectural detailing of the adjacent dwelling. Mailbox location should be placed to minimize visual impact while insuring easy accessibility. When common mailboxes are provided, they be near either the project entryway or recreation facility.

    6.   Lighting Plan. The single-family units should require security lighting on walkways and along the internal streets. The following standards should be followed:

    a.   Exterior building materials and the on-site lighting plan should be reviewed by the community development department to minimize the potential for light and glare impacts.

    b.   The site lighting plan should be designed to direct all light sources downward and into the site. Landscaping and other buffering measures should be provided where lighting poles and vehicle headlights would directly cause spillover light to adjacent residential uses.

    c.   Outdoor lighting should be designed and installed so that all direct illumination is confined to the site and adjacent properties are protected from spillover illumination.

    d.   Low wattage security lighting directed away from light-sensitive uses, should be utilized and should be shielded so as not to be visible from off-site locations.

    e.   Street lights should be consistent with the development in terms of scale and design. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.050 Common recreation area development standards.
    A.  Development Timing. The recreation area should be fully developed prior to the final inspection of the first forty percent of the one hundred thirteen single-family homes to be constructed.

    B.   Land Area. The area to be devoted to common recreation should reflect the design and location depicted in Specific Plan 301. No less than fourteen thousand square feet of land area should be included within the recreation area.

    C.   Maintenance. The city of Pico Rivera should not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of the recreation area. The maintenance of the recreation area should be the responsibility of the property owners (or homeowner’s association), and this area should be maintained in good conditions at all times.

    D.  Amenities. The amenities provided within the recreation should include a twenty-foot by forty-foot pool for swimming, an eight-foot spa, restrooms, a tot lot with a sand area and play equipment, and a picnic area containing at least five covered tables and five barbecues. Access should conform to Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) guidelines, and playground equipment should conform to NRPA (National Recreational Parks Association) safety requirements.

    E.   Landscaping. The portion of the recreation area not devoted to the aforementioned amenities should be turfed and a sprinkler system should be provided.

    F.   Architecture. All structures, including the restrooms, table coverings, and fences should be consistent in style, and constructed of materials compatible with the surrounding residential development (refer to Section 18.74.040.(N)).

    G.  Safety. The recreation area should be fully enclosed by a fence, and an additional safety fence should be placed around the pool area. Pedestrian crossings across Blossom Court and Orchid Lane should be clearly delineated. The pavement materials around the pool and spa areas should consist of slip-resistant paving materials. No stairways will be permitted within the recreation area.

    H.  Lighting. Nighttime lighting should be provided, and lighting placement and shielding should be effective in eliminating light spillover to adjacent residences. Lighting plans should be approved by the department of community development. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.060 Senior housing development standards.
    All development standards for the senior housing component of this plan shall be established through the conditional use permit process. (Ord. 986 § 5, 2001)

 

18.17.070 Commercial development standards.
    A.  Permitted Uses. Regulations of land in the C-G zone set forth in Chapter 18.40 should govern existing and future permitted uses.

    B.   Setback Requirements. The setback standards for front yard setbacks, rear yard setbacks, and buffering shall be as follows:

    1.   Washington/Rosemead Setbacks. The minimum setback along Washington Avenue and Rosemead Boulevard is fifteen feet.

    2.   Rear/Side Yard. The minimum rear and side yard setbacks be no less than twenty-five feet. A landscaped buffer with a minimum depth of five feet be provided along the south and east property lines adjacent to residential development.

    C.   Parking Requirements. One open parking space should be provided for each two hundred fifty square feet of net building floor area.

    D.  Signs and Advertising. Signs and advertising should be enforced according to Chapter 18.46.

    E.   Nonconforming Requirements. Building expansions of one hundred square feet or less are permitted provided that all other setback and parking provisions can be complied with. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.080 Consistency and compliance with Specific Plan 301.
    All development shall be consistent with the provisions of specific plan 301, and shall comply with the land use plan, urban design plan and infrastructure plan contained in Specific Plan 301. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

 

18.17.090 Administration.
    A.  The community development director shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of the Specific Plan 301 zone. Any use of a building or structure hereafter erected, built, maintained or used contrary to the provisions of the SP-301 zone is prohibited.

    B.   The planning director shall have the duty to interpret the provisions of this SP-301 zone. All such interpretations shall be prepared in written form and should be permanently maintained. Any person aggrieved by such an interpretation may appeal the decision to the planning commission and if aggrieved by the planning commission, the decision may be appealed to the city council.

    C.   All development within the planning area should comply with the terms of Specific Plan 301. However, upon application by the developer and upon good cause shown, the community development director may allow minor variations from the urban design plan upon a finding that such variation is consistent with the design concepts contained in this Specific Plan 301. The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission and city council in the same manner as a conditional use permit. (Ord. 877 § 3, 1996)

Chapter 18.18 R-M MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL VARIABLE DENSITY ZONE
18.18.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “R-M multiple-family residential variable density zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.06)

 

18.18.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the R-M zone is to principally designate and classify certain areas within the city for development of multiple-family residential housing and apartment complexes, and to provide for the integration of developments and uses of land more closely related to multiple-family residential characteristics best suited to carry out the needs of the community. (Prior code § 9205.06 (A))

 

18.18.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The R-M zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the residential land use and housing elements of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on selected areas of the community where the concentration of population can be varied and controlled, yet sufficiently flexible to accommodate the housing needs projected for the city.

    B.   Application of the R-M zone can provide for development to serve as a low-density residential transition between more intense residential uses of land and single-family residential neighborhoods, can provide compatible development along principal streets and highways, can serve as a medium-density residential transition between less-intense residential land uses and more-intense commercial activities, and can provide for development of high-density residential apartment complexes.

    C.   The R-M zone need not be restricted entirely to residential uses of land, and may include public, semipublic, institutional and other transitional land uses which would not necessarily be compatible with solely residential or limited commercial uses.

    D.  The application of the R-M zone for high-density residential apartment complexes serves also as a transitional development adjacent to large-scale commercial facilities where consumer purchasing power is a necessary ingredient to the overall scheme of land use planning.

    E.   When qualifying, application of the R-M zone must clearly be defined in accordance with the criteria herein, be protected from the encroachment of land uses that do not perform a function of this zone classification, and be protected from the tendency to yield to oversaturation and concentration of population.

    F.   Uses of land and development which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the R-M zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.06 (B))

 

18.18.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the R-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.06 (C))

 

18.18.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses of land in the R-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.06 (D))

 

18.18.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the R-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.06 (E))

 

18.18.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the R-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.06 (F))

Chapter 18.19 SPECIFIC PLAN 400
18.19.010 Establishment.
    There is established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “specific plan 400 zone” (SP-400) and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. Prior to commencement of any development within the subject planning area, approval of a master conditional use permit and phased time line agreement for sub-areas 1 through 8 is required. (Ord. 902 § 3(part), 1997)

 

18.19.020 Scope and purpose.
    A.  The intent and purpose of the specific plan 400 zone is to provide a comprehensive set of guidelines, regulations and implementation programs to guide the future redevelopment of a two hundred thirty-five acre site bounded by Washington Boulevard, Rosemead Boulevard, and Paramount Boulevard.

    B.   The primary objective of this specific plan is to ensure that development of this planning area mirrors the city’s land use and development objectives outlined in the city’s general plan. (Ord. 902 § 3(part), 1997)

 

18.19.030 Land use and development standards.
    A.  The specific land use and development standards for specific plan 400 are contained in the specific plan 400 document contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    B.   Specific plan 400 provides for four distinct, mutually exclusive development scenarios.

    1.   The manufacturing retention scenario allows heavy industrial uses within sub-area 8 and expansion of the existing facility within sub-areas 1 through 8 with a maximum build-out capacity ranging between four million twenty thousand to four million two hundred thirty-eight thousand square feet.

    2.   The mega-mall scenario allows optional commercial or office/institutional uses ranging between one million nine hundred seventy-one thousand to two million one hundred twenty-six thousand square feet within sub-areas 1 through 8.

    3.   The theme park scenario allows optional commercial, office/institutional, hotel and entertainment uses ranging between to two million eight hundred thirty-five thousand to three million six hundred thirty-three thousand square feet within sub-areas 1 through 8.

    4.   The mixed-use scenario allows optional commercial, office/institutional, entertainment, manufacturing R&D and heavy industrial uses ranging between three million twenty-six thousand three hundred to four million three hundred eleven thousand square feet within sub-areas 1 through 8.

    C.   Development Standards.

    1.   Manufacturing Retention.

    a.   The specific plan 400 land use plan provides for retention and a ten percent expansion of the existing facility to accommodate a potential user. This scenario assumes that the majority of the existing facility will be retained and permits sub-area 8 south of Rex Road, to be developed as a business park or in heavy manufacturing.

    b.   The specific development standards and requirements are set forth in the specific plan 400 document contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    2.   Mega-Mall.

    a.   The specific plan 400 land use plan provides for commercial retailing uses to be constructed as part of a larger regional shopping center within sub-areas 1 through 8, and office/institutional uses in sub-areas 2 and 4.

    b.   The specific development standards and requirements are set forth in the specific plan 400 document contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    3.   Theme Park.

    a.   The specific plan 400 provides for sub-areas 4 through 8 to be developed in theme park related uses while commercial development is permitted in sub-areas 1, 2 and 3; commercial entertainment is permitted in sub-areas 3 and 8; the amphitheater is permitted in sub-areas 7 and the west portion of sub-area 8; the hotel is permitted in sub-areas 3, 4, 5 and 7 and office/institutional is permitted in sub-areas 1, 2 and 4.

    b.   The specific development standards and requirements are set forth in the specific plan 400 document contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    4.   Mixed-Use.

    a.   The specific plan 400 provides for commercial uses within sub-area 1, office/institutional uses in sub-areas 2 and 4, entertainment and commercial uses in sub-area 3, and manufacturing/R&D within sub-areas 4 through 8. Heavy industrial uses are permitted in sub-areas 7 and 8.

    b.   The specific development standards and requirements are set forth in the specific plan 400 document contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code as amended by specific plan amendment 400.4.

    5.   Rail Yard.

    a.   The specific plan 400 provides for retention of the rail yard and the potential for a Metrolink station within sub-area 9.

    b.   The specific development standards and requirements are set forth in the specific plan 400 document contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 993 §§ 4, 5, 2003; Ord. 961 § 4, 2001; Ord. 920 § 4, 1998; Ord. 902 § 3(part), 1997)

 

18.19.040 Urban design concepts and development standards.
    A.  Future development of each sub-area will conform to design standards which will be specifically established by a conditional use permit.

    B.   The submitted project shall conform to the design concepts and development standards set forth in the urban design plan of specific plan 400 contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 920 § 5, 1998; Ord. 902 § 3(part), 1997)

 

18.19.050 Consistency and compliance with specific plan 400.
    All development shall be consistent with the provisions of specific plan 400, and shall comply with the land use plan, urban design plan and infrastructure plan contained in specific plan 400 contained in Table C to the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 902 § 3(part), 1997)

 

18.19.060 Administration.
    A.  The community development director shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of the specific plan 400 zone. Any use of a building or structure hereafter erected, built, maintained or used contrary to provisions of the SP-400 zone is prohibited.

    B.   The community development director shall have the duty to interpret the provisions of this SP-400 zone. All such interpretations shall be prepared in written form and should be permanently maintained. Any person aggrieved by such an interpretation may appeal the decision to the planning commission and if aggrieved by the planning commission, the decision may be appealed to the city council.

    C.   All development within the planning area should comply with the terms of specific plan 400. However, upon application by the developer and upon good cause shown, the community development director may allow minor variations from the urban design plan upon a finding that such variation is consistent with the design concepts contained in this specific plan 400. The decision of the community development director may be appealed to the planning commission and city council in the same manner as a conditional use permit. (Ord. 902 § 3(part), 1997)

Chapter 18.20 PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE
18.20.010 Establishment.
    There is established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “public facilities zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 857 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9205.07)

 

18.20.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the public facilities zone is to recognize existing publicly owned facilities and to clearly distinguish certain areas within the city that will best facilitate the development and conduct of government and public related institutional activities. (Prior code § 9205.07 (A))

 

18.20.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The public facilities zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the community facilities element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on selective areas of the community most appropriately located for public and public oriented institutional activities.

    B.   Application of the public facilities zone must identify and define those specific public and/or public oriented institutional uses, facilities and agencies that preserve and maintain civic integrity and public services, and must be fully protected from the encroachment of land uses and development which may tend to usurp, deteriorate or destroy its function and purpose.

    C.   Uses of land and development which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the public facilities zone are expressly prohibited. (Ord. 857 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9205.07 (B))

 

18.20.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the public facilities zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9205.07 (C))

 

18.20.050 Property development conditions.
    Because of the unique nature of the public facilities zone, development of property therein shall be determined by and subject to a precise plan of design as set forth in Chapter 18.48 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9205.07 (D))

 

18.20.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development in the public facilities zone shall be subject to the provisions as specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9205.07 (E))

 

18.20.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development in the public facilities zone shall be subject to the provisions as specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Ord. 857 § 4, 1994; prior code § 9205.07 (F))

Chapter 18.22 P-A PROFESSIONAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ZONE
18.22.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “P-A professional and administrative zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.08)

 

18.22.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the P-A zone is to designate certain areas within the city for the use and development of business office centers and complexes, institutional, professional and administrative facilities, and other similar uses of land specializing in the rendering of services rather than the dispensing of commodities. (Prior code § 9205.08 (A))

 

18.22.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The P-A zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the commercial land use element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on areas of the community of a general business nature, and to limit and restrict uses of land wherein the general development of mixed commercial uses would not be appropriate or compatible.

    B.   Application of the P-A zone must be clearly defined and protected from the encroachment of land uses and development that do not exhibit or perform a service rendering function and purpose.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the P-A zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.08 (B))

 

18.22.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the P-A zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.08 (C))

 

18.22.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the P-A zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.08 (D))

 

18.22.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the P-A zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.08 (E))

 

18.22.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the P-A zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.08 (F))

Chapter 18.24 C-N NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL ZONE
18.24.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “C-N neighborhood commercial zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.09)

 

18.24.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the C-N zone is to designate certain areas within residential neighborhoods of the city for limited and restrictive commercial uses that could provide convenience goods and services catering to a limited marketing and trading area. (Prior code § 9205.09 (A))

 

18.24.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The C-N zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the commercial land use element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied in areas of the community that will provide only those uses, stores and services most appropriate and compatible with the residential area and pattern of development of which the C-N zone is intended to serve.

    B.   Application of the C-N zone must be clearly defined, limited and restricted to only those uses of land that will not conflict with the residential neighborhood environment of the area in which they are located, and must be protected from the encroachment of land uses and development that do not perform a convenience neighborhood commercial function and purpose.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the C-N Zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.09 (B))

 

18.24.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the C-N zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.09 (C))

 

18.24.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the C-N zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.09 (D))

 

18.24.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the C-N zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.09 (E))

 

18.24.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the C-N zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.09 (F))

Chapter 18.26 C-C COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL ZONE
18.26.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “C-C community commercial zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.10)

 

18.26.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the C-C zone is to recognize and designate areas within the city for providing a variety and range of retail stores and service establishments limited to primarily serve the general community trading area. (Prior code § 9205.10 (A))

 

18.26.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The C-C zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the commercial land use element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied in selected areas of the community most suitable for individual retail commercial establishments, as well as shopping center complexes, wherein the development of mixed commercial uses would be appropriate and compatible for public convenience, and when such uses cannot and should not be dispersed in smaller, more intimate commercial areas.

    B.   Application of the C-C zone must be clearly defined and limited to restrictive shopping center complexes catering to individual ownership or distribution, and protected from the encroachment of general commercial uses that rely heavily on a trading area outside the corporate boundaries of the city.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the C-C zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.10 (B))

 

18.26.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the C-C zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.10 (C))

 

18.26.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the C-C zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.10 (D))

 

18.26.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing the development of property for off-street parking for uses in the C-C zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title (Prior code § 9205.10 (E))

 

18.26.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the C-C zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.10 (F))

Chapter 18.28 C-G GENERAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
18.28.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “C-G general commercial zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.11)

 

18.28.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the C-G general commercial zone is to designate areas within the city for providing a full range and wide variety of retail commercial stores and service establishments that are not dependent on marketing and trading area support solely within the corporate boundaries of the city, but also rely on consumer purchasing power outside the established community. (Prior code § 9205.11 (A))

 

18.28.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The C-G zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the commercial land use element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied in those areas of the community where the greatest variety and range of commercial uses can be amassed largely dependent on their respective interrelationships for providing goods and services to an unlimited source of consumer purchasing power.

    B.   Application of the C-G zone need not be as definitive as the C-N and C-C zones, but must be protected from uses of land that are oriented and more closely associated and compatible with industrial activities.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the C-G zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.11 (B))

 

18.28.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the C-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.11 (C))

 

18.28.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the C-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.11 (D))

 

18.28.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the C-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.11 (E))

 

18.28.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the C-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.11 (F))

Chapter 18.30 CPD COMMERCIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
18.30.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “CPD commercial planned development zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.12)

 

18.30.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the CPD zone is to provide for a more efficient, appropriate and desirable commercial use of land which integrates environmental land planning, design and physical characteristics sufficiently unique, creative, innovative and imaginative in nature and scope, and to provide for the unified control of architectural design features and a method by which existing deteriorating commercial activity can be revitalized through both private and public interests. (Prior code § 9205.12 (A))

 

18.30.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  In order to qualify for application of the CPD zone, land must first be recognized in the commercial land use element of the general plan, be of sufficient size, shape and configuration for the division of land and interests in common, and demonstrate a clear need for revitalization and commercial land use distributions that cannot be adequately provided for in the P-A, C-N, C-C or C-G Zones.

    B.   Uses of land which do not qualify and are not specifically permitted in the CPD zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.12 (B))

 

18.30.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the CPD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.12 (C))

 

18.30.050 Property development conditions.
    Because of the unique character and nature of the CPD zone, the use and development of property herein shall be determined by and subject to a conditional use permit as set forth in Chapter 18.56 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.12 (D))

 

18.30.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the CPD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.12 (E))

 

18.30.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the CPD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.12 (F))

 

18.30.080 Landscape requirements.
    Development shall comply with the regulations of the water efficient landscaping provisions set forth in Chapter 18.45 and Section 18.44.050B(22) of this code. (Ord. 823 § 7, 1993)

Chapter 18.32 C-M COMMERCIAL/ MANUFACTURING ZONE
18.32.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “C-M commercial/manufacturing zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.13)

 

18.32.020 Intent and purpose.
    A.  There have evolved certain land uses which may be considered predominantly general commercial in nature, but which may also involve wholesaling and limited manufacturing. It is, therefore, the intent of the C-M commercial/manufacturing zone to permit such uses in selected areas of the city, either on suitable parcels wherein the permitted uses under the C-M zone will not conflict with permitted uses on adjacent property, or where a buffer may be desirable.

    B.   It is further the intent of this title to supersede and replace the R-D research and development zone and that properties heretofore designated R-D are hereby converted and changed to C-M commercial/manufact-uring zone and subject to the conditions of this title.

    C.   Except as specifically provided in Chapter 18.54 of this title on nonconforming uses, any and all real property, premises or land in the C-M commercial/manufacturing zone shall be used for or occupied, and every building shall be erected, constructed, established, altered, enlarged, maintained and moved into or within such C-M commercial/manufacturing zones, exclusively and only in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.13(A))

 

18.32.030 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the C-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapters 18.40 and 18.61 of this title. (Ord. 852 § 10, 1994; prior code § 9205.13(B))

 

18.32.040 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the C-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Ord. 852 § 11, 1994; Ord. 765 § 10, 1989; prior code § 9205.13(C)(1))

 

18.32.050 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the C-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Ord. 852 § 12, 1994; Ord. 709 § 4, 1985; prior code § 9205.13(C)(2))

 

18.32.060 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development in the C-M zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Ord. 852 § 13,

1994; Ord. 611 § 2, 1979; Ord. 610 § 2, 1979; prior code § 9205.13 (C)(3))

Chapter 18.33 MIXED USE OVERLAY ZONE
18.33.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established an overlay zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “M-U Overlay zone” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

 

18.33.020 Intent and purpose.
    A.  The mixed-use overlay zone is intended to allow an integrated mix of residential and commercial land uses located close to one another, either within a single building, on the same parcel, or on adjacent parcels.

    B.   The mixed-use overlay zone has the following major objectives:

    1.   Promote a compatible mix of residential, commercial and service uses with strong functional relationships.

    2.   Implement the city’s housing element by facilitating residential development on identified “housing opportunity sites,” and enabling the development of affordable housing consistent with the requirements of State Government Code Article 10.6 (65580) and the city of Pico Rivera Housing Element.

    3.   Contribute to the city’s mix of housing types.

    4.   Facilitate well-designed mixed-use development projects that promote pedestrian access and activity and allow residents to live close to where they work.

    5.   Stimulate economic development and reinvestment by allowing property owners to respond with flexibility to market opportunities. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

 

18.33.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  Relationship between Base Zone Standards and Overlay Zone Standards. For properties within the mixed-use overlay zone, the regulations allow mixed-use development as an alternative to the stand-alone base zone development allowed under the base (underlying) zone standards.

    B.   Base Zone Standards.

    1.   New projects may be developed in compliance with the existing underlying base zone, provided that all standards and requirements of the underlying base zone are met.

    2.   Regulations, development standards, and requirements in the underlying base zone shall continue to apply to those projects that are currently developed according to the existing standards.

    C.   For legal nonconforming uses (i.e., uses that do not comply with the provisions of the base zone), the provisions in Chapter 18.54 (Nonconforming Uses) shall apply.

    D.  Option to Apply Mixed-Use Overlay Zone Standards. The owner or developer of any property within the mixed-use overlay zone may choose to exercise the mixed-use overlay zone standards or continue to utilize the standards of the underlying zone. An applicant may choose to develop standalone commercial or multi-family developments within the mixed-use overlay zone. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

 

18.33.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the M-U overlay zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40, Land Use Regulations, of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

 

18.33.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the M-U overlay zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42, Property Development Regulations of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

 

18.33.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the M-U overlay zone are calculated per the land use proposed to be developed as specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44, Off-Street Parking and Loading of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

 

18.33.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the M-U overlay zone are permitted per the land use zone specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46, Signs and Advertising of this title. (Ord. 1089 § 7, 2014)

Chapter 18.34 I-L LIMITED INDUSTRIAL ZONE
18.34.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “I-L limited industrial zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.14)

 

18.34.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the limited industrial zone is to designate areas within the city for providing a limited and restricted variety of manufacturing, processing, warehousing, distribution, assembly, storage and storage of products, materials and equipment, maintenance facilities and corporation yards. This zone may also include research and development activities in conjunction with product manufacturing and wholesaling operations. (Prior code § 9205.14 (A))

 

18.34.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The I-L zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the industrial land use element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied in those areas of the community where selected, mixed light industrial uses are most appropriate and compatible with one another, and where achievement of high-quality design standards can be attained.

    B.   Application of the I-L zone must clearly define and limit uses of land subordinate to those uses which are generally considered heavy industry, and must be protected from the tendency to allow the encroachment of general industrial uses that would subjugate the scope of the I-L zone function and purpose.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the I-L zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9205.14 (B))

 

18.34.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the I-L zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.14 (C))

 

18.34.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the I-L zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.14 (D))

 

18.34.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the I-L zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.14 (E))

 

18.34.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing signs and advertising requirements for uses and development of property in the I-L zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.14 (F))

Chapter 18.36 I-G GENERAL INDUSTRIAL ZONE
18.36.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “I-G general industrial zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.15)

 

18.36.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the I-G zone is to designate selected areas within the city for providing a wide variety and range of heavy manufacturing, the processing of limited raw materials, and large-scale assembly establishments where the mixture of limited light industrial uses would not be appropriate or compatible, and may include other uses which by the nature and scope of operation more closely resemble heavy industry. (Prior code § 9205.15 (A))

 

18.36.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The I-G zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the industrial land use element of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied in those areas of the community where large-scale industrial operations would be best suited to carry out the mass production of goods and materials and provide for an employment base vital to the city as a whole.

    B.   Application of the I-G zone need not be as definitive as the more-restrictive industrial zones, but caution must be utilized to prevent the encroachment of detrimental and nuisance industries that tend to create an undesirable element that could adversely affect the community.

    C.   The I-G zone must also be protected from the tendency to oversaturate industrial areas with smaller, more intimate uses that may have a destroying effect on the intent and purpose of the zone classification. (Prior code § 9205.15 (B))

 

18.36.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the I-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.15 (C))

 

18.36.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the I-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.15 (D))

 

18.36.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the I-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.15 (E))

 

18.36.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and developments of property in the I-G zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.15 (F))

Chapter 18.37 IPD INDUSTRIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
18.37.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “IPD industrial planned development zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the IPD zone is to establish certain areas within the city that would promote desirable industrial and certain sales related uses conducive to the physical characteristics of the land and surrounding development by integrating environmental land planning and development flexibility and encourage creative and innovative architectural design. The purpose of this zone is to encourage high quality industrial development in areas where existing unimproved land, underutilized and/or deteriorating industrial activity should be revitalized. In addition, the zone is intended to provide for industrial and certain sales related land use distributions that cannot be adequately provided for in the CM, I-L or I-G zoned districts. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  In order to qualify for application of the IPD zone, land must first be designated for industrial development in the land use element of the general plan, be of commensurate in size, shape and configuration for industrial development and demonstrate a clear need for revitalization.

    B.   Uses of land which are not specifically permitted in the IPD zone as indicated in this title are hereby expressly prohibited. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the IPD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.050 Property development conditions.
    Because of the unique character and nature of the IPD zone, the use and development of property herein shall be determined by and subject to a conditional use permit as set forth in Chapter 18.56 of this title. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the IPD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the IPD zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Ord. 799 § 3, 1991)

 

18.37.080 Landscape requirements.
    Development shall comply with the regulations of the water efficient landscaping provisions set forth in Chapter 18.45 and Section 18.44.050B(22) of this code. (Ord. 823 § 8, 1993)

Chapter 18.38 P PARKING ZONE
18.38.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “P parking zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9205.17)

 

18.38.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the P zone is to recognize and continue to preserve those areas within the city that were previously zoned solely for off-street parking and related purposes pursuant to the proceedings established by an ordinance in effect prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. (Prior code § 9205.17(A))

 

18.38.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    In order to qualify for application of the P zone, property must have been previously zoned B, buffer zone, in which the use and development of such property was restricted to off-street parking facilities and related purposes, and of which a vested interest can be shown as being required for such purposes. (Prior code § 9205.17(B))

 

18.38.040 Permitted uses.
    The uses of land permitted in the P zone shall be limited only to off-street parking facilities. (Prior code § 9205.17(C))

 

18.38.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property for uses in the P zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.42 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.17(D))

 

18.38.060 Off-street parking.
    Regulations governing off-street parking requirements for uses and development of property in the P zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.17(E))

 

18.38.070 Signs and advertising.
    Regulations governing permitted signs and advertising for uses and development of property in the P zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title. (Prior code § 9205.17(F))

Chapter 18.39 EMERGENCY SHELTERS OVERLAY ZONE
18.39.010 Establishment.
    There is hereby established a zone which shall hereinafter be known as the “E-S emergency shelter overlay zone,” and which shall function and serve as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 1083 § 9, 2014)

 

18.39.020 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of the E-S zone is to principally designate, classify, and distinguish certain areas within the city that may best facilitate the development and use of emergency shelters. (Ord. 1083 § 9, 2014)

 

18.39.030 Applicability—Criteria.
    A.  The E-S zone is a land use classification which, in part, assists in the implementation of the land use and housing elements of the general plan. It is a zone classification designed to be applied on selective areas of the community where an emergency shelter can be located and served by accessible public transportation, job centers, and public and community services.

    B.   Application of the E-S zone must be clearly defined within the scope and purpose of qualifying land for an emergency shelter, and should account for environmental constraints, such as flooding, seismic hazards, chemical contamination, slope instability or erosion that could make building an emergency shelter infeasible.

    C.   Uses of land which do not qualify and which are not specifically permitted in the E-S zone are hereby expressly prohibited. (Ord. 1083 § 9, 2014)

 

18.39.040 Permitted uses.
    Regulations governing permitted uses of land in the E-S zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Ord. 1083 § 9, 2014)

 

18.39.050 Property development conditions.
    Regulations governing the development of property in the E-S zone are specifically set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title. (Ord. 1083 § 9, 2014)

Chapter 18.40 LAND USE REGULATIONS
18.40.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to categorize and classify numerous uses of land, and the conditions, requirements and limitations applicable in the respective zone classifications. Any use of land not specifically enumerated in Section 18.40.040 and Table 18.40.040 shall be deemed to be expressly prohibited. (Prior code § 9206.01)

 

18.40.020 Land use chart—Adopted.
    The chart and text illustrated in this chapter are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 9206.02)

 

18.40.030 Land use chart—Directions for use.
    The land use chart is divided into five categories of uses: public, residential, special, commercial and industrial. In order to determine the zone in which a specific use of land is permitted or conditionally allowed, application and use of the chart is as follows:

    A.  Find the specific land use in one of the categories in Section 18.40.040 under the “Land Use” column.

    B.   Read across the chart until either a “number” or “X” appears.

    C.   If an “X” appears in a zone column, this means that the specific land use is permitted in the particular zone represented by the column in which the “X” appears, without being subject to any of the special conditions or limitations set forth in subsection B of Section 18.40.050.

    D.  If a “number” appears in a zone column, this means that the specific land use is allowed in the particular zone represented by the column in which the “number” appears, but only under certain conditions. The conditions applicable to such land use are those set forth in subsection B of Section 18.40.050.

    E.   If more than one “number” appears in a zone column, this means that the specific land use is allowed in the particular zone represented by the column in which the “numbers” appear, and such land use is subject to all special conditions set forth in subsection B of Section 18.40.050.

    F.   If an “X” or “number” does not appear in a zone column, this means that the specific land use is expressly prohibited in the particular zone represented by the empty column.

    G.  Any use of land not specifically enumerated in the five land use categories, but which could be considered as a compatible use in a particular zone classification, shall be subject to determination by the zoning administrator, as set forth in Sections 18.06.090 through 18.06.110 of this title, relative to ambiguities and interpretations. (Prior code § 9206.03)

 

 

18.40.040 Land use chart—Contents.
    The land uses outlined in Section 18.40.030 are categorized, enumerated and set forth in Table 18.40.040, the Land Use Chart.

Table 18.40.040
LAND USE CHART

(For explanation of notes see Section 18.40.050C; for prohibited uses see Section 18.40.050B)

 

Land Use

Zone

A.

Public Uses*

O-S

Public Facilities

M-U Overlay

1.

Civic or social associations

 

2, 63

 

2.

Educational institutions, public

2

2, 63

 

3.

Flood control facilities

X

2, 63

 

4.

Government agencies; local, county, state or federal

 

2, 63

 

5.

Libraries, public

 

2, 63

 

6.

Off-street parking facilities

1, 32

 

2

7.

Parks and playgrounds

2

 

2

8.

Permanent and interim open spaces

2

 

2

9.

Public utility facilities and structures

2

2, 63

 

10.

Recreational facilities

2

 

 

11.

Riding, hiking and bicycle trails

1

2, 63

 

12.

Nurseries, wholesale

2

2, 63

 

13.

Temporary uses

42

42

 

14.

Wireless telecommunication facilities

65

65

 

*   Refer to zoning administrator determinations, on file in community development department planning division.

 

 

Land Use

Zone

B.

Residential Uses*

R-E

S-F

R-I

PUD

R-M

P

E-S

M-U Overlay

1.

Accessory buildings and uses

X

X

X

X

X

 

 

X, 76

2.

Animals, poultry and fowl, keeping

3

3

3

3

3

 

 

 

3.

(Unassigned)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.

Boardinghouses

 

 

 

 

2, 4

 

 

 

5.

Farms, limited to agriculture crops only

2

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.

Guest houses, limited to one only

X

X

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.

Multiple-family dwellings

 

 

 

 

1, 76, 35

 

 

35, 76

8.

Planned residential unit developments

 

 

 

1, 76

1, 76

 

 

 

9.

Single-family dwellings

6

6

76

76

X

 

 

 

10.

Two-family dwellings

 

 

 

 

5

 

 

 

11.

Senior citizen housing

 

 

 

 

1, 76

 

 

76

12.

Community care facility (<6 persons)

X

X

X

X

X

 

 

 

13.

Community care facility (7+ persons)

1

1

1

1

1

 

 

 

14.

Emergency shelters, up to 20 occupants within the city

 

 

 

 

 

 

73

 

15.

Emergency shelters, more than 20 occupants within the city

 

 

 

 

 

 

1, 73

 

16.

SRO (efficiency units)

 

 

74

 

74

 

 

74, 76

17.

Supportive housing

X

X

X

X

X

 

 

X

18.

Transitional housing

X

X

X

X

X

 

 

X

19.

Second dwelling units

75

75

 

75

 

 

 

 

*   Refer to zoning administrator determinations, on file in community development department planning division.

 

 

Land Use

Zone

C.

Special Uses*

R-E

S-F

R-I

PUD

R-M

P

M-U Overlay

1.

Cottage food operations

11

11

11

11

11

 

 

2.

Day care centers

2, 7, 8

2, 7, 8

2, 7, 8

2, 7, 8

2

 

2

3.

Educational institutions, private

2, 7

2, 7

 

 

2, 7, 9

 

 

4.

Electric distribution substations

1

1

1

1

1

1

 

5.

Foster care homes

10

10

 

 

 

 

 

6.

Gas metering and control stations

1

1

1

1

1

1

 

7.

Home occupations

11

11

11

11

11

 

11

8.

Hospitals

 

 

 

 

2

 

1

9.

Mobilehome parks

 

 

 

 

1

 

 

10.

Off-street parking facilities

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

11.

Private recreation and open spaces

 

2

 

2

2

2

1

12.

Ranches, limited to livestock only

1, 3

 

 

 

 

 

 

13.

Religious places of worship

1

1

1

1

1

 

1

14.

Rest homes

 

 

 

 

1

 

 

15.

Water facilities

1

1

1

1

1

1

 

16.

Satellite dish receiving antenna

X, 52

X, 52

 

X, 52

X, 52

 

X, 52

17.

Amateur radio/CB radio antennas

 

2, 38

 

2, 38

2, 38

2, 38

2, 38

18.

Family day care homes

8, 40

8, 40

8, 40

2, 8, 40

2, 40

 

2, 40

19.

Garage sales

41

41

41

41

41

 

 

20.

Temporary uses

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

21.

Wireless telecommunication facilities

65

65

65

65

65

65

65

22.

Modular classroom/offices

2, 70

2, 70

 

 

2, 70

2

 

*   Refer to zoning administrator determinations, on file in community development department planning division.


 

Land Use

Zone

D.

Commercial Uses* (Every permitted use of land shall be conducted within an entirely enclosed building except as otherwise designated below.)

P-A

C-M

C-N

C-C

C-G

CPD

M-U Overlay

1.

Adult uses

 

60

 

 

 

 

 

2.

Animal hospitals

 

20, 23, 55, 57

 

20, 23, 55, 57

20, 23, 55, 57

 

20, 23, 55, 57

3.

Antique shops

 

 

 

12, 20, 27, 55, 57

12, 20, 27, 55, 57

1, 12, 27, 55, 57

1, 12, 27, 57

4.

Appliance sales, rentals, repairs, service

 

20, 28, 55

 

 

 

 

 

5.

Automated teller machines-interior

55

55

55

55

55

1, 55

55

6.

Automated teller machines-exterior

61

61

61

61

61

61

61

7.

Automobile leasing and renting

 

20, 24, 51, 55

 

20, 24, 51, 55

20, 24, 51, 55

1, 20, 24, 51, 55

 

8.

Automobile parts and accessories stores

 

20, 29, 55, 57

 

20, 29, 55, 57

20, 29, 55, 57

1, 29, 55, 57

 

9.

Automobile repair shops

 

1, 28, 36

 

1, 28, 36

1, 28, 36

1, 28

 

10.

Automobile sales, new and used

 

2, 13, 28

 

2, 13, 28

2, 13, 28

 

 

11.

Automobile service stations

 

1, 28, 81

 

1, 19, 28

1, 19, 28, 39, 62, 81

1, 19, 28, 39, 62, 81

 

12.

Automobile upholstery shops

 

2, 57

 

1

1

 

 

13.

Automotive related sales and installation

 

2

 

2

2

 

 

14.

Bakeries

 

15, 20, 55, 57

15, 20, 55, 57

15, 20, 55, 57

15, 20, 55, 57

1, 15, 55, 57

15, 55, 57

15.

Banks, savings and loan associations, and other similar lending institutions, but excluding pawnshops

20, 55, 57, 61

 

 

20, 55, 57, 61

20, 55, 57, 61

1, 55, 57, 61

55, 57, 61

16.

Barbershops and beauty shops

20, 55, 33, 57

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

17.

Bars and cocktail lounges

 

 

 

1, 25

1, 25

1, 25

 

18.

Bicycle shops

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

19.

Bookstores

20, 55, 33, 57

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

20.

Bowling alleys, skating rinks and similar recreational facilities

 

 

 

1

2

1

1

21.

Brewery

 

1, 80

1, 80

1, 80

1, 80

1, 80

1, 80

22.

Building materials, new

 

20, 55

 

 

 

 

 

23.

Business offices and services

20, 55, 57, 81

20, 55, 57, 81

 

20, 55, 57, 81

20, 55, 57, 81

1, 55, 57, 81

20, 55, 57, 81

24.

Cafés and restaurants

20, 33, 55, 56, 66, 67

20, 55, 56, 66, 67

 

20, 55, 56, 66, 67

20, 55, 56, 66, 67

1, 55, 56, 66, 67

1, 20, 55, 56, 66, 67

25.

Carwashes, automatic or coin-operated only

 

2

 

1

1

 

 

26.

Ceramics, stone, tile products

 

20, 55

 

 

 

 

 

27.

Check cashing establishments

 

55, 57, 72

 

 

55, 57, 72

 

 

28.

Clothing and wearing apparel stores of new retail merchandise only

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

29.

Coin-operated games and game arcades

 

1, 53, 55, 57

 

1, 53, 55, 57

1, 53, 55, 57

1, 53, 55, 57

 

30.

Confectionery stores

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

31.

Craft and hobby shops

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

32.

Dental laboratories or scientific research centers

1

 

 

 

 

 

1

33.

Drapery shops

 

17, 20, 55, 57

 

17, 20, 55, 57

17, 20, 55, 57

1, 17, 55, 57

17, 55, 57

34.

Dressmaking and millinery shops

 

 

 

17, 20, 55, 57

17, 20, 55, 57

1, 17, 55, 57

17, 55, 57

35.

Drive-in and drive-thru business establishments

 

 

1, 18, 28

1, 18, 28

1, 18, 28

1, 18, 28

1, 18, 28

36.

Drug or alcohol outpatient treatment facilities

1

 

 

1

1

 

 

37.

Drugstore

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

38.

Dry cleaning, laundry and pressing establishments

20, 33

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

39.

Electric distribution substation

1, 55

 

1

1

1

 

 

40.

Electronic components and supplies

 

20, 58

 

 

 

 

 

41.

Equipment (light) rentals

 

20, 55

 

 

 

 

 

42.

Florist shops

20, 33, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

43.

Food markets

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

44.

Fortune telling

 

 

 

 

1, 37

 

 

45.

Fire cell generator

1, 55

 

1, 55

1, 55

1, 55

 

 

46.

Furniture and appliance stores

 

20, 22, 55, 57

 

20, 22, 55, 57

20, 22, 55, 57

1, 22, 55, 57

20, 22, 55, 57

47.

Furniture, cabinet making

 

20, 58

 

 

 

 

 

48.

Furniture upholstery

 

20, 55, 57

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

 

 

49.

Galleries, works of art and collections

20, 33, 55, 57

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

50.

Gas metering and control stations

1, 55

 

1

2

2

 

 

51.

Hardware stores

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

52.

Home occupations

11

 

 

11

11

 

11

53.

Hospitals/medical facilities

1

 

 

1

1

 

1

54.

Hotels and motels

 

 

 

1

1

 

 

55.

Jewelry stores

20, 33, 55, 57

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

1, 20, 55, 57

56.

Laundromats

 

 

2, 20, 55, 57, 81

2, 20, 55, 57, 81

2, 20, 55, 57, 81

1, 55, 57, 81

1, 55, 57, 81

57.

Liquor stores, packaged off-sale only

 

1, 81

 

1, 81

1, 81

1, 81

1, 81

58.

Live/work

78

 

78

78

78

 

77, 78

59.

Locksmith shop

 

20, 55, 57

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

55, 57

60.

Medical clinic

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

61.

Medical laboratories

2

2

 

 

2

 

2

62.

Mobilehome sales, new and used

 

 

 

 

2, 14

 

 

63.

Motorcycle sales, repairs, rentals, new and used

 

1

 

1

1

 

 

64.

Muffler shops, automobile only

 

 

 

1

1

 

 

65.

Multifamily dwellings

1, 34, 57

 

 

1, 34

1, 34

1, 34

1, 76

66.

Newspaper publishing

 

1

 

 

 

 

1

67.

Nightclubs

 

1

 

 

1

 

 

68.

Nurseries and retail building

 

 

 

20, 55

20, 55

1, 55

 

69.

Off-sale of alcoholic beverages

 

 

 

1, 39

1, 39

 

 

70.

Off-site hazardous waste facility

 

 

 

 

1, 43, 45

 

 


 

Land Use

Zone

 

 

 

 

 

 

D.

Commercial Uses* (Every permitted use of land shall be conducted within an entirely enclosed building except as otherwise designated below.)

P-A

C-M

C-N

C-C

C-G

CPD

M-U Overlay

71.

Off-street parking facilities privately owned and operated

2

 

 

2

2

1

1

72.

On-site hazardous waste facility

 

 

 

 

44, 45, 55

 

 

73.

On-site sale or tasting of alcoholic beverages

1, 25

1, 25

 

1, 25

1, 25

1, 25

1, 25

74.

Packaging and assembly of non-hazardous products

 

20, 28, 58

 

 

 

 

 

75.

Parcel delivery

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

76.

Pet shops and grooming

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

77.

Pharmacies

20, 33, 55, 57

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

78.

Physical fitness clubs, physical training including gyms

 

2

 

 

2

2

2

79.

Physical therapy

 

2

 

 

2

2

2

80.

Picture frames and framing

 

20, 55, 57

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

81.

Printing and reproduction establishments

 

20, 28, 55, 57

 

20, 54, 55, 57

20, 54, 55, 57

1, 54, 55, 57

55, 57

82.

Private clubs, fraternities, sororities, lodges and institutions of nonprofit or charitable nature

 

 

 

2

2

 

55, 57

83.

Religious places of worship

1

 

1

1

 

 

 

84.

Resthomes

2

 

 

2

2

 

 

85.

Retail sales and personal service businesses

 

 

 

20, 55, 57, 81

20, 55, 57, 81

1, 55, 57, 81

55, 57, 81

86.

Satellite dish receiving antenna

30

30

30

30

30

30

1

87.

Shoe repair shops

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

 

55, 57

88.

Sign shops

 

28, 55

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

 

55, 57

89.

Small boat sales and service

 

20, 28, 55

 

 

 

 

 

90.

Stationery stores, including incidental printing

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

55, 57

91.

Studios (dance, martial arts, music, and photography, except motion picture)

 

 

 

2, 20, 55, 57

2, 20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

92.

Temporary uses

42

42

42

42

42

42

42

93.

Theaters

 

 

 

1

1

1

1

94.

Trade schools

1

1

 

1

1

1

1

95.

Truck, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle sales, new and used

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

96.

Unclassified uses

1, 48

1, 48

1, 48

1, 48

1, 48

1, 48

1, 48

97.

Wireless telecommunication facilities

45

45

45

45

45

45

1

98.

Wrought-iron work shops

 

20, 28, 55

 

 

 

 

 

99.

Yardage stores

 

 

 

20, 55, 57

20, 55, 57

1, 55, 57

 

*   Refer to zoning administrator determinations, on file in community development department planning division.

 

 

Land Use

Zone

E.

Industrial Uses*

I-L

I-G

IPD

1.

Assembly and packaging of nonhazardous products

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

2.

Auto service stations

1, 19, 39, 62, 79

39, 62

1, 39

3.

Automated teller machines-interior

55, 79

55

55

4.

Automobile assembly plants

 

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

5.

Automobile overhauling and major or minor repairing

20, 51, 58, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

6.

Automobile storage

 

1, 64

 

7.

Automotive electronics/installation and service

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

8.

Bottling plants

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

9.

Brewery

1, 80

1, 80

1, 80

10.

Building materials sales and storage

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

11.

Business offices

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

12.

Cafés and restaurants

20, 56, 58, 62, 79

20, 56, 62

1, 20, 56, 58

13.

Childcare

 

 

1

14.

Coin-operated games and game arcades

1, 53, 79

1, 53

1, 53

15.

Contracting equipment storage and rental yards

 

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

16.

Distribution plants and warehouses

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

17.

Electric distribution substation

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

18.

Electric generating, transmission substation and energy support facilities

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

58, 59

19.

Electrical and gas appliance assembly plants

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

20.

Fuel cell generator

58, 59, 79

58, 59

1, 58, 59

21.

Gas metering and control stations

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

22.

Hospitals/medical facilities

 

 

1

23.

Industrial uses involved with on-site hazardous waste as defined in Section 18.04.613.1

2, 79

2

2

24.

Laundries and cleaning plants

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

25.

Liquefied petroleum sales

2, 79

2

2

26.

Machine shops

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

27.

Manufacturing of food products

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

28.

Manufacturing of meat, poultry, fish or similar products

 

2

 

29.

Manufacturing of products

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

30.

Metallurgical testing

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

58, 59

31.

Newspaper publishing

2, 79

2

2

32.

Nighclubs

 

1

 

33.

Nurseries, wholesale

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

34.

Off-site sale of alcoholic beverages at auto/service stations

1, 39, 79

1, 39

1, 39

35.

Off-site hazardous waste facilities

1, 44, 45, 79

1, 44, 45

 

36.

On-site sale or tasting of alcoholic beverages

1, 25, 79

1, 25

1, 25

37.

On-site hazardous waste facilities

44, 45, 58, 59, 62, 79

44, 45, 58, 59, 62

1, 44, 45, 58, 59

38.

Physical fitness clubs, physical training including gyms

2

2

2

39.

Printing, photographic and reproduction activities

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

40.

Public utility service yards

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

41.

Recycling collection facility

2, 28, 33, 58, 79

2, 28, 33, 58

 

42.

Recycling plant

 

 

 

43.

Recycling station

 

1, 37

 

44.

Religious places of worship

1, 79

1

 

45.

Retail sales

 

 

1, 46

46.

Satellite dish receiving antenna

30, 79

30

30

47.

Scientific research centers and laboratories

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

48.

Sheet metal shops

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 52

1, 58, 59

49.

Sign shop

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

50.

Temporary uses

42, 79

42

42

51.

Theaters, walk-in

 

 

1

52.

Trade schools, industrial oriented

2, 79

2

 

53.

Transfer, moving and storage facilities for furniture and household goods only

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

54.

Truck repairing, overhauling, and rental and retail sales

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

1, 58, 59

55.

Unclassified uses

1, 48, 79

1, 48

1, 48

56.

Waste disposal facility

 

 

 

57.

Water facilities

1, 79

2

1

58.

Wholesale sales

58, 59, 62, 79

58, 59, 62

58, 59

59.

Wireless telecommunication facilities

65, 79

65

65

*   Refer to zoning administrator determinations, on file in the community development department planning division.

 

(Ord. 1126 §§ 3—5, 2018; Ord. 1116 §§ 3, 4, 2018; Ord. 1102 § 4, 2016; Ord. 1098 § 3, 2016; Ord. 1089 § 8, 2014; Ord. 1087 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1085 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 8, 2014; Ord. 1057 § 9, 2009; Ord. 988 § 4, 2002; Ord. 973 § 5, 2001; Ord. 968 §§ 6—8, 2001; Ord. 922 §§ 4, 5, 1999; Ord. 917 § 3, 1998; Ord. 912 §§ 7, 8, 1998; Ord. 911 §§ 2, 3, 1998; Ord. 900 § 4, 1997; Ord. 893 §§ 4—7, 1997; Ord. 892 §§ 4—7, 1997; Ord. 886 § 3, 1996; Ord. 857 §§ 8, 9, 10, 1994; Ord. 852 § 27, 1994; Ord. 830 § 5, 1993; Ord. 823 § 9, 1993; Ord. 785 §§ 5, 6, 1990; Ord. 765 §§ 12—17, 1989; Ord. 764 § 2, 1989; Ord. 752 §§ 3, 4, 1989; Ord. 751 §§ 3, 4, 1989; Ord. 745 § 5, 1988; Ord. 716 § 1, 1986; Ord. 710 § 3, 1985; Ord. 709 §§ 1—3, 1985; Ord. 559 § 1, 1977; prior code § 9206.04)

 

 

18.40.050 Special use conditions and chart notes.
    The uses of land set forth in the land use chart in Table 18.40.040 shall be subject to the provisions of this section, as indicated.

    A.  Relationship to Chart. Special use conditions, requirements and limitations governing use of land indicated by “numbers” appearing in the zone column of the land use chart correspond to the specific numbered use conditions, requirements or limitations set forth in subsection B of this section.

    B.   Specific Uses Prohibited.

    1.   Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to the contrary, the advertising, promoting, holding, conducting or participating in any public dance or entertainment in the single-family residential zone, the planned residential development zone, or the multiple-family residential variable density zone of the city, as well as the processing of any entitlements relating thereto, is prohibited. “Entertainment,” as used in this subsection, means and includes any activity planned, engaged in or permitted to occur for the purpose of or resulting in the pleasing, entertainment, attracting or retaining of patrons or customers, and shall specifically include but not be limited to the playing of any musical instrument by any human being, the playing of records, tapes or other musical reproduction devices, or performing the functions of a disc jockey. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to churches, schools, public buildings, bona fide charitable institutions and political organizations. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, local law enforcement officers may enforce the provisions of this subsection.

    C.   Use Conditions, Requirements and Limitations Enumerated. Special use conditions, requirements and limitations on land uses set forth in the land use chart in Table 18.40.040 are as follows:

    Note 1. Subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit.

    Note 2. Subject to approval of a precise plan of design.

    Note 3. Subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.50 of this title relative to animal, poultry and fowl regulations.

    Note 4. Housing not more than ten persons.

    Note 5. More than twenty thousand square feet of lot area requires precise plan of design approval.

    Note 6. More than one dwelling unit per lot requires precise plan of design approval.

    Note 7. Permitted when in conjunction with church use and related facilities.

    Note 8. Small family day care homes of eight or fewer children approved by-right and does not require any permit or business license when located in a single-family home. Large family day care homes of seven to fourteen children approved with a home occupation permit with one hundred-foot radius notice of the exterior boundaries when located in a single-family home. Family day care homes shall adhere to the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 1597.45 through 1597.46.

    Note 9. Limited to not more than sixty students, not less than fifteen thousand square feet of lot area, and appropriately licensed operators pursuant to state regulations.

    Note 10. Limited to not more than eight persons, including the resident family, and not more than six foster children, four or more foster children requiring approval of CUP.

    Note 11. Subject to issuance of a home occupation permit or cottage food operations permit as appropriate per Chapter 18.52. The following businesses shall not be operated out of a home and shall not be permitted by home occupation permits: alcohol sales, firearm and ammunition sales and services, on-site massage therapists, hairdressers, retail sales, vehicle storage, vehicle sales and vehicle repair, vehicle dispatch (taxis, towing, etc.) furniture or cabinet making, commercial kennels, commercial stables, breeding facilities, and forensic testing.

    Note 12. All goods, wares and other merchandise shall be of an intrinsic value, and shall specifically exclude secondhand goods.

    Note 13. May include servicing, mechanical repairs, painting, body and fender work only in conjunction with a new automobile sales dealership.

    Note 14. Excluding any maintenance or repair of any type whatsoever.

    Note 15. Limited to processing and retail sale of pastries only.

    Note 16. Deleted by Ord. 852.

    Note 17. Limited to on-premises retail sales directly to the consumer.

    Note 18. Drive-in Businesses. The following operations and property development regulations shall apply to drive-in business establishments:

    a.   Screening of Restroom Facilities. Whenever restroom facilities provide outside access, such access shall be screened from public view with decorative materials used and designed in the exterior appearance of the main building, or by suitable landscape material as may be approved by the city planner.

    b.   Trash Areas. Each drive-in business establishment shall provide adequate trash area so as to contain and conceal all trash or refuse generated on the site, and shall be constructed of similar materials used and designed in the exterior appearance of the main building.

    c.   Area Lighting. All exterior outdoor area lighting shall only be provided in an indirect manner, emanating from fixtures located under canopies, building eaves and ground level in landscaped areas. Other types of outdoor area lighting shall be subject to determination by the city planner.

    d.   Walls. Requirements for walls shall be governed by regulations of the zoning district in which a drive-in business is located.

    e.   Method of Operation. All operations, except service rendered directly to the occupant of an automobile, shall be conducted in an entirely enclosed building or structure. All products and/or merchandise shall be stored inside a building or structure.

    f.    Site Area and Dimensions. The minimum site area and dimensions shall be as follows:

    (i)   Corner Lot. No drive-in business shall be developed on a corner lot or parcel of land with less than twelve thousand square feet in area, or less than one hundred ten linear feet of frontage on each street. Lots or parcels of land being extreme or irregular in shape shall be subject to determination by the city planner.

    (ii)  Interior Lot. Drive-in businesses located on an interior lot or parcel of land shall have not less than ten thousand square feet of lot area, nor less than one hundred feet of street frontage.

    g.   Driveway Approaches and Access—Location and Size. Location and size of driveway approaches and access shall be as follows:

    (i)   Corner Lot. Any drive-in business located on a corner lot or parcel of land having a minimum of one hundred ten linear feet of frontage along each street shall have not more than one driveway approach for each such one hundred ten feet of frontage. Such driveway approach shall be located not less than ten feet from any interior property line, nor less than sixty feet from the intersection of two street property lines. In no case shall a driveway approach have a length greater than thirty feet. The number and location of driveway approaches on a corner lot or parcel of land having more than one hundred ten feet of frontage along each street, and for existing lots of record, shall be determined by the city planner.

    (ii)  Interior Lot. Any drive-in business located on an interior lot or parcel of land shall not have more than two drive-

way approaches for each one hundred fifty feet of street frontage. Such driveway approach shall be located not less than fifteen feet from any interior property line, and shall have a minimum distance between driveway approaches of not less than thirty feet. No driveway approach shall have a length greater than thirty feet.

    h.   Landscaping. Permanent landscaping shall be provided as follows:

    (i)   A landscape planter area having a net width of not less than five feet shall be installed continuously along the interior property lines, except when a drive-in business site is located contiguous to a commercial shopping or industrial center, such landscape planter area may be eliminated in those areas used for vehicular ingress and egress to such commercial or industrial center. In no case shall there be more than two such driving areas, and each area shall not be more than thirty feet in width.

    (ii)  There shall be a six-foot-wide landscaped planter area installed continuously along all street frontages except for driveway approaches. In no case shall there be less than a thirty-foot angular corner landscape planter, measured along each street frontage, for drive-in business developments located on a corner lot or parcel of land. Minor landscaping modifications may be made by the city planner or other pertinent reviewing body.

    (iii) Landscaping for drive-in business developments located on an interior lot or parcel of land shall be determined by the city planner.

    (iv) All landscaping shall be subject to the off-street parking regulations set forth in Chapter 18.44 of this title.

    i.    Signs. All signs and advertising shall be subject to the provisions set forth in Chapter 18.46 of this title.

    Note 19. Automobile Service Stations. Automobile service stations shall comply with the following conditions in addition to zone provisions and conditions imposed in a conditional use permit.

    a.   Site Area. The service station site shall have a minimum frontage on a major or secondary highway of one hundred fifteen feet, and contain a minimum area of eighteen thousand five hundred feet. Notwithstanding the above, those service stations lawfully existing at the enactment of the amendment codified herein shall be exempted from frontage and area requirements when approved by the planning commission under a conditional use permit.

    b.   Location. The location for the proposed service station shall be in accordance with the general plan, and be on an existing or proposed street that is designed to carry the type and quantity of traffic to be serviced by the proposed use.

    c.   Building, Canopy and Pump Island Setbacks.

    (i)   The service station building shall be set back forty feet from all street property lines, and shall not be closer than twenty feet to any property zoned residential.

    (ii)  Canopies may project to within five feet of all street property lines, and shall not be closer than fifteen feet to all other property lines.

    (iii) All pump islands are to be set back a minimum of fifteen feet from any property line.

    d.   Curbcuts and Driveways. A parcel containing a minimum of one hundred fifteen feet of frontage shall have no more than two driveways on any one street, with a minimum distance between the two driveways of not less than twenty-two feet. No driveway shall exceed a width of thirty feet, nor be less than twenty feet in the flat. However, if a parcel contains in excess of one hundred fifteen feet, the planning commission may make appropriate modifications in accordance with Los Angeles County Highway Permit Ordinance No. 3597, and its latest amendments. If physical problems exist at the time of construction, the director of public works is also authorized to make necessary adjustments as to conditions relating to curbcuts and driveways, so long as the objectives and conditions and standards of the conditional use permit are adhered to.

    e.   Utility Trailers. Auto and truck rentals shall not exceed ten in number and may be stored on service station sites, provided they are located on the rear of the property and do not occupy any of the required parking spaces for customer service or employees. In addition, the planning commission, upon review of the application for additional utility vehicles, may increase the number when sufficient area is provided and is determined not to be in conflict with the circulation element of the property.

    f.    Outside Operations. Operations outside of the permanent structure shall be limited to the dispensing of gasoline, oil, water, changing of tires, attaching and detaching of trailers, charging of batteries, wheel alignment and other minor emergency repairs.

    g.   Outside Display. There shall be no outside display of tires, batteries, auto appliances or other materials within the building setback area, and all display areas shall be designed as part of the development.

    h.   Walls. A decorative masonry wall six feet in height with a color compatible with the building shall be erected on all property lines. Such wall can be omitted if the station is designed as a part of a commercial center. The design, height and location of the wall or materials may be modified by the planning commission when the modification will meet the needs and objectives of this title.

    i.    Lighting. All lighting on the exterior of the building shall be of an indirect nature, screened or immediately below the canopy, or on a freestanding pole which shall be hooded and screened to direct the main source of light away from the adjacent properties and the public right-of-way. The standard on which the light is located shall not exceed a maximum of sixteen feet in height.

    j.    Trash Enclosures. A trash enclosure six feet in height, constructed of decorative block, shall be provided, and shall be enclosed on three sides, with a solid gate six feet in height providing access to the trash area. Trash enclosed within the enclosure shall not exceed the height of the enclosure, nor be allowed to be carried by natural causes onto adjacent properties. The planning commission, in reviewing the trash enclosure, may modify the material selected when the design will be in keeping with the architecture of the structure and meets the needs and objectives of this title. The color of the enclosure is to be compatible with the required wall of the building.

    k.   Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground.

    l.    Landscaping. Landscaping shall be based on seven percent of the total site area, and shall be distributed in accordance with the following standards. The planning commission may make modifications to the following standards when cause or circumstances relating to the subject site and/or the adjacent area characteristics are demonstrated:

    (i)   A five-foot landscaping area (inside dimensions) shall be provided along all street frontages except where provided with driveway access.

    (ii)  A landscaping strip shall be provided along interior property lines. Such landscaping may be distributed evenly along the interior property line or in a manner approved by the planning commission.

    (iii) A planter of not less than three hundred square feet shall be located at the intersection.

    (iv) There shall be one fifteen-gallon tree, six feet to the bottom of the branch structure, for every three thousand square feet of lot area.

    (v)  All planting areas are to be protected by a concrete curb no less than six inches in height surrounding the planting. Planting areas shall be provided with an irrigation system and must be permanently maintained.

    (vi) Landscaping shall consist of combinations of trees, shrubs and ground covers, with careful consideration given to eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability, and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions.

    m.  Existing Service Stations. Any service station lawfully existing on the date of this zoning code and for which no conditional use permit has been granted, shall assume the status of a legal nonconforming use. Such nonconforming use status shall only remain in effect for a period not to exceed one year from the effective date of the zoning code codified in this title. Upon expiration of the one-year period, all such service stations shall comply with the provisions of this title.

    n.   Abandoned Service Stations and/or Revocation of Conditional Use Permit. If any service station is closed, vacated, abandoned or not operated so as to engage in the sale of petroleum products or the dispensing of gasoline for a period of six months, any legal permits in effect at the end of the six-month period will become null and void, and no further sales or service from such service station shall be allowed. The presence of a service station that has been vacated or abandoned for a period of six months is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and shall be cause for removal of all pumps, pump islands, tanks, canopies, signs and other appurtenances related to the dispensing of gasoline after proper notification by the zoning administrator. Notification shall be made by the zoning administrator setting forth the intent to declare such abandoned service station a nuisance and to revoke any active permits.

    o.   Change of Use and/or Vacant or Abandoned Service Station Facilities. A change in the use of a service station facility to a use permitted within the appropriate zone and which does not operate for a principal purpose of dispensing gasoline, shall constitute a closed, vacated, abandoned or inoperative service station, which shall be declared a public nuisance and be abated pursuant to subsection n above.

    Note 20. Precise plan of design required for new construction of five hundred square feet or more.

    Note 21. Limited to feed and fuel for small animals, poultry and fowl only.

    Note 22. Limited to new retail sales only.

    Note 23. No animal runs permitted, and shall be limited to the treatment of only household pets, rabbits and small animals.

    Note 24. Limited to the leasing or renting of automobiles only.

    Note 25. On-site sale of alcoholic beverages may be conditionally permitted only when in conjunction with a bona fide eating establishment with primarily sit-down service. Instructional tastings of alcoholic beverages via a Type 86 license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control may be conditionally permitted only in conjunction with a grocery store or supermarket which exceeds twelve thousand five hundred square feet in gross floor area, or with specialty liquor stores which sell beer, wine, liquor and alcoholic beverage accessories at a minimum of ninety-five percent of their total sales receipts. Instructional tasting events are not permitted in conjunction with convenience stores, or liquor stores which sell grocery items such as milk, eggs and bread, or beauty items or household goods, or which offer secondary services such as check cashing, utility bill payments, delicatessens, etc. Instructional tasting events are subject to compliance with the following:

    a.   Business establishment must have a conditional use permit approval for the sale of beer and wine, or for the sale of beer, wine and distilled spirits, under a Type 20 or Type 21 alcohol license with a minimum of one-year in operation under current ownership.

    b.   Business establishment must be in good standing with the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control with no history of disciplinary action.

    c.   A parking analysis may be required to ensure sufficient parking is provided.

    d.   As determined by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, the business establishment cannot be located within a census tract which has an overconcentration of on-sale or off-sale alcohol licenses.

    e.   As determined by local law enforcement, the business establishment cannot be located within an area with high crime rates or have a history of alcohol-related offenses.

    f.    Not more than three tasting events can be held per week.

    g.   Installation of security cameras required. Retention of all surveillance footage for a minimum period of one week or longer may be required.

    h.   All portions of the instructional tasting event shall be located indoors and shall be separated from the remainder of the off-sale licensed premises by a wall, rope, cable, cord, chain, fence, or other permanent or temporary barrier.

    i.    Entertainment of any kind, including the playing of music or dancing, is prohibited.

    j.    As determined by the zoning administrator, installation of new parking area lighting may be required if the hours of instructional tasting are proposed to occur after seven p.m. Parking area shall be provided with a minimum illumination of one footcandle.

 

    k.   Instructional tastings are not permitted in conjunction with any off-sale licensee location where vehicle fuel is sold.

    l.    The instructional tasting event can only serve alcoholic beverages to an attendee of legal drinking age.

    m.  Tastings of wine or distilled spirits shall be limited to not more than three tastings per person per day. A single tasting of distilled spirits shall not exceed one-fourth of one ounce and a single tasting of wine shall not exceed one ounce.

    n.   Tastings of beer shall be limited to not more than eight ounces of beer per person per day.

    o.   The wine, beer, or distilled spirits tasted shall be limited to the products that are authorized to be sold by the authorized licensee and the licenseholder under its off-sale license.

    p.   An instructional tasting event shall be limited to a single type of alcoholic beverage. For purposes of this subsection, “type of alcoholic beverage” means distilled spirits, wine, or beer.

    q.   Business establishment must comply with Section 25503.56 of the Business and Professions Code, which regulates instructional tasting events.

    r.    Business establishment must obtain a Type 86 license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control prior to conducting any instructional tasting events.

    Note 26. Limited to dairy products only.

    Note 27. Specifically excluding pawnshops.

    Note 28. Outdoor storage and/or operations shall be visually screened from view subject to the approval or conditional approval of the zoning administrator.

    Note 29. Limited to retail sales operations only.

    Note 30. a. Ground-Mount Provisions.

    (i)   Height limited to fourteen feet or less. Not to project above building height.

    (ii)  Placement limited to rear or side of structure, facing interior lot line.

    (iii) Solid screening required to conceal visibility from adjoining public right-of-way, designed to match exterior finish of primary structure.

    (iv) Landscape screening shall also be required if property adjoins residentially zoned property.

    (v)  Limited to choice of one ground-mount or roof-mount antenna.

    b.   Roof-Mount Provisions.

    (i)   Solid screening required to conceal visibility from any adjoining public right-of-way by existing parapet walls; or a licensed architect shall design a solid screen to be an integral part of the building.

    (ii)  Antennas five feet in height or less shall be exempt from these provisions, provided that the antenna is located in the rear one-third of the roof.

    (iii) Limited to choice of one ground-mount or roof-mount antenna.

    Note 31. Regulations governing this use of land shall be established pursuant to the provisions set forth for conditional use permit proceedings, but in no case shall such regulations be less restrictive than set forth in Notes 19, 20 and 21 of subsection B of Table 18.44.050 of Section 18.44.050.

    Note 32. This use of land shall be subject to the minimum requirements set forth in Notes 19, 20 and 21 of subsection B of Table 18.44.050 of Section 18.44.050.

    Note 33. Permitted only in conjunction with and/or incidental to other permitted uses.

 

    Note 34. Limited to areas above first floor when in conjunction with another permitted use in its respective zone classification.

    Note 35. Multiple-family dwellings constructed on lots less than twenty thousand square feet shall be subject to approval of a precise plan of design.

    Note 36. Major repair of automobiles, limited to vehicles under six thousand pounds.

    Note 37. a. The use shall be conducted entirely within a building.

    b.   The building shall comply with fire department regulations applicable to this use.

    c.   The facility shall be properly licensed.

    d.   Hours of operation shall be those between seven a.m. and ten p.m.

    e.   Conditions may be imposed restricting the size, content, construction and maintenance of the identification sign.

    f.    This use may not be conducted within five hundred feet of another such use, nor within five hundred feet of an adult other use, as specified in Chapter 18.04 of this title.

    Note 38. Amateur Radio/Citizen Band Radio Antennas. Amateur radio/

 

citizen band radio antennas not exceeding the following standards shall be subject to the approval of a precise plan of design.

    a.   Number. No more than one tower utilized as an antenna support structure shall be permitted on a lot or parcel less than fifteen thousand square feet in size, but in no instance shall there be more than two such towers per lot or parcel.

    b.   Height. The height of an antenna and antenna support structure shall not exceed thirty-eight feet above the maximum height of any building within fifty feet of where said antenna and antenna support structures are affixed to the ground or to any existing structure.

    c.   Location. No antenna or antenna support structure shall be affixed to the ground in any required yard area and no guy-lines shall be anchored within the required front yard or corner side yard. In addition, no portion of an antenna shall extend beyond the property lines, and no tower utilized as an antenna sup-port structure shall be located other than to the rear of the main residential building, but in no event closer than fifty feet to the front property line.

    d.   Appearance. Towers utilized as antenna support structures shall be maintained in an appropriate manner at all times to minimize the visual impact to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator. In addition, wooden utility poles shall not be utilized as antenna support structures.

    e.   Waiver of Standards. Where a pro-posed antenna and/or support structure would not meet the standards enumerated above, a variance is required. In granting such variance, the planning commission may consider topographic features of the site and surrounding area, lot or parcel configuration and/or any other circumstances or factors deemed relevant by the commission that make it obviously impractical to require literal compliance with said standards. The burden of proof for any modification shall be borne by the applicant who shall make a clear and convincing demonstration that usable radio or electromagnetic signals cannot be transmitted or received under the limitations of the above standards. In coming to a determination to modify any specific standard and to what extent, the planning commission shall consider a modification to the extent to allow reception of usable radio or electromagnetic signals while attempting to mitigate the visual impact of the antenna from adjoining streets and from adjoining residentially zoned properties In addition the planning commission, at its discretion, shall seek whatever technical advice it deems necessary to review these matters, with the cost of such technical advice to be paid by the applicant.

    f.    Conformance. All amateur radio and citizens band antennas and antenna support structures shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the city. Amateur radio and citizen band antennas and antenna support structures which do not conform to the provisions of this title and which were constructed and in place prior to September 9, 1987, are declared to be provisionally legal so long as the present owner retains ownership of the property on which they are erected and so long as any license granted by the Federal Communications Commission remains in effect. At such times as the property is sold or where the licenses have lapsed, then any antenna or antenna support structures shall be required to conform with the provisions of this title or to be removed from the property.

 

    Note 39. Concurrent Sale of Alcoholic Beverages and Motor Fuels. The conditional use permit for the off-sale of alcoholic beverages concurrently with motor vehicle fuels including gasoline at automobile service stations shall be subject to the following standards:

    a.   Only beer and wine, not distilled spirits, may be sold.

    b.   All alcoholic sales shall take place within an enclosed building.

    c.   The minimum sales area for in store retail products shall be one thousand square feet.

    d.   The sale of products, other than beer and wine, measured by gross receipts on an annual basis, shall exceed the annual sales of beer and wine products, measured by gross receipts.

    e.   No displays of beer and wine shall be located within five feet of the store’s entrance.

    f.    No displays of beer and wine shall be located on motor fuel islands and no lighted advertising for beer or wine shall be located on buildings or windows.

    g.   No display or sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub or any other ice-containing device as determined by the state of California Department of Alcohol Beverage Control.

    h.   No on-sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on any portion of the premises or any portion adjacent thereto which is under the control of the applicant.

    i.    Beer and wine coolers shall be sold in minimum quantities of no less than six-pack lots and four-pack lots, respectively.

    j.    No off-sale of alcoholic beverages shall take place after twelve a.m., midnight.

    k.   No employee under the age of twenty-one shall sell alcoholic beverages.

    l.    No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to any person while such person is in a motor vehicle.

    m.  The sale and delivery of all alcoholic beverages shall be made to persons within the enclosed building only and not through a pass-out window, or a slide-out tray to the exterior of the premises.

    n.   The proposed or existing automobile service station requesting approval to sell alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption shall be a minimum of three hundred feet measured from an existing off-sale establishment property line to property line unless the applicant can demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that:

    1.   The proposed off-sale alcohol sales are a necessary adjunct to the business; and

    2.   A need exists for additional off-sale premises at the location proposed by the applicant.

    o.   All requirements of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control Board of the state of California shall be met.

    p.   All other conditions which may be imposed by the planning commission in granting the required conditional use permit must be met.

    Note 40. Large family day care homes shall be subject to the following:

    a.   All necessary permits from the

State Department of Social Services to operate a large family day care home to be obtained.

    b.   A city business license must be obtained.

    c.   Proof of compliance with the standards of the state fire marshal to be obtained.

    d.   The proposed home shall not be located within one thousand feet of any other large family day care home along the same street.

    e.   One on-site parking space to be provided for each nonresident employee.

    f.    An on-site drop-off/pick-up area to be provided.

    Note 41. Garage/yard sales shall be subject to the following:

    a.   That not more than four such sales shall be permitted on any lot per calendar year. Lots with multiple dwelling units, such as duplexes, triplexes and apartment complexes, are also limited to not more than four such sales per lot per calendar year; and

    b.   That no such sale shall have a duration in excess of two consecutive calendar days; and

    c.   That the merchandise offered for sale shall be used household goods belonging to the property owner or occupant. Merchandise which is obtained for the sole purpose of resale is considered a business and is strictly prohibited. Not more than five items of the same kind, type or model shall be displayed at any time. Not more than two residential appliances can be displayed at any time; and

    d.   That no signs shall be erected within any public right-of-way; and

    e.   That merchandise for sale may be displayed or sold within the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. only; and

    f.    That canopies, tables, racks and other fixtures associated with the set-up of a permitted yard sale can be placed outside as early as five p.m. on the day prior to the first day of the sale and must be removed from public view by nine p.m. on the final day of the sale; and

    g.   That none of the following items are sold, exchanged or bartered at any garage or yard sale: food or beverages, alcoholic beverages, tobacco products, controlled substances, illegal substances, commercial appliances and equipment, fire arms, ammunition, explosives, animals and livestock, items where the serial number has been removed, stolen merchandise, or any item prohibited by the city, county, state or federal government.

    Note 42. Temporary uses permitted by Chapter 18.61 of Title 18.

    Note 43. This shall include reduction, recycling, treatment and temporary storage facilities for hazardous wastes generated by automotive uses only.

    Note 44. Application for this use shall be accompanied by accurately drawn maps which depict the following information, and any other information which the director of building and planning deems necessary:

    a.   Physical dimensions of the property and structures;

    b.   Location of existing and proposed structure;

    c.   Setbacks and landscaping;

    d.   Methods of circulation and parking;

    e.   Drainage patterns;

    f.    Ingress and egress;

    g.   Storage and processing areas;

    h.   The distance of the property line to the nearest adjacent structure, and description and location of such structure;

    i.    Proximity of the project to one-hundred-year flood-prone areas;

    j.    Proximity of the project to any known earthquake fault zones;

 

    k.   The relationship of the proposed project to all aboveground water supplies and all known underground aquifers that might be threatened with contamination;

    l.    Topographic description of the property and surrounding area;

    m.  Vicinity map;

    n.   In addition, the following information, and other information deemed necessary by the director of building and planning, shall be submitted:

    (i)   Identification of all waste water, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed use and the method and place of final discharge.

    (ii)  An analysis of visual, noise and any olfactory impacts associated with the project and recommended mitigation measures.

    (iii) An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the project and proposed mitigation measures to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area.

    (iv) Identification of the amount (in tons), sources and types of hazardous waste to be treated, stored or disposed of at the proposed facility, and the ultimate disposi-

 

tion of the wastes, and anticipated life of the facility.

    (v)  A risk assessment which analyzes, in detail, all probabilities of accidents or spills at the site, transportation-related accidents from the point of origin from the subject site, and any other probabilities requested by either the director of building and planning or the planning commission.

    (vi) A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program of air, soil and ground water. This plan shall be in conformance with the Los Angeles County hazardous waste management plan and include any monitoring requirements imposed by other permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, Regional Water Quality Control Board and Department of Health Services.

    (vii) An emergency response plan.

    Note 45. A separate fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.

    Note 46. A mix of commercial and industrial uses permitted in the Industrial Planned Development (IPD) zones for new development of over fifteen acres with the approval of a conditional use permit.

    Note 47. Satellite dish may be roof or ground mounted without a conditional use permit provided that dish is not visible from any street, subject to zoning administrator approval.

    Note 48. Unclassified uses permitted by Chapter 18.56 of Title 18.

    Note 49. With the exception of retail uses, a conditional use permit is not required for occupancy of existing buildings.

    Note 50. This use shall be considered to be automatically allowable under an existing conditional use permit.

    Note 51. On-premises car washing, cleaning, and repairs prohibited.

    Note 52. a. Satellite dish antennas must be ground-mounted and installed within the rear third of the lot.

    b.   Ground-mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed fourteen feet in height.

    c.   No more than one satellite dish antenna is allowed.

    d.   Solid fence screening of six feet in height is required to conceal visibility from the public street and/or adjoining properties.

    e.   Landscape screening exceeding six feet in height is also required to conceal visibility from the public street and/or adjoining properties.

    f.    A precise plan of design application is required for roof or pole-mounted satellite dish antennas.

    Note 53. Coin-operated Games and Game Arcade Regulations.

    a.   Coin-operated games and game arcades, as defined in Chapter 18.04, shall be restricted to the C-C, C-G, C-M, I-L, I-G, IPD and CPD zones. Coin-operated games of seven or more shall be subject to a conditional use permit and all conditions that may be applied thereto and in accord with the following standards:

    (i)   The use shall be conducted entirely within a building.

    (ii)  No premises shall be open to the public unless one or more adult attendant(s) or supervisor(s) are present during all hours of operation.

    (iii) Conditions may be imposed restricting hours of operation so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare, and surrounding property and uses.

    (iv) Conditions pertaining to both the construction of the facility and its maintenance may be imposed so as to minimize the effect of noise, congregation, parking and other factors generated by the use detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or the surrounding community.

    (v)  Such other conditions may be imposed as necessary in order to preserve the public peace, health, safety and welfare of the surrounding community.

    b.   Excluded from the provisions of this subsection are governmental buildings and facilities, public and state licensed private schools, churches and church-related facilities located in any zone.

    Note 54. Limited to noncommercial printing.

    Note 55. This specific use is automatically permitted within an existing building subject to certificate of occupancy approval and compliance to the following provision:

    a.   Existing landscaped planters to be completely landscaped and continuously maintained within thirty days of certificate of occupancy approval.

    Note 56. Precise plan of design required for more than twenty seats.

    Note 57. Use to be completely conducted within enclosed building.

    Note 58. This specific use is automatically permitted within an existing building subject to certificate of occupancy approval and compliance to the following provisions:

    a.   Existing landscaped planters to be completely landscaped and continuously maintained within thirty days certificate of occupancy approval.

    b.   Compliance to current parking and loading space provisions.

    c.   Decorative block wall screening or alternate screening approved by the community development director to be provided to conceal outside storage visible from the public right-of-way; or nonindustrially zoned properties.

    d.   Outside storage shall not exceed height of approved screen wall.

    e.   Nonconforming parking and loading space provisions subject to precise plan of design approval prior to occupancy.

    Note 59. Precise plan of design required for new construction of two thousand five hundred square feet or more.

    Note 60. Zoning and Locational Restriction Requirements.

    a.   All adult businesses are required to procure and maintain an adult business regulatory permit as mandated by Chapter 5.22 et seq.

    b.   No adult business shall be established or located in any area in the city other than in the following locations:

    (i)   Parcels fronting along the north side of Slauson Avenue commencing at a point three hundred twenty feet easterly of the centerline of Rosemead Boulevard, proceeding easterly to Reeve Road.

    (ii)  Parcels fronting along the north side of Bermudez Street, from Bequette Avenue easterly to Reeve Road.

    (iii) Parcels fronting along both sides of Industry Avenue, north of Telegraph Road, and as well as parcels fronting along both sides of Telegraph Road from Industry Avenue westerly to the Rio Hondo.

    (iv) In locations where the adult business regulated by this section would otherwise be a permitted use, it is unlawful to establish any adult business if the location is within one hundred fifty feet of any existing residential zone or school. In addition, it is unlawful to establish any adult business if the location is within one thou-

sand feet of any legally established adult business. The distances set forth above shall be measured between the nearest property line of the facility or tenant space housing the adult business or the proposed adult business, and the nearest property line included within the residential zone or nearest property line of a school, along a straight line extended between the two points.

    d.   No building permit or zoning clearance, business tax receipt, adult business regulatory permit, or other permit or entitlement for use shall be legally valid if issued to any adult business proposed to operate or to be established in the city except if the zoning and locational requirements set forth above are satisfied.

    e.   An adult business or establishment operating as a conforming use with an approved adult business regulatory permit from the city shall not be rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of residential zones or schools within the locational limitations set forth above. For purposes of this section, a use shall be deemed to be subsequently located if it commences following the date an application for an adult business regulatory permit is filed pursuant to Section 5.22.030.

 





 



 

    Note 61. a. Exterior-mounted automated teller machines placed in conjunction with an existing permitted financial institution require zoning consistency review and are subject to the following conditions:

    (i)   Area Lighting. All exterior outdoor lighting shall be provided in an indirect manner, emanating from fixtures located under canopies, building eaves and ground level in landscaped areas. Other types of lighting shall be subject to zoning administrator approval.

    (ii)  Design Features. Teller machines must be flush-mounted with exterior building wall and match architectural style of existing building. Each machine is required to have an enclosed trash receptacle.

    b.   Exterior mounted automated teller machines in conjunction with a permitted, conforming commercial use requires precise plan of design approval, prior to installation.

    Note 62. Occupancy of existing structures or expansions of less than two thousand five hundred square feet for industrial zoned properties located adjacent to residentially zoned properties must comply with the following:

    a.   Establish a six-foot high block wall along side and rear property lines that abut residential property and if physically possible include a landscaped setback consisting of irrigation, trees and ground cover subject to approval by the zoning administrator.

    b.   Hours of operation limited to seven a.m. to six p.m. Monday through Friday, unless noise generated by operation does not spill off-site. Noise not to exceed sixty-five dBA as measured from residential property line. In addition, on-site lighting not to spill onto residential property.

    c.   All unpaved areas to be paved or adequately landscaped.

    d.   Outside storage to be adequately screened subject to zoning administrator approval and limited to an area no closer than twenty feet to any residentially zoned property.

    e.   Commercial vehicles not to be parked or stored within twenty feet of residential zoned property.

    Note 63. Precise plan of design required for new development only.

    Note 64. Allowable use only in conjunction with an automotive towing service. On-site operations to be screened from public right-of-way and adjacent properties.

    Note 65. Wireless telecommunication facility proposals must be in compliance with Chapter 18.49 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    Note 66. Outside dining associated with a restaurant as defined in this code allowed with issuance of a zoning administrator approved outdoor dining permit.

    Note 67. Outdoor dining not located on public or private sidewalk required to have a minimum three-foot wide landscaped setback including a solid barrier from any automobile parking area or driveway aisle. Setbacks from property lines must comply with parking area setback requirements. Compliance with current parking regulations required.

    Tables, chairs, umbrellas, serving stations or similar equipment to be located outside must be architecturally compatible with existing structure subject to zoning administrator approval. Said dining area must be in compliance with the parking provisions of Chapter 18.44 of this title.

    Outside dining that is proposed to be located on or adjacent to a public or private sidewalk must abide by the following requirements, subject to zoning administrator approval:

    Tables and chairs to be of wrought iron or similar construction and compatible with the appearance and design of the existing structure, and must be located parallel to the front of the restaurant, with no possibility of incursion into required clear area of sidewalk.

    All outdoor furniture or equipment limited to a maximum fifty percent of the sidewalk width located in front of the restaurant, with a minimum four feet wide area of sidewalk to remain clear of obstruction. Primary pedestrian ingress and egress must be from sidewalk utilized for outdoor dining.

    One or more twenty-five (25) gallon landscape planters to be placed at each end of outdoor dining area. Plants to consist of natural, healthy trees and/or similar container appropriate plants. Potted plants shall not drain onto the public right-of-way.

    One freestanding, mounted menu board no greater than fifteen (15) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in length permitted adjacent to entranceway.

    Provisions shall be made for trash receptacles to serve the sidewalk dining area.

    Outdoor lighting to illuminate dining area only. Reproduced music permitted as long as sound does not travel off-site or interfere with users of the sidewalk.

    The permittee is responsible for maintaining the outdoor dining area and any adjoining street, curb, gutter and sidewalk in a neat, clean, and orderly condition at all times.

    Any proposed outdoor dining located on a public right-of-way will require an encroachment permit or similar approval from the Pico Rivera department of public works in addition to the above noted requirements.

    The zoning administrator may revoke the outdoor dining permit upon violation of any imposed condition. Upon termination of said permit the sidewalk shall be returned to its original condition.

    Note 68. Any recycling facility shall meet and be certified by the California Department of Conservation and if necessary, the Integrated Waste Management Board, as to meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. Additionally, unless otherwise required by the zoning administrator, the recycling facility must be designed to accept, collect and distribute all redeemable beverage containers made of glass, plastic, aluminum, bi-metal, and made of other recyclable material as determined by this chapter.

    Note 69. The recycling facility shall meet the following requirements:

    a.   Reverse Vending Machines (RVM).

    1.   The RVM, if located outside of the primary business, shall not occupy more than twenty-five square feet.

    2.   The RVM be located within the store, within twenty-five feet of the main entrance of the primary business.

    3.   The RVM shall not require additional parking in addition to that required for the primary use.

    4.   Unless otherwise required by state regulations, one directional and informational sign for each RVM site no more than one foot by three feet shall be permitted. This sign shall be placed on, painted onto, or otherwise permanently affixed to the RVM.

    5.   RVMs shall be limited to the collection of redeemable empty beverage containers made of glass, plastic, aluminum beverage, bi-metals, and other recyclable material as permitted by this chapter and approved by the zoning administrator.

    6.   Shall be permitted as an accessory use to a permitted use.

    b.   Collection Storage Unit(s) (CSU).

    1.   Collection storage units aggregate coverage shall not exceed one hundred twenty-five square feet.

    2.   Collection storage units shall be fully enclosed, except for small openings for deposit of recyclable materials.

    3.   The CSU shall be located within twenty-five feet of the main entrance into the primary use, whenever possible the CSU shall be located on a sidewalk, and not on any portion of a drive aisle or parking space.

    4.   All storage units shall be sealed in such a manner as to preclude the deposit of nonredeemable materials in the unit during hours when the primary facility is unmanned.

    5.   The CSUs shall be staffed a minimum of thirty hours per week to facilitate the purchase of or donation of recyclable materials.

    6.   The CSUs shall not occupy required parking spaces or landscape areas. No additional parking in addition to that required for the primary use shall be required.

    7.   CSUs shall be limited to the collection of redeemable paper, and empty beverage containers made of glass, plastic, aluminum beverage and bi-metals; and other beverage containers meeting the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986, as approved by the zoning administrator.

    8.   The CSU shall be of a size, shape and design to be compatible with existing facilities.

    9.   No permanent or temporary structures for human habitation or use is permitted as part of a CSU site.

    10. The CSUs shall be permitted as an accessory use to a permitted use.

    11. Unless otherwise required by state regulations, one directional and information sign for each CSU site no more than one foot by three feet shall be permitted. This sign shall be placed on, painted onto, or otherwise permanently affixed to the CSU.

    c.   Mobile Recycling Unit (MRU).

    1.   All storage shall be completely enclosed in a truck, van, trailer, cargo container, or bin as approved by the zoning administrator.

    2.   MRUs shall not occupy nor block driveway aisles, nor occupy landscaped areas. MRUs may be located within an existing parking space if adequate screening and design measures as approved by the zoning administrator are approved. No additional parking in addition to that required for the primary use shall be required.

    3.   An attendant shall be at the facility at all times during operational hours of the mobile recycling unit.

    4.   The MRU shall be located outside of required building setback areas as approved by the zoning administrator.

    5.   MRUs shall be limited to the collection of redeemable paper, and empty beverage containers made of glass, plastic, aluminum beverage, and bimetals, and other recyclable materials as approved by the zoning administrator.

    6.   MRUs shall be permitted as an accessory use to a permitted use.

    7.   Unless otherwise required by state regulations, one directional and information sign for each MRU site no more than one foot by three feet shall be permitted. This sign shall be placed, painted or otherwise permanently affixed to an MRU.

    d.   Recycling Plant (Processing Plant).

    1.   All outdoor storage of salvageable recycled materials (e.g., non-processed recyclable materials) shall be contained within bins that are located on a paved area on the rear one-half of the project site, or located within a fully enclosed building or structure. No open, loose, bulk or aggregate storage shall be permitted.

    2.   All outdoor storage of processed recycled materials shall be prepackaged or stored in an enclosed container within the rear one-half of the project site. No open loose, bulk, or aggregate storage shall be permitted.

    3.   Outdoor storage plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city, L.A. County sheriff’s department and L.A. County fire department, L.A. County health department, and city of Pico Rivera.

    4.   All outdoor storage containers and outdoor operations shall be enclosed by view-obscuring walls, fences, gates, or buildings. No storage containers shall be seen from a public right-of-way or from any residential land use.

    5.   All processing and other similar activities shall occur entirely within an enclosed building.

    6.   A recycling plant, upon planning commission approval of a conditional use permit may accept used motor oil for recycling from consumers or other used oil generators for distribution in accordance with Sections 25250.1 1 of the California Health and Safety Code. No reclamation processing of used oil is permitted.

    7.   The ambient noise level shall not be increased above existing noise levels as measured at any property line as a result of this permitted activity.

    8.   The recycling facility plant shall comply with signage and off-street parking code standards.

    9.   The delivery of biodegradable refuse (e.g., garbage or food wastes) shall not be permitted. Any incidental amounts of biodegradable refuse materials enters the site shall be removed by the next working day or within the next forty-eight hours of it entering the site, whichever is sooner. All incidental refuse material shall be placed in containers or within an existing structure until such time that this waste material is removed from the project site.

    10. Liquid wastes, hazardous and biodegradable materials, including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides, batteries and other similar materials shall not be permitted on the site.

    11. As applicable, the owner and operator of the facility shall prevent or eliminate immediately any nuisance created by dust, odors, blowing material, litter, ponding water, noise or other nuisance. Inspections, as necessary, by the L.A. County department of health and city of Pico Rivera, mitigating nuisances may be required on a case-by-case basis.

    12. All buildings and structures within the site shall be rodent-proofed and any rodent infestation shall be controlled immediately. Inspections, as necessary, by the L.A. County department of health and city of Pico Rivera, mitigating impacts may be required on a case-by-case basis.

    13. Any infestation or accumulation of flies or other insects of public health significance shall be immediately controlled. Inspections, as necessary, by the L.A. County department of health and city of Pico Rivera, mitigating impacts may be required on a case-by-case basis.

    14. In anticipation of emergency situations (e.g., breakdown of facilities, power failure, landfill closure), provisions shall be made to ensure nonsalvageable waste materials will be properly contained and that no continuous storage of nonsalvageable material be allowed. Unless otherwise approved by the zoning administrator, nonsalvageable materials shall be removed within forty-eight hours.

    15. Any representative of a regulatory governmental agency shall be permitted access to the recycling plant at any reasonable time for the purpose of obtaining information or inspecting operations.

    16. Burning of wastes shall be prohibited.

    17. Fire protection and prevention facilities, including, but not limited to, fire sprinklers, shall be provided in a manner subject to approval of the fire marshal.

    18. A detailed site plan, building elevations and operations plan, illustrating improvements such as building, parking, outdoor storage, use of equipment, processing operations, transport routes, shall be subject to review and approval.

    19. A recycling plant shall not be located on a property located within four hundred feet of a lot zoned residential or open space or any property containing a public institutional land use (e.g., church, school, park or library).

    20. As applicable, the applicant and operator of a recycling plant shall bear the full administrative costs of monitoring and inspection activities to be conducted by city staff or consultant representatives. An annual permit fee and fine schedule shall be prepared and approved prior to any recycling-related use being established. Failure to pay the city all fees and/or fines shall constitute a zoning code violation.

    e.   Recycling Station.

    1.   All storage of salvageable recycled materials (e.g., nonprocessed recyclable material) shall be contained within bins that are located on a paved area in the rear one-half of the project site or located within a fully enclosed building or structure. No open, loose, bulk or aggregate storage shall be permitted.

    2.   Outdoor storage plans shall be reviewed and approved by the city, L.A. County sheriff’s department and L.A. County fire department, L.A. County health department, and city of Pico Rivera.

    3.   All outdoor storage containers and operations shall be totally enclosed by view-obscuring walls, gates, fences or buildings. No storage containers shall be seen from a public right-of-way or from any residential land use.

    4.   Recyclable material delivered to the site shall be presorted, and shall include no hazardous or biodegradable wastes.

    5.   No processing activities shall be permitted.

    6.   The ambient noise level shall not be increased above existing noise levels as measured at any property line.

    7.   The recycling station shall comply with signage and off-street parking code standards.

    8.   The site shall not be located on a property within four hundred feet of a lot zoned for residential or open space purposes or any property containing a public institutional land use (e.g., church, school, park or library).

    9.   The delivery of biodegradable refuse (e.g., garbage or food wastes) shall not be permitted. Any incidental amounts of biodegradable refuse material enters the site shall be removed by the next working day or within the next forty-eight hours of its entering the site, whichever is sooner. All incidental refuse material shall be placed in containers or within an existing structure until such time that this material is removed from the project site.

    10. Liquid wastes, hazardous and biodegradable materials, including, but not limited to, food, beverages, drugs, cosmetics, hazardous chemicals, poisons, medical wastes, syringes, needles, pesticides, batteries, and other similar materials shall not be permitted on the site.

    11. As applicable the owner or operator of the facility shall prevent or eliminate immediately any nuisance created by dust, odors, blowing material, litter, ponding water, noise, rodents, infestations, or other nuisances. Inspections, as necessary, by the L.A. County department of health and city of Pico Rivera, mitigating nuisances may be required on a case-by-case basis.

    12. All buildings and structures within the site shall be rodent-proofed and any rodent infestation shall be controlled immediately. Inspections, as necessary, by the L.A. County department health and city of Pico Rivera, mitigating nuisances may be required on a case-by-case basis.

    13. Any infestation or accumulation of flies or other insects of public health significance shall be immediately controlled. Inspections, as necessary, by the L.A. County department of health and city of Pico Rivera, mitigating nuisances may be required on a case-by-case basis.

    14. Any representative of a regulatory governmental agency shall be permitted access to the recycling plant at any reasonable time for the purpose of obtaining information or inspecting operations.

    15. A detailed site plan, building elevations and operation plans illustrating improvements, such as building storage, parking, signage, and provisions for site supervision and security shall be subject to review and approval by the zoning administrator.

    f.    General Requirements.

    1.   All recycling facilities require a separate business license.

    2.   All recycling facilities must post city licenses and phone contact for site maintenance and operation.

    3.   Excepting for permitted signage, no advertisement for any product or use other than material(s) to be recycled may be affixed to a machine, collection unit, or other facility visible to the public.

    4.   All facilities immediately accessible to the public must be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and serviced on a daily basis. This shall include washing, sweeping and other cleaning activities. As needed, a trash receptacle shall be provided at each recycling facility as determined by the zoning administrator.

    5.   A plan of operation including correctly dimensioned site plans of the facility, actual days and hours of operation, anticipated volume of recyclable and nonrecyclable materials to be collected and any other information as requested by the zoning administrator shall be submitted for review and approval.

    6.   The name and phone number of the person responsible for the recycling facility site and hours of operation shall be visible to the public; other signage as permitted by this code or required by state regulators shall be reviewed and approved by the community development department, planning division.

    7.   Operation hours of the recycling facility shall be at least the operating hours of the primary use.

    8.   The recycling facility shall be illuminated to ensure a comfortable and safe operation, if operating hours fall between dusk and dawn.

    9.   The operator and primary business of any recycling facility shall remove any and all recyclable materials which have accumulated or are deposited outside a designated container, bin or enclosure intended as receptacles for such materials within a twenty-four hour period. Upon failure to immediately remove said material, the city may deem them to be abandoned and may enter the site to remove the materials. The property owner(s) of the premises and the operator of the facility shall be liable for full costs of such clean-up work completed by the city.

    10. As necessary, a litter and debris plan for on- and off-site impacts shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator.

    11. Violation of any condition of any terms set forth may result in the issuance of a notice of noncompliance certificate by the city of Pico Rivera and be cause for the immediate closing of the facility until such times as the violations are corrected to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.

 

    12. As determined by the zoning administrator, a periodic report providing such information as the weight, volume and type of recyclable material, and nonrecyclable material received, shall be provided to the community development department, planning division.

    Note 70. Modular classroom/offices must abide by zoning and Uniform Building Code requirements in regards to placement and installation. Trailers to be screened from neighboring residential properties and public right-of-way. Architectural design to complement existing structures and minimize modular appearance. It is not the intent of this section to encourage modular units in lieu of permanent structures. Total square footage of modular units not to exceed twenty-five percent of existing permanent classroom space. Such units allow for private education institutions Grades K through 8.

    Note 71. Effective March 23, 2006, self-storage facilities as defined in Section 18.04.604 are not permitted in any zone in the city; provided, however, that this provision shall not effect self-storage facilities that are in operation or have received city entitlements prior to such date.

    Note 72. The following regulations shall apply to check cashing establishments:

    a.   Distance Requirements. A minimum distance of two thousand six hundred forty feet (one-half of a mile), as measured from property line to property line, shall be maintained between any two check cashing establishments.

    b.   The establishment shall comply with the state of California Department of Justice regulations for Check Cashers Permit Program set forth in the California Code of Regulations, Title 11, Division 1, Chapter 13.5 and maintain an active check cashers permit at all times.

    Note 73. Emergency Shelters. Emergency shelters for homeless persons shall be subject to and comply with the following standards and regulations.

    a.   A single emergency shelter for twenty occupants, or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed twenty occupants, shall be allowed as a permitted use, consistent with Section 65583(4)(A) of the Government Code. All emergency shelters, regardless of the number of occupants, shall meet all applicable development standards applicable to the zoning districts in which they are permitted by-right and minimum standards contained herein below. Any emergency shelter with a capacity greater than twenty occupants shall also be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, as set forth in Chapter 18.56.

    (i)   A single emergency shelter for twenty occupants or a combination of multiple shelters with a combined capacity not to exceed twenty occupants shall be allowed as a permitted use per Chapter 18.39. The emergency shelter overlay zone shall be applied to the area located south of Beverly Boulevard, north of the Union Pacific Railroad, east of Tobias Avenue and west of the San Gabriel River.

    b.   The facility shall operate on a first-come, first serve basis with clients only permitted on-site and admitted to the facility between six p.m. and seven a.m. during Pacific Daylight Time, and five p.m. and seven a.m. during Pacific Standard Time. Clients must vacate the facility by eight a.m. and have no guaranteed bed for the next night. A curfew of ten p.m. (or earlier) shall be established and strictly enforced and clients shall not be admitted after the curfew.

    c.   To avoid over-concentration of emergency shelter facilities, a minimum distance of three hundred feet shall be maintained from any other emergency shelter, as measured from the property line.

    d.   Emergency shelters shall not be located within one thousand feet of a public or private school (pre-school through twelfth grade), universities, colleges, student housing, senior housing, child care facilities, public parks, businesses licensed for on- or off-site sales of alcoholic beverages or parolee/probationer home as defined in Chapter 18.04 (Definitions) and as measured from the property line.

    e.   Service providers shall provide sufficient numbers of male and female toilets (restrooms) for clients and prospective clients to have access to use on a twenty-four-hour basis. For group housing and other similar shelter programs, adequate private male and female showers shall be provided along with lockers for clients to temporarily store their belongings.

    f.    Any outdoor storage, including, but not limited to, items brought on-site by clients for overnight stays, shall be screened from public view by a minimum six-foot tall decorative wall or fence. Shopping carts are not permitted on-site.

    g.   Adequate waiting areas must be provided within the premises for clients and prospective clients including ten square feet per bed, minimum one hundred square feet to ensure that public sidewalks or private walkways are not used as queuing or waiting areas.

    h.   Facility improvements shall comply with the Pico Rivera Municipal Code and the most current adopted Building and Safety Code, specific to the establishment of dormitories and shall additionally provide:

    (i)   A minimum of one toilet for every eight beds per gender.

    (ii)  A minimum of one shower for every eight beds per gender.

    (iii) Private shower and toilet facility for each area designated for use by individual families.

    i.    An emergency shelter facility shall provide off-street parking at the ratio of one space per four beds, and/or one-half per bedroom designated as a family unit with children, plus one space per staff member. Service providers are responsible to provide and maintain adequate parking and freight loading facilities for employees, clients and other visitors who drive to the premises.

    j.    Bike rack parking shall be provided at the facility.

    k.   Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property per the lighting standards of Section 18.44.050 of this code.

    l.    The facility may provide the following services in a designated area separate from sleeping areas:

    (i)   A recreation area inside the shelter or in an outdoor area visually separated from public view by a minimum six-foot tall visually screening decorative wall or fence.

    (ii)  A counseling center for job placement, educational, health care, legal services, or mental health services.

    (iii) Laundry facilities to serve the number of clients at the shelter.

    (iv) Kitchen and dining area.

    (v)  Client storage area.

    m.  Similar types of facilities to address the needs of homeless clients, as determined by the zoning administrator. A shelter management plan shall be submitted as a part of the permit application, which addresses all of the following:

    (i)   Service providers shall maintain sufficient monetary resources to enable them to operate the facility per the shelter management plan, and shall demonstrate to the city prior to approval of the permit application that such funds shall be available for use upon first occupancy of the proposed project and shall reasonably be expected to be available for the life of the project.

    (ii)  A minimum of one staff member per fifteen beds shall be awake and on duty when the facility is open. Facility staff shall be trained in operating procedures, safety plans, and assisting clients. The facility shall not employ staff who has been convicted of a felony or who are required to register as a sex registrant under Penal Code Section 290.

    (iii) Service providers shall maintain up-to-date information and referral sheets to give clients and other persons who, for any reason, cannot be served by the establishment.

    (iv) Service providers shall provide criteria to screen clients for admittance eligibility, with the objective to provide first service to individuals with connections to Pico Rivera.

    (v)  Service providers will maintain information on individuals utilizing the facility and will ensure that the maximum stay at the facility shall not exceed one hundred twenty days in a three hundred sixty-five day period.

    (vi) Service providers shall continuously monitor waiting areas to inform prospective clients whether they can be served within a reasonable time. If they cannot be served by the provider because of time or resource constraints, the monitor shall inform the client of alternative programs and locations where he or she may seek similar service.

    (vii)  Service providers will educate on-site staff to provide adequate knowledge and skills to assist clients in obtaining permanent shelter and income, including referrals to outside assistance agencies. An annual report on this activity will be provided to the city.

    (viii) Service providers shall provide for the timely removal of litter attributable to clients within the vicinity of the facility every twenty-four-hour period.

    (ix) Service providers will maintain good communication and have procedures in place to respond to operational issues which may arise from the neighborhood, city staff, or the general public.

    (x)  Service providers shall establish standards for responding to emergencies and incidents expelling clients from the facility. Re-admittance policies for clients who have previously been expelled from the facility shall also be established.

    (xi) Alcohol and illegal drug use is prohibited on-site. Service providers shall expel clients from the facility if found to be using alcohol or illegal drugs.

    (xii)  The establishment shall implement other conditions and/or measures as determined by the city, in consultation with other city/county agencies necessary to ensure that management and/or clients of the establishment maintain the quiet, safety and cleanliness of the premises and the vicinity of the use.

    (xiii) Other requirements as deemed necessary by the city to ensure that the facility does not create an adverse impact to surrounding properties.

    (xiv) On a monthly basis, provide an updated list of emergency shelter residents to the sheriff’s department.

    (xv) All graffiti on the premises shall be removed by the business operator within twenty-four hours.

    (xvi) Installation of anti-loitering signs.

    n.   The facility shall comply with all other laws, rules, and regulations that apply including, but not limited to, Building and Fire Codes. The facility shall be subject to city inspections prior to the commencement of operation. In addition, the city may inspect the facility at any time for compliance with the facility’s management plan and other applicable laws and standards.

    o.   Emergency shelter operator shall obtain a city business license.

    Note 74. Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Units. Single-room occupancy (SRO) units, also known as efficiency units, shall be subject to and comply with the following standards and regulations.

    a.   Each SRO facility shall comply with all applicable development standards for the applicable zoning district and minimum standards contained herein below.

    b.   Units shall have a minimum size of two hundred square feet and a maximum of four hundred square feet.

    c.   Each unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons.

    d.   Exterior lighting shall be provided for the entire outdoor and parking area of the property per the lighting standards of Section 18.44.050 of this code.

    e.   Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate enclosed room at the ratio of one washer and one dryer for every twenty units of fractional number thereof, with at least one washer and dryer per floor.

    f.    A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO (efficiency) unit facility.

    g.   Each unit required to provide a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

    h.   Each unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, functioning cooking appliance and a refrigerator, each having a clear working space of not less than thirty inches in front.

    i.    Each SRO (efficiency) unit shall have a separate closet.

    j.    SRO (efficiency) units shall comply with all requirements of the California Building Code. All units shall comply with all applicable accessibility and adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible.

    k.   An SRO (efficiency) unit project shall not be located within five hundred feet of any other SRO (efficiency) unit project, emergency shelter, or other similar program, unless such program is located within the same building or on the same lot.

    l.    An SRO (efficiency) unit project with ten or more units shall provide on-site management. A project with less than ten units may provide a management office off-site.

    m.  Tenancy of SRO (efficiency) units shall not be less than thirty days and maximum period of twelve months.

    n.   SRO (efficiency) unit parking shall be provided as follows:

    (i)   One uncovered parking space for every three SRO (efficiency) units.

    (ii)  Two uncovered parking spaces for an on-site manager unit.

    (iii) Each efficiency unit shall be provided at least one lockable bicycle parking space in a location that is adjacent to that SRO (efficiency) unit.

    o.   Applications for SRO (efficiency) units projects shall be processed in a manner consistent with procedures for multiple-family residential projects.

    Note 75. Second Dwelling Units. Second dwelling units shall be subject to and comply with the following standards and regulations.

    a.   This section provides standards for the establishment of secondary dwelling units. Pursuant to Government Code 65852.2 local governments have the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote second units. A second unit which conforms to the requirements of this section shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located and shall be deemed to be a residential unit which is consistent with the general plan and zoning classification for the lot.

    b.   The application for a secondary dwelling unit shall be considered a ministerial action without discretionary review or a public hearing, notwithstanding any other requirements of state law or this development code. The permit applicant shall be the owner and resident of the main dwelling.

    c.   One secondary dwelling unit shall be allowed on a single-family parcel.

    d.   A parcel proposed for a secondary dwelling unit shall comply with all the following requirements:

    (i)   The parcel shall have a minimum area of the underlying zoning district;

    (ii)  The parcel shall be developed with only one existing owner occupied single-family detached main dwelling unit;

    (iii) Either the principal or secondary living unit shall be the primary residence of the record owner of the property; and

    (iv) A secondary dwelling unit shall not be sold, but may be rented. A covenant shall be recorded in the Los Angeles County clerk’s office against the title declaring that the property owner must occupy either the primary residence or the secondary dwelling unit.

    e.   A secondary dwelling unit may be either attached to the existing dwelling or detached from the existing dwelling and located on the same lot as the existing dwelling.

    f.    A secondary dwelling unit shall:

    (i)   Have a floor area not exceeding thirty percent of the existing living area of the main dwelling;

    (ii)  Be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling unit and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of height, roofing, bulk and mass, landscaping, and architectural materials;

    (iii) Comply with height and setback requirements for the applicable zone;

    (iv) Contain separate kitchen and bathroom facilities and have a separate entrance from the main dwelling;

    (v)  Not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet; and

    (vi) Have a designated open space area of three hundred square feet directly adjacent to the second unit.

    g.   The secondary dwelling unit shall be provided one covered garage off-street parking space, in addition to that required for the main dwelling unit, in compliance with Chapter 18.44.

    h.   The following findings shall be made, in addition to those requirements to approve a site plan:

    (i)   The secondary dwelling unit is compatible with the design of the main dwelling unit and the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, exterior treatment, height, setbacks and landscaping, and will not cause excessive noise, traffic, or other disturbances or result in adverse effects on public services and resources; and

    (ii)  The secondary dwelling unit will not contribute to a high concentration of these units sufficient to change the character of the surrounding neighborhood.

    Note 76. A project shall be approved with a streamlined administrative site plan/zoning consistency review only for properties identified in the 2014-2021 Housing Element to meet the Regional Housing Needs Assessment. Landowners and developers that propose uses, structures, designs and site improvements shall comply with the following:

    a.   Application. The applicant shall submit a site plan application/zoning consistency review to the zoning administrator with the number of prints of the plans specified, together with a filing fee. The contents of the site plan review applicant shall be specified by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall require a parking, traffic, noise or any other study as necessary.

    b.   Completeness. If the zoning administrator determines the application to be incomplete, the applicant will be notified within thirty days, indicating what additional information is required to complete the application. The application will not be processed until that information is received by the city planner.

    c.   Findings. The zoning administrator shall make the following findings in approving or conditionally approving an application for review:

    (i)   That the site plan is consistent with the goals and policies of the general plan;

    (ii)  That the proposed development is in accordance all provisions of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code;

    (iii) That the proposed development’s site plan and its design features, including architecture and landscaping will integrated harmoniously and enhance the character and design of the site, the immediate neighborhood, and the surrounding areas of the city;

    (iv) That the site plan and location of the buildings, parking areas, signs, landscaping, luminaries, and other site features indicate that proper consideration has been given to both the functional aspects of the site development, such as automobile and pedestrian circulation, and the visual effects of the development from the view of the public streets;

    (v)  That the proposed development will improve the community appearance by preventing extremes of dissimilarity or monotony in new construction or in alterations or in alterations of facilities; and

    (vi) That the site plan and design considerations shall tend to upgrade property in the immediate neighborhood and surrounding areas with an accompanying betterment of conditions affecting the public health, safety, comfort, and welfare.

    d.   Building Permit. A building permit shall be issued pursuant to the site plan approval. If there is a substantial change from the original site plan as determined by the zoning administrator, a revised application shall be resubmitted.

    e.   Appeal. Denial of the application by the zoning administrator may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18.64 of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

    Note 77. New live/work lofts permitted in vertical mixed-used developments only with direct access to street.

 

    Note 78. Existing legally nonconforming and former residential single-family units on major thoroughfares which have maintained the characteristics of a single-family unit may convert to a live/work space, provided a precise plan of design approval is obtained. Development of new single-family homes for the conversion to live/work space is not permitted. Only office uses permitted provided the applicant can provide parking for the required office and residential unit per Chapter 18.44.

    Note 79. Light industrial zoned properties with a mixed-use overlay may develop a standalone industrial development consistent with the base zone or a mixed use development. The property owner may not subdivide properties for the purpose of allocating land uses. The property owner must choose to continue the existing industrial land use or choose to develop the entire property under the mixed use overlay as of the adoption of this note. The mixed use component may not include an industrial land use. However, the property owner may choose to develop a standalone residential or commercial development.

    Note 80. Brewery. The following operations and property development regulations shall apply to brewery establishments:

    a.   The display of alcoholic beverages shall not be located outside of the brewery facility.

    b.   The purchase, consumption, tasting and sales of alcoholic beverages shall be limited to only those fermented and manufactured on site.

    c.   Ancillary retail sales shall be limited to only those retail items directly associated with the on-site brewery facility and accessory tasting room.

    d.   A security plan, including a video surveillance system and exterior lighting plan shall be submitted as part of the conditional use permit application.

    e.   No persons under twenty-one shall be permitted in the brewery and associated tasting room.

    f.    A State a California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control permit shall be obtained prior to operation.

    g.   There shall be no admission fee, cover charge, nor minimum purchase required.

    Note 81. Vending Machines and Lockers. The following vending machines, charity bins and storage lockers shall adhere to the following:

    a.   Movie rental vending machines shall be only placed inside a building within a commercial business.

    b.   Self-service parcel delivery service lockers shall only be placed inside a building within a commercial business.

    c.   Collection containers, boxes, bins, or receptacles for clothing and other personal property shall only be placed inside a building within a commercial business.

    d.   Water vending machines shall only be placed inside a building within a commercial business.

    e.   Propane tanks within lockers for retail sale are permitted at the exterior of a commercial business with a square footage of over ten thousand square feet or automobile service stations (gas stations). The applicant shall submit a site plan and elevation to be approved by the planning division.

    This note shall apply and only be allowed in the General-Commercial (C-G). (Ord. 1126 §§ 6, 8, 11, 2018; Ord. 1116 § 5, 2018; Ord. 1089 §§ 9, 10, 2014; Ord. 1087 § 6, 2014; Ord. 1085 § 5, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 11, 2014; Ord. 1066 § 6, 2011; Ord. 1057 § 8, 2009; Ord. 1053 § 5, 2009; Ord. 1018 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1000 § 4, 2003; Ord. 988 § 4, 2002; Ord. 934 §§ 5, 6 and 7, 1999; Ord. 932 § 4, 1999; Ord. 917 § 4, 1998; Ord. 912 § 9, 1998; Ord. 911 §§ 4, 5, 1998; Ord. 893 § 8, 1997; Ord. 892 § 8, 1997; Ord. 886 § 4, 1996; Ord. 857 §§ 11, 12, 1994; Ord. 852 §§ 28—43, 1994; Ord. 830 § 6, 1993; Ord. 823 §§ 10, 11, 1993; Ord. 799 §§ 4—5, 1991; Ord. 785 § 7, 1990; Ord. 765 §§ 18—20, 1989; Ord. 752 § 5, 1989; Ord. 751 § 5, 1989; Ord. 745 §§ 4, 5, 1988; Ord. 710 § 4, 1985; Ord. 652 § 3, 1982; Ord. 640 § 2, 1981; prior code § 9206.05)

 

18.40.060 Regulations non-exclusive.
    The provisions of this chapter regulating adult businesses are not intended to be exclusive, and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the city council of the city of Pico Rivera. (Ord. 988 § 6, 2002)

 

18.40.070 Public nuisance.
    Any adult business that is operating in violation of these provisions regulating adult businesses is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation. (Ord. 988 § 6, 2002)

Chapter 18.42 PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Article I. General Provisions
18.42.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish and set forth minimum property development regulations, conditions, requirements and limitations governing the development of property for uses of land in the various zone classifications, as established in Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 of this title. (Prior code § 9207.01)

 

18.42.020 Property development chart—Adopted.
    The chart and text illustrated in this chapter are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 9207.02)

 

18.42.030 Property development chart—Directions for use.
    The property development regulations chart is divided into twelve basic categories of minimum regulations for the development of property in the various zone classifications. In order to determine the zone in which the regulations apply, application and use of the chart is as follows:

    A.  Find the specific “Regulations” column in the chart set forth in Section 18.42.040.

    B.   Read across the chart to the zone column in which the regulation sought appears.

    C.   If a specific regulation appears in a zone column, this means that it is the minimum regulation required for the particular zone represented by the column in which the regulation appears.

    D.  If a specific regulation appears in a zone column with a parenthetic number or numbers, e.g., “10 acres (3, 9)” this means that the minimum regulation required for the particular zone represented by the column in which the regulation appears is also subject to compliance with the special development conditions, requirements and limitations set forth in subsection B of Section 18.42.050.

    E.   If only parenthetic numbers appear in a zone column, this means that the specific minimum regulation required for the particular zone represented by the column in which the parenthetic numbers appear is subject to compliance with the special development conditions, requirements or limitations set forth in and corresponding with the numbered conditions of subsection B of Section 18.42.050.

    F.   If neither a specific regulation, nor a parenthetic number appears in a zone column, this means that the governing regulation set forth in Section 18.42.040 in the “Regulations” column does not apply to the particular zone represented by the column. (Prior code § 9207.03)

 

18.42.040 Property development chart—Contents.
    The basic minimum property development regulations are categorized, enumerated and set forth in Table 18.42.040, the Property Development Regulations Chart, following this section.

 

 

 

Table 18.42.040

PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS CHART

(Part 1—R-E, S-F, R-I, PUD, R-M, and M-U Overlay Zones)

 

Zone

Regulations

R-E

S-F

R-I

PUD1

R-M

M-U Overlay

A

B

A. Lot Frontage and Access

(1)

(1)

(2)

(2)

(2)

(1, 3)

(1,3)

B. Size, Area & Frequency of Zone

 

 

0.5<2.5 Acres (Gross)

N/A

2.5 Acres (Gross)

 

 

C. Lot Area

15,000 sq. ft. (8)

6,500 sq. ft. (8)

4,200 sq. ft. (6)

1,500 sq. ft. (6)

2,600 sq. ft. (6)

12,500 sq. ft. (8, 9, 44)

 

D. Dwelling Unit Density

One per lot (10)

One per lot (11)

One per lot

1—30 DUs2 per acre (12, 13)

1—30 DUs2 per acre

30 DUs per acre (14)

30 DUs per acre (14)

E. Floor Area per Dwelling Unit. 1—6 deleted.

 

 

 

 

 

500 sq. ft. (15)

500 sq. ft. (15)

7. Senior citizens housing

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

F. Lot Size

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Lot width

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Corner or reverse corner lot

100 feet (8)

70 feet (8)

40 feet

N/A

40 feet

(19)

(19)

b. Interior lot

100 feet (8)

60 feet (8)

40 feet (42)

25 feet

40 feet (42)

(19)

(19)

2. Lot depth

150 feet (8)

100 feet (8, 18)

 

N/A

65 feet (42)

(19)

(19)

G. Yards

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Front

30 feet (20)

20 feet (20)

20 feet to garage, 15 feet to residence (any portion) Minimum 50% of front setback 20 feet

N/A

18 feet to garage, 15 feet to residence (any portion)

25 feet (20, 31)

15 feet (60)

2. Side

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Interior

10 feet (20)

5 feet (20)

4 feet (56)

N/A

4 feet (56)

5 feet (20, 23)

10 feet (20, 61)

b. Street

20 feet (20)

10 feet (20)

8 feet (56)

N/A

8 feet (56)

10 feet (20, 23)

10 feet (20)

3. Rear

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Case I

10 feet (20, 25)

5 feet (20, 25a)

50% minimum 20 feet and 50% minimum 15 feet

N/A

50% minimum 20 feet and 50% minimum 15 feet

10 feet (20, 25a)

(26)

b. Case II

15 feet (20, 25b)

10 feet (20, 25b)

 

N/A

 

15 feet (20, 25b)

(26)

c. Case III

20 feet (20, 25c)

15 feet (8, 20, 25c)

 

 

 

20 feet (20, 25c)

(26)

4. Projections

(8, 27)

(8, 27)

(27g)

N/A

(27f)

(27)

(62)

H. Building Heights

24 feet (28)

24 feet (28)

26 feet (28, 29)

26 feet (28, 29)

26 feet (28, 29)

28 feet (28, 29)

60 feet (58)

I. Lot Coverage

35% lot area (30)

40% lot area (30)

50%

80% lot area (30)

50%

50% lot area (30)

 

J. Location and Relationship of Buildings, Structures and Uses

(31)

(31)

(31a, b, c, d, e, f)

(31f, g, h, i)

(31f, g, i, j)

(31)

(31a, b)

K. Fences, Hedges and Walls

(32a, b, c, d)

(32a, b, c, d)

(32c)

 

 

(32a, b, c, d, e)

(32a, c, h)

L. Other Conditions, Requirements

(33—39, 47, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 57, 65)

(33—39, 47, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 57, 65)

(33, 40, 49, 50, 53, 54, 55, 57, 65)

(33—39, 49, 50, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(33—39, 40, 49, 50, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(33—39, 41, 42, 47, 48, 50, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(34, 35, 37—39, 41, 44, 45, 47, 50, 53, 55, 57, 63, 65)

1.  PUD development criteria to come entirely from Column “A” or Column “B.”

2.  These densities will be subject to general plan standards.

 

Table 18.42.040

PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS CHART (continued)

(Part 2—P-A, C-N, C-C, C-G, C-M, I-L and I-G Zones)

Regulations

Zone

P-A

C-N

C-C

C-G

C-M

I-L

I-G

A. Lot Frontage and Access

(1, 3)

(1, 3, 4)

(1, 3)

(1, 3)

(1, 3)

(1, 3)

(1, 3)

B. Size, Area and Frequency of Zone

 

1—1/2 acres (5, 7)

4—20 acres (7)

10 acres (7)

3 acres (7)

5 acres (7)

10 acres (7)

C. Lot Area

10,000 sq. ft.

12,000 sq. ft.

 

 

 

 

 

D. Dwelling Unit Density

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E. Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Senior Citizens Housing

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

F. Lot Size

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Lot width

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Corner or reverse lot

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Interior lot

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Lot depth

120 feet

150 feet

 

 

 

 

 

G. Yards

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Front

15 feet (20, 22)

15 feet (20, 22)

15 feet (20, 22)

15 feet (20, 22)

20 feet (20, 22)

25 feet (20, 21, 22)

25 feet (20, 21, 22)

2. Side

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a. Interior

(24)

(20, 23, 24)

(8, 20, 23, 24)

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

b. Street

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

(8, 20, 23, 24)

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

(23, 24)

3. Rear

(23, 26)

(23, 26)

(23, 26)

(23, 26)

(23, 26)

(23, 26)

(23, 26)

a. Case I

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b. Case II

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

c. Case III

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Projections

(27)

(27)

(27)

(27)

(27)

(27)

(27)

H. Building Height

42 feet (28)

24 feet (28)

38 feet (28)

42 feet (28, 48)

38 feet (28, 48)

38 feet (28, 48)

38 feet (28, 48)

I. Lot Coverage

60% lot area (30)

45% lot area (30)

60% lot area (30)

60% lot area (30)

60% lot area (30)

60% lot area (30)

60% lot area (30)

J. Location and Relationship of Buildings, Structures and Uses

(31-e, f, g)

(31-e, f, g)

(31-e, f, g)

(31-e, f, g)

(31-e, f, g)

(31-e, f, g)

(31-e, f, g)

K. Fences, Hedges and Walls

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

(32-a, c, d, f, i)

L. Other Conditions, Requirements and Use Limitations

(33—39, 43, 44, 45, 50, 51, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(33—39, 44, 45, 50, 51, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(34—39, 44, 45, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(34—39, 44, 45, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(34—39, 44, 45, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 57)

(34—39, 44, 45, 50, 52, 53, 55, 57, 65)

(34—39, 44, 45, 50, 52, 53, 55, 57, 65)

 

 

(Ord. 1126 § 10, 2018; Ord. 1116 §§ 20, 21, 2018; Ord. 1089 § 11, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 11, 2014; Ord. 1049 § 6, 2008; Ord. 922 § 6, 1999; Ord. 887 § 3, 1996; Ord. 880 § 3, 1996; Ord. 856 § 5, 1994; Ord. 852 § 44, 1994; Ord. 834 § 2, 1993; Ord. 823 § 4, 1993; Ord. 785 § 8, 1990; Ord. 765 §§ 21—23, 1989; Ord. 764 § 3, 1989; Ord.664 § 3, 1983; Ord. 559 § 1, 1977; prior code § 9207.04)

 

18.42.050 Special use conditions and chart notes.
    The regulations governing development of property set forth in Table 18.42.040, the Property Development Regulations Chart, as may be applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of this section, as follows:

    A.  Relationship to Chart. Special development conditions, requirements and limitations governing property development regu-lations indicated by a parenthetic number appearing in the zone column of the Property Development Regulations Chart, correspond to the specific numbered conditions, requirements or limitations set forth in subsection B of this section.

    B.   Development Conditions, Requirements and Limitations Enumerated. Special development conditions, requirements and limitations for the development of property set forth in Table 18.42.040, the Property Development Regulations Chart, are as follows:

    Note 1. Every lot shall have and maintain frontage along a publicly dedicated and improved street, and shall have unobstructed access to such street or to a publicly dedicated and improved alley.

    Note 2. Every lot shall be provided with a means of access to a publicly dedicated and improved street. For purposes of the R-I and PUD zoned districts, the front property line shall be considered that portion of property from which vehicular access is taken.

    Note 3. In the case when development occurs on a corner or reverse corner lot that has frontage along a major, secondary, collector or local street, or any combination thereof, as designated and defined in the circulation element of the general plan, the front lot line and permitted vehicular access to such lot shall be determined by that portion of the lot congruent with the right-of-way of the street designated as having the highest classification of traffic-generating capacity. All other lot lines shall be relative to such determined front lot as set forth herein.

    Note 4. Whenever property located in this zone classification abuts property located in the O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zone, such property shall be separated therefrom by a publicly dedicated and improved alley.

    Note 5. Frequency of the C-N zone shall not be established or applied on any property located within a radius of one thousand feet of another C-N zone.

    Note 6. This requirement shall apply only to an individually owned lot upon which a single-family dwelling unit is located.

    Note 7. The number of acres set forth shall be the minimum, except, in the case where a range is indicated, it shall be the minimum and/or maximum in order to establish or apply this zone classification on any property or a combination of properties.

    Note 8. See Section 18.08.110 of this title for regulations governing lots of record.

    Note 9. Except in selected areas of the community where it has been clearly demonstrated and established through the zone reclassification process that such areas possess those characteristics more closely associated with single-family residential neighborhoods, lots may contain less than twelve thousand five hundred square feet of lot area, but in no case shall the lot area be less than six thousand square feet.

    Note 10. Any lot having a lot area greater than the minimum required herein may be developed with more than one detached single-family dwelling unit. A lot qualifying for such additional dwelling unit development shall contain not less than fifteen thousand square feet of lot area for each such dwelling unit thereafter. In no case shall there be more than a total of four such dwelling units, and such development thereof shall be subject to a precise plan of design, as set forth in Article I of Chapter 18.48 of this title.

    Note 11. Any lot having a lot area greater than the minimum required herein may be developed with more than one detached single-family dwelling unit. A lot qualifying for such additional dwelling unit development shall contain not less than six thousand square feet of lot area for the first single-family dwelling unit and not less than five thousand square feet of lot area for each such dwelling unit thereafter. In no case shall there be more than a total of four such dwelling units, and such development thereof shall be subject to a precise plan of design, as set forth in Article I of Chapter 18.48 of this title.

    Note 12. The total number of dwelling units permitted shall not exceed or be less than the following distribution of dwelling unit densities:

    a.   Not less than fifteen percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted shall be developed at a density of eight dwelling units per acre;

    b.   Not less than twenty-five percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted shall be developed at a density of fourteen dwelling units per acre; and

    c.   Not more than sixty percent of the total number of dwelling units permitted shall be developed at a density of twenty dwelling units per acre.

    Note 13. When implementing the dwelling unit densities as hereinabove provided, such densities shall be distributed throughout the planned residential unit development project in order to obtain the maximum amount of dispersion. In no case shall there be more than twenty dwelling units grouped or clustered on any given acre of land within the project. Contiguous lots and/or attached dwelling units which are grouped or clustered in any manner so as to form or appear to form a single building or dwelling structure may be permitted; provided, however, that such grouping or clustering shall not contain more than six dwelling units and/or lots, nor shall the horizontal dimension of such building or dwelling structure exceed eighty feet.

    Note 14. The number of dwelling units permitted shall be subject to the following distribution of dwelling unit densities:

    a.   Lots containing six thousand square feet but not more than eight thousand five hundred square feet of lot area shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit for each three thousand square feet of lot area. Such lots shall be designated by the zone classification symbol “R-M-3000.”

    b.   Lots containing eight thousand five hundred square feet but not exceeding twelve thousand five hundred square feet of lot area shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit for each two thousand five hundred square feet of lot area. Such lots shall be designated by the zone classification symbol “R-M-2500.”

    c.   Lots containing twelve thousand five hundred square feet but not exceeding twenty thousand square feet of lot area shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit for each two thousand square feet of lot area. Such lots shall be designated by the zone classification symbol “R-M-2000.”

    d.   Lots containing twenty thousand square feet of lot area or more may be developed with any combination of dwelling unit densities as hereinabove set forth in paragraphs a, b and c of this subsection, and may also include but shall not be developed with more than one dwelling unit for each one thousand four hundred fifty square feet of lot area. Any such lot qualifying or approved for the exclusive development of one dwelling unit for each one thousand four hundred fifty square feet of lot area shall be designated by the zone classification symbol “R-M-1450.”

    e.   Apartment or residential complex designed, built, maintained for and occupied exclusively by senior citizens and/or physically handicapped persons may be developed to a greater density than otherwise permitted herein, such maximum density to be determined and prescribed by conditional use permit.

    Note 15. Each apartment or dwelling unit in a complex developed specifically and exclusively for occupancy by senior citizens and/or physically handicapped persons.

    Notes 16 and 17. Deleted.

    Note 18. Lots fronting on and/or backing up to a major or secondary highway, railroad or flood control right-of-way shall have a lot depth of not less than one hundred thirty feet.

    Note 19. Every lot shall have a lot width and depth as hereinafter required:

    a.   Lots containing six thousand to eight thousand five hundred square feet of lot area shall have a lot width of not less than sixty feet, and a lot depth of not less than one hundred feet. Corner or reverse corner lots shall have a lot width of not less than sixty-five feet. Lots fronting on or backing up to a major or secondary highway, or railroad or flood control right-of-way shall have a lot depth of not less than one hundred twenty feet.

    b.   Lots containing more than eight thousand five hundred up to twelve thousand five hundred square feet of lot area shall have a lot width of not less than eighty-five feet and a lot depth of not less than one hundred feet. Corner or reverse corner lots shall have a lot width of not less than ninety-five feet. Lots fronting on or backing up to a major or secondary highway, or railroad or flood control right-of-way shall have a lot depth of not less than one hundred thirty feet.

    c.   Lots containing more than twelve thousand five hundred to twenty thousand square feet of lot area shall have a lot width of not less than one hundred feet and a lot depth of not less than one hundred twenty-five feet.

    d.   Lots containing more than twenty thousand square feet of lot area shall have a lot width of not less than one hundred twenty-five feet and a lot depth of not less than one hundred sixty feet.

    Note 20. Yards and Open Spaces—Generally. Except as may otherwise be permitted in the provisions hereof, every required yard or open-space area shall be maintained completely open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, excluding natural landscape material. No such yard or open-space area provided for the purpose of complying with the regulations contained herein shall be considered in any way as providing required yards or open-space area for any other building or adjoining lot which is also subject to the provisions herein.

    a.   Every residential front yard shall be fully landscaped and irrigated with the exception of driveways leading to required parking and walkways not exceeding six feet in width. Landscaping shall be continuously provided and maintained free of all weeds, debris, overgrown vegetation and dead plant material. Every residential property shall have eighteen months from the adoption of the ordinance to comply with this section.

    b.   Nonconforming conditions shall comply with setback provisions set forth in Section 18.54.060 of this title.

    Note 21. In the case of a subdivision, the required front yards of lots along a block may be varied so as to maintain an average front yard of twenty-five feet, but in no case shall a front yard be less than fifteen feet.

    Note 22. This requirement shall also be subject to the following provisions:

    a.   Every required front yard shall be fully landscaped, and a complete landscape plan, showing the landscape design, schedule of plant material, location, and method of permanent irrigation, shall be prepared, submitted to and approved by the director of building and planning, and such landscaping shall be installed and planted according to such approved plan, and shall thereafter be continuously and permanently maintained. Off-street parking facilities may be located in any required yard area, except that the parking facilities shall not be closer than ten feet from the street property line.

    b.   Whenever the side lot line of a lot located in this zone abuts the side or rear lot line of a lot located in the O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zone, there shall be a front yard building setback equal to the yard required for the abutting lot, but in no case shall such front yard building setback be less than ten feet. This front yard building setback requirement shall apply whether or not an alley intervenes.

    Note 23. Whenever a building exceeds two stories in height, an additional five feet of yard area shall be provided for each story more than two.

    Note 24. No minimum side yard building setback shall be required, except as may hereinafter respectively apply or be required.

    a.   In the case of a corner or reverse corner lot, a side yard building setback of not less than fifteen feet shall be maintained along the side lot line abutting a street. Such side yard shall be fully landscaped, and a complete landscape plan, showing the landscape design, schedule of plant material, and location and method of permanent irrigation, shall be prepared, submitted to and approved by the director of building and planning, and such landscaping shall be installed and planted according to such approved plan, and shall thereafter be continuously and permanently maintained. Open off-street parking facilities may be located in any required yard area, except that the parking facilities shall not be closer than ten feet from the street property line.

    b.   Whenever the side lot line of a lot located in this zone abuts the side or rear lot line of a lot in the R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zone, there shall be a side yard building setback of not less than twenty feet. Not less than ten feet of such required side yard shall be fully landscaped. A complete landscape plan, showing the design, schedule of plant material and location and method of permanent irrigation, shall be prepared, submitted to and approved by the city planner, and such landscaping shall be installed and planted according to such approved plan, and shall thereafter be continuously and permanently maintained. This side yard building setback requirement shall apply whether or not an alley intervenes. A line of sight analysis shall be provided ensuring the privacy of the abutting residential properties in the R-E, S-F, R-I, PUD or R-M zone. Should privacy not be achieved with landscaping or other approved methods, the building shall be further set back until sufficient privacy has been determined by the zoning administrator. When not in conflict with building codes, windows facing residential properties shall be offset and/or raised to preserve privacy.

    c.   In the case of interior side setbacks for parcels located in the general-commercial (C-G) zone the setback shall not be less than five feet provided that windows are offset or raised to preserve privacy and that a landscaping plan is provided. A line of sight of plan analysis shall be provided for interior setbacks at the discretion of the zoning administrator.

    Note 25. Rear Yard. The following rear yards shall be maintained, as each case may apply:

    a.   Case I. This rear yard building setback shall apply when there are no door or window openings in the rear wall of the dwelling.

    b.   Case II. This rear yard building setback shall apply when there are door or window openings in the rear wall of the dwelling.

    c.   Case III. This rear yard building setback shall apply when a dwelling contains more than one story.

    Note 26. Rear Yard. A minimum rear yard building and landscaped setback of five feet shall be required, except, when a lot located in this zone abuts the side or rear lot line of a lot located in the R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zone, there shall be a rear yard building setback of not less than twenty-five feet. Not less than ten feet of such required rear yard shall be fully landscaped. A complete landscape plan, showing the design, schedule of plant material, and location and method of permanent irrigation, shall be prepared, submitted to and approved by the director of building and planning, and such landscaping shall be installed and planted according to such approved plan, and shall thereafter be continuously and permanently maintained. This rear yard building setback requirement shall apply whether or not an alley intervenes. A line of sight analysis shall be provided ensuring the privacy of the abutting residential properties in the R-E, S-F, R-I, PUD or R-M zone. Should privacy not be achieved with landscaping or other approved methods, the building shall be further set back until sufficient privacy has been determined by the zoning administrator. When not in conflict with building codes, windows facing residential properties shall be offset and/or raised to preserve privacy.

    Note 27. Projections Permitted into Required Yards. The following projections may be permitted to intrude or encroach into any required yard, but shall not occupy more than fifty percent of any required yard area, except paragraph e of this subsection. In the R-E and R-M zones, none of the following shall extend more than ten feet into a required front yard, and in the S-F zone, not more than six feet into a required front yard nor more than three feet into a side or rear yard, except paragraphs a, d, e and i of this subsection.

    a.   Arbor-type entry structures constructed or erected over driveways or other similar-type architectural features not exceeding sixteen feet in height;

    b.   Cornices, roof eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, bay windows, or such other similar architectural features;

    c.   Fireplace structures not exceeding a width greater than twelve feet, measured parallel with the wall or portion thereof of which it is or forms a part;

    d.   Stairways and balconies, open-roofed porches, platforms, walkways, and such other similar features. Walkways not exceeding four feet in width may be extended to the front property line. Walkways shall maintain a three-foot landscaped setback from an existing driveway or a one-foot setback if a raised planter is constructed of decorative block or brick between the entire length of the driveway and the walkway. The raised planter shall be permanently mounted onto the ground and must be a minimum of one foot in width and one foot in height. Walkways located directly adjacent to a driveway shall consist of decorative paving materials such as brick, scored or tinted concrete, aggregate concrete or other impervious materials so as to clearly distinguish the walkway from the driveway. Such pavers shall be used either as a decorative border or throughout the entire walkway area. Non-permanent or moveable pavers such as stepping stones, pebbles and river rocks are not permitted adjacent to a driveway. Parking is not permitted on any portion of the driveway;

    e.   Constructed landscape planter area not exceeding three and one-half feet in height above finished grade, natural landscape plant material and landscaping earth mounds and other similar features;

    f.    Planned unit developments (Column B only) permitted the following projections into the required yards:

    Side yards: one-foot projection on interior lot line for fireplace or chimneys.

    Rear yards: roofed, open sided patios must maintain a five-foot rear setback, inclusive of overhang. Patio coverage not to exceed fifty percent of the rear yard area. Barbecues, decks, or spas permitted to project into rear yard.

    g.   Residential infill zone developments permitted the following projections into required yards:

    Side yards: One foot projection for fireplaces or chimneys.

    Rear yards: Roofed, open sided patios must maintain a ten foot setback, inclusive of overhang. Patio and accessory coverage not to exceed fifty (50) percent of rear yard area. Patio slabs or decks may encroach within five feet of property line.

    h.   Such other features which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, will produce desired effects not detrimental to the general nature and character of the area.

    i.    Porte-cochere structures may encroach up to two feet into the required interior side-yard setback of single-family zoned lots, inclusive of the overhang. Porte-cochere structures may also project up to six feet into the required front-yard setback if attached to a permitted front porch. In such cases, the porte-cochere shall maintain the same setback as the front porch but shall not project more than six feet into the required front-yard setback.

    Note 28. No building or structure shall exceed this maximum building height, except in the case where the architectural design of a roof structure enhances the overall design features, such roof may project above the maximum height not more than six feet. Mechanical equipment, communications antennae or masts, chimneys, plumbing riser pipes, ventilators and similar such facilities located on or extending above the surface of any roof structure shall not be installed, placed, erected or maintained above the maximum building height permitted except for amateur radio/citizen band radio antenna and antenna support structures which shall be regulated by Section 18.40.050(B)(38). Any such facilities located on or extending above the roof surface shall be adequately screened and/or so designed as to present the monolithic visual appearance of being a part or feature of the building or structure that such facilities are intended to serve.

    Note 29. Buildings designed in such a manner as to form a split-level pattern that takes advantage of preserving and utilizing contours and terrain features may be permitted to exceed the maximum height, but in no case shall the height of the building be greater than thirty-four feet. Each building shall be so designed, constructed and/or arranged in such a manner that no portion of any given dwelling unit shall occupy an area or space above any part of another dwelling unit which is within same building or within a building that is attached.

    Note 30. Development on any lot shall not exceed this maximum amount of aggregate total building coverage except as indicated below:

    Forty-five percent lot coverage allowed for single-family residential zoned lots containing five thousand five hundred square feet or less.

    Note 31. The location and relationship of buildings, structures and permitted uses shall be subject to the following requirements:

    a.   No building or structure shall occupy any space or portion of a required yard, except as may hereinafter be specifically permitted.

    b.   Accessory buildings and dwellings or portions thereof may either be attached by means of a common wall, or there shall be a distance maintained between such buildings of not less than seven feet with the separation of any roof eaves at least four feet. In the case of two or more buildings classified for dwelling purposes, such buildings may be attached by means of a common wall, or there shall be a distance maintained between such buildings of not less than ten feet.

    c.   Accessory buildings or structures located in the rear one-third of the lot, and where there is no alley access, may be erected or constructed with a minimum three-foot setback. Where the rear and/or side lot lines of the lot abut an alley, the location of any such accessory buildings or structures shall maintain a distance of not less than fifteen feet from the centerline of such alley. Where the rear lot line abuts a publicly dedicated street, the location of such accessory structures shall maintain a ten-foot setback from rear property line. In any case where such accessory buildings or structures are located on a property line, adequate roof drainage facilities shall be provided to assure that drainage of the roof shall take place on the same lot with the building or structure such facilities are required to be provided for.

    d.   Swimming pools and spas may be located anywhere on the lot, except in any required side yard abutting a street or front yard provided that said structure maintains a distance of not less than three feet from all property lines or enclosed structures. A minimum distance of five feet shall be maintained to any residential door opening. Fencing and/or gates no less than five feet in height shall be provided in compliance with the adopted Uniform Building Code.

    e.   The location of all buildings, structures and/or accessory uses relative to corner cutoffs shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.28 of this code.

    f.    No building or structure shall occupy any space or portion of a required yard, except a freestanding advertising sign as regulated in Chapter 18.46 of this title.

    g.   The location of all buildings, structures and/or accessory uses relative to corner cutoffs shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.28 of this code.

    h.   Lot Regulations Pertaining and Relating to Open Space. Every lot upon which a dwelling unit is proposed to be developed shall be subject to the following regulations pertaining and relating to open space:

    (i)   Each lot shall be contiguous to and abut an open-space area or recreational area which has an average minimum width of forty feet, but in no case shall the minimum dimension be less than twenty feet in width.

    (ii)  There shall be not less than three hundred square feet devoted to usable open space for each dwelling unit, and such area shall be a separate private yard adjacent to such dwelling unit.

    i.    Regulations Pertaining to Open Space. As it pertains to a planned residential unit development, “open-space land” means that certain area within the boundaries of a planned residential unit development used exclusively as commonly owned land, excluding vehicular access areas, developed for recreational purposes, and shall include areas of scenic or natural beauty integrated throughout the development, and also means recreational areas of a noncommercial nature, parks and playgrounds, riding, hiking, bicycle and nature trails, and land which lends itself to the use of an open-space nature. Development and reservation of open-space land shall be subject to compliance with the following regulations:

    (i)   Open-space land shall comprise not less than forty percent of the gross area, excluding streets, alleys and vehicular access areas, and shall be permanently reserved and maintained as open space by means of a landscape maintenance district or other satisfactory means approved by the planning commission and city council, and shall only be used for open-space purposes. No building or structure shall be erected, placed or constructed thereon, except those buildings or structures which are determined to be of such nature so as to perform an open-space function.

    (ii)  All open-space land shall be landscaped and provided with a permanent irrigation system, and recreational facilities shall be installed as may be required through appropriate and applicable proceedings.

    (iii) A complete landscape and recreational plan, prepared by a licensed landscape architect, showing a schedule and location of all plant material, method of permanent irrigation, finished grades, and other recreational facilities, shall be submitted as a part of the project, approved through appropriate and applicable proceedings and developed in accordance with such approved plan.

    (iv) Landscaping of open-space land shall be planted and installed during and concurrent with the construction development period of the project.

    (v)  Planned unit developments utilizing the “B” development column to abide by all of the above except the following “open space land” requirements:

 

No. of Units

Open Space

0—20

250 square feet per unit

21—40

200 square feet per unit

41—60

175 square feet per unit

61—80

150 square feet per unit

81 +

125 square feet per unit

 

Note 32. Fences, Hedges and Walls. Fences, hedges and walls may be located anywhere on the lot subject to the following requirements:

    a.   A non-solid fence or wall not exceeding four and one-half feet in height may be permitted in any required front yard building setback area. Solid fences, walls and solid hedges shall not exceed three and one-half feet in height in the front yard setback. Pilasters of four and one-half feet in height constructed alongside and/or front property lines located adjacent to any driveway shall maintain a ten-foot setback from the front and/or side property line. Pilasters of four and one-half feet in height located along the front property line shall also maintain a ten-foot setback from the outside edge of any driveway. Non-solid walls greater than four and one-half feet in height within any required front yard, shall be subject to a precise plan of design, as set forth in Article I of Chapter 18.48 of this title.

    b.   Solid gates located within the front yard setback shall not exceed three and one-half feet in height. Wrought-iron gates located within the front yard setback shall not exceed four and one-half feet in height. Placement of gates on lots adjoining major, secondary or collector streets, as defined per the circulation element of the city general plan, shall maintain a twenty-foot front yard setback with the exception of electronically operated gates.

    c.   A fence, hedge or wall not exceeding six feet in height may be permitted anywhere on the lot to the rear of the required front yard building setback area.

    d.   In the case where a masonry wall is used, the appropriate number of courses necessary for construction thereof may be used for determining the maximum height permitted that would substantially conform with the provisions herein.

    e.   The location of fences, hedges and walls relative to corner cutoffs shall be subject to the requirements set forth in Chapter 17.28 of this code.

    f.    Whenever a lot located in the R-M zone abuts a lot in the O-S, R-E or S-F zone, a six-foot high, solid masonry wall shall be constructed, installed and erected continuously along all side and/or rear property lines abutting such O-S, R-E or S-F zoned property, except within any required front yard, in which case such wall shall be incrementally reduced to a height of not more than two and one-half feet within the front fifteen feet of the lot. In all cases, a building permit shall be obtained for the design and construction of the wall. If any alley intervenes, the required wall shall be located either on the R-M zoned property contiguous to the alley right-of-way, or on the O-S, R-E or S-F zoned property contiguous to the alley right-of-way.

    g.   Whenever a lot located in this zone abuts a lot in the O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zone, a six-foot high, solid masonry wall shall be constructed, installed and erected from finished grade of the commercial site continuously along all side and/or rear property lines abutting such O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zoned property, except within any required front yard, in which case such wall shall be incrementally reduced to a height of not more than two and one-half feet within the front fifteen feet of the lot. In all cases, a building permit shall be obtained for the design and construction of the wall. If an alley intervenes, the required wall shall be located either on this zoned property contiguous to the alley right-of-way, or on the O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD or R-M zoned property contiguous to the alley right-of-way.

    h.   A decorative six-foot block wall shall be constructed for all commercial and residential multi-family developments in rear and side setbacks.

    i.    Fence height may be exceeded up to ten feet in any zone provided there is a public safety issue associated with the increase and shall only be approved with a precise plan of design if a conditional use permit is not required as part of a larger development.

    Note 33. Animal, Poultry and Fowl Requirements. The keeping and maintenance of animals, poultry, fowl or other livestock in this zone may be permitted subject to the specific regulations set forth in Chapter 18.50 of this title.

    Note 34. Underground Utilities. All utility services and appurtenances, including electrical and communication services, shall be installed and located underground within the boundaries of the subject property, and shall be completely concealed from view. In no case shall there be any new or additional overhead electrical or communication facilities or utility poles placed, installed or erected in order to provide underground utility service facilities. However, when building permits are issued for additions, undergrounding shall be required where practical when the addition exceeds fifty percent of the floor area of the existing residence. The practicality of undergrounding shall be determined by the director of community development or designated representative.

    Note 35. Drainage Gutters and Downspouts. All building drainage gutters and downspouts located on the exterior wall of any building or structure shall be of ornamental design or such gutters and downspouts shall be completely concealed inside the building or structure.

    Note 36. Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment located on rooftop, ground level, or anywhere on the building or structure, shall be completely enclosed so as not to be visible from any public street and/or adjacent property with the exception of subsections a—c below.

    All other appurtenances of any type whatsoever, including plumbing vents located on the rooftop shall be painted to match the color of the roofing material. Multiple plumbing vents shall be combined wherever possible. Any metal chimney exceeding eight inches in diameter shall require screening designed to be an integral part of the dwelling. Plumbing pipes and vents shall be located within the structure or concealed to appear as part of the main dwelling.

    a.   Exterior relocation of water heaters may be permitted for single-family residential and single-family residential estate zoned properties provided that the water heater is placed along the rear half of the building and located within a metal or stucco enclosure painted to match their residence. Exposed vent pipes shall be painted to match the dwelling. Residential additions may incorporate water heaters within the structure.

    b.   Roof-mounted air-conditioning units shall not be permitted for single-family residential and single-family residential estate zoned properties unless the unit is physically unable to be installed in a ground-mounted location as determined by the building official.

    c.   Residential ground-mounted air-conditioning units shall be installed along the rear building wall or side yard, provided that a three foot side yard setback is maintained and screened from any public right-of-way view of single-family residential estate zoned properties. Exposed heating and air conditioning ducts shall be concealed to appear as part of the main structure.

    d.   Residential window air-conditioning ducts shall be permitted without screening provisions for single-family residential and single-family residential estate zoned properties.

    e.   New industrial and commercial development must screen roof-mounted equipment by a parapet wall on all sides of the building. Roof mounted equipment change outs must be screened by a parapet wall on all sides of the building unless it is determined by the community and economic development director to be a financial hardship. Accessory equipment such as ground-mounted modular equipment, vent pipes, stacks, catwalks or similar equipment to be painted to match building. Solid architectural or landscape screening may be required if accessory equipment is visible from neighboring residential or commercial property, or public right-of-way, subject to zoning administrator approval.

    Note 37. Sewerage. All property shall be served by and connected to a public sanitary sewer approved by and to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

    Note 38. Street Improvements. Any owner, lessee or agent proposing to develop any lot, or arranging for the construction of a building, dwelling or other structure, or portion thereof, on such lot shall also construct and install or cause to be constructed or installed all off-site improvements, as set forth in Chapter 12.44 of this code.

    Note 39. Drainage. All property shall be graded to drain to such drainage facilities as may be approved by the city engineer. A grading and/or drainage plan shall be prepared, submitted to and approved by the building and safety division of the department of building and planning, and such grading and/or drainage shall take place in accordance with such approved plan. Any change in grading and/or drainage shall first be approved by the director of building and planning and/or the city engineer prior to the commencement of such grading and/or drainage project.

    Note 40. Conditional Use Permit Required. A residential unit or planned residential unit development shall be established and permitted only by means of issuance of an approved conditional use permit pursuant to Chapter 18.56 of this title. Approval and issuance of the conditional use permit shall be based on the findings that the proposed planned residential unit development complies with the intent and purpose of the PUD zone, or that the residential unit development complies with the intent and purpose of the R-I zone.

    Note 41. Trash Area Requirements. There shall not be less than six square feet of enclosed trash area provided for every dwelling unit, and such trash area enclosure shall be designed and constructed of materials compatible with the main building structure.

    Note 42. For lots located in a cul-de-sac or facing similar physical constraints, the intent of this section will be met if the lot meets this dimension for a majority of the area of the lot, as shown in the following diagrams:



    Note 43. Precise Plan of Design Requirements. Any development proposed on a lot having a lot area greater than thirty thousand square feet shall first be subject to a precise plan of design, as set forth in Article I of Chapter 18.48 of this title. Any development proposed on a lot having a lot area greater than fifty thousand square feet shall first be subject to issuance of a conditional use permit, as set forth in Chapter 18.56 of this title.

    Note 44. Trash Area Requirements. There shall be not less than thirty-six square feet of enclosed trash area for every five thousand square feet of gross building floor area or fraction thereof, and such trash area enclosure shall be designed and constructed of materials compatible with the main building structure.

    Note 45. Uses of Land Restricted. Except for off-street parking and loading facilities, every permitted use of land shall be conducted within an entirely enclosed building unless specifically permitted in Section 18.40.040(D) and (E).

    Note 46. Mobilehome Parks. Development of mobilehome parks shall be subject to the property development regulations of the R-M zone classification in which the mobilehome park is to be located.

    Note 47. Outdoor Living Space. The following living space shall be provided:

    a.   R-E and S-F Zones. There shall be not less than one thousand square feet of outdoor living space located anywhere on the lot contiguous to a dwelling unit, except in any required front yard building setback area, and such dimension space shall have a minimum dimension of not less than ten feet.

    b.   R-M and R-M Variable Density Zone. There shall be one hundred fifty square feet of private open space provided for each unit for the first floor unit and one hundred square feet per unit for the upper floor. Such space shall have a minimum dimension of six feet. There shall be two hundred square feet of common open space provided for each unit. Such space shall have a minimum dimension of ten feet.

    Note 48. The building height may be increased one foot for each one foot setback from the front property line, in addition to the required setback.

    Note 49. Design Standards. Each single-family dwelling unit, including foundational mobilehome units, shall comply with the following design standards:

    a.   Exterior Siding. Each dwelling structure and additions thereto shall have exterior siding of wood, stucco, masonry, asbestos shingle, or other approved material which is formed and finished to give the appearance of such materials described in this subsection.

    b.   Roofing Materials. Each dwelling structure shall have a roof constructed of wood shake, shingle, asphalt composition, fiberglass shingle, crushed rock, tile, or other approved material. Metal roofing shall be prohibited, except that which is formed and finished to represent wood shake or tile or shingle, and excepting metal patio covers, when located on or to the rear of the structure.

    Note 50. All construction activities on any lot or parcel shall take place only between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. except for purposes of emergencies.

    Note 51. All new construction and additions five hundred square feet or greater shall be subject to approval of a precise plan of design. All new construction and additions of one thousand five hundred square feet or greater shall be subject to approval of a conditional use permit. If a conditional use permit is required for a project, then a precise plan of design is not required.

    Note 52. The following standard shall apply to all hazardous waste facilities:

    a.   Buffer zones and screening walls for all facilities shall be in accordance with federal, state and county guidelines and/or shall be determined by the director of building and planning after evaluation of any submitted risk assessment.

    Note 53. Development to comply with water efficient landscaping provisions set forth in Chapter 13.90 of this code.

    Note 54. Storage on the roof is prohibited except for legally permitted mechanical equipment.

    Note 55. Any new public facility, institutional, commercial, industrial building, or residential development of five units or more, or new construction that would add thirty percent to the existing floor area of same, shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 18.43 (recycling space allocation) of this title.

    Note 56. Zero lot line development permitted on one interior lot line, with a minimum eight-foot opposite side yard setback.

    Note 57. New construction must comply with Article II of this chapter, the public image enhancement program.

    Note 58. The maximum height from grade allotted is sixty feet or five stories for properties on major roadways as described per the Circulation Element of the General Plan. For properties not located on a major roadway, the height shall be that of the underlying base zone.

    Note 59. a. The maximum intensity (non-residential component of mixed-use project) shall be 1.0 floor area ratio (FAR). Podium or underground parking is not counted toward the FAR.

    b.   A minimum distance between buildings of ten feet for buildings up to twenty-five feet in height and twenty-five feet for buildings above twenty-five feet.

    Note 60. A minimum of a five-foot front landscaped setback required. The five-foot setback shall be allowed only when the setback is:

    a.   In-line with the front yard setback of adjacent buildings within plus or minus ten feet.

    b.   Has a major entrance from the front yard setback.

    c.   Achieves a pedestrian scale. See Design guidelines Note 63.

    Should (a) above not be achieved the setback shall be fifteen feet and shall require that (b) and (c) are met.

    Note 61. The minimum interior setback requirement shall be five feet for buildings under forty-two feet in height and/or located on major roadways as described per the Circulation Element of the General Plan. The minimum interior setback requirement shall be ten feet for properties not located on a major roadway and/or over forty-two feet in height.

    Note 62. Projections.

    a.   Balconies, porches, decks and stairways shall not be permitted to encroach into setbacks less than ten feet. Balconies shall not be permitted in rear and side setbacks when facing a residential structure(s).

    b.   Cornices, eaves, fireplaces and similar architecture features may encroach into any required setback provided a minimum of five-foot setback remains free and clear.

    c.   Walkways four feet in width permitted in front yard setbacks provided the walkway is perpendicular to a main entrance. Walkways located directly adjacent to a driveway shall consist of decorative paving materials such as brick, scored or tinted concrete, aggregate concrete or other impervious material so as to clearly distinguish the walkway from the driveway.

    d.   Open patios, carports in the rear one-third of the lot, may encroach into the rear side setback provided a minimum five-foot setback remains free and clear. Surface parking spaces in commercial developments may encroach in the rear setback provided a minimum five-foot setback remains free and clear.

    e.   Swimming pools may encroach into the rear yard setback provided a minimum five-foot setback remains free and clear. A minimum distance of ten feet shall be maintained to any building structure.

    Note 63. A conditional use permit shall be required for all mixed use developments whether standalone residential or commercial. Multi-family developments located on the housing opportunity sites (Housing Element sites identified in the General Plan) shall be approved by-right provided the development standards for the zone and the streamlined administrative review under Section 18.40.050 Note (76) are met. A minimum of twenty dwelling units per acre and maximum of thirty dwelling units per acre for the housing opportunity sites shall be required.

    Note 64. Design Guidelines.

    a.   Mixed Use/Residential Design Guidelines.

    1.   First floors shall clearly be distinguished from upper floors by a change in materials, colors, and style.

    2.   All visible building frontages shall be detailed with a similar level of architectural treatment as the primary frontage.

    3.   Primary building entries shall be accented with strong architectural definition such as distinctive building forms, design elements and materials.

    4.   Building façades shall include openings, recesses, changes in wall planes, doors, windows, and other elements to avoid large expanses of un-articulated walls.

    5.   Articulations shall add three-dimensional interest to the façade and not rely on “false” detailing.

    6.   Detailing of the building façades shall be integral to the architectural design and a permanent feature of the surface.

    7.   Building façades shall incorporate architectural detail, recessed widows, awnings, overhands and other elements that relate to the scale of a person.

    8.   Entrances to residential, office or other upper story uses shall be clearly distinguishable in form and location from retail entrances.

    b.   Building Elevations/Architecture. To ensure that buildings, particularly large structures, are designed with elements that relate to a human scale, the following should be incorporated into the design.

    1.   Commercial buildings shall be articulated to reflect a small-scale street frontage rhythm, with building bay widths of approximately twenty-five feet.

    2.   A ground floor retail use should have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of twelve feet and maximize transparency into the retail space.

    3.   Where multiple-tenant spaces are incorporated into a building, individual tenant spaces shall be located within the building bays. This can be achieved by any of the following:

    A.  Placing a column, pier or pilaster between façade elements.

    B.   Applying vertical slot or recess between façade elements.

    C.   Providing variation in plane along the building wall.

    D.  Varying the building wall by recessing the storefront entrance or creating an opportunity for landscaping or pedestrian area.

    c.   Materials.

    1.   Within a design theme, a variety of durable material and textures is strongly encouraged. Materials such as granite, marble, polished stones, and other panels should be used as accent materials on the building’s base.

    2.   In concert with the primary building material(s), a variety of materials is encouraged to articulate different building elements, such as the ground floor façade, the building base, horizontal break bands, pier or column bases, roof terminations, sills, awnings and similar building components.

    d.   Roofs. Roof design shall contribute to the overall building design.

    1.   The form, color and texture of the roofs shall be an integral component of the building design.

    2.   Roofline ridges and parapets should not run unbroken for more than seventy-five feet. Vertical or horizontal articulation is required.

    3.   Roofs should be compatible with the architectural style of the building.

    4.   The roof shape should reflect the configuration of the building’s mass and volume, and should be consistent in its character from all vantage points.

    5.   False fronts, applied mansard forms and other artificial rooflines that are not an integral component of the architectural design should be avoided.

    6.   All buildings shall provide cornice or parapet detailing in order to delineate a strong roofline along the primary façades.

    7.   Cornices and horizontal bands of genuine materials, such as wood trim rather than foam are strongly encouraged.

    8.   Reflective roofing materials shall not be used on roof surfaces that are visible from either ground level or elevated viewpoints, such as freeways.

    e.   Windows.

    1.   Upper story windows shall be detailed with architectural elements, such as projecting sills, molded surrounds and/or lintels.

    2.   Deeply tinted glass or applied films should be avoided.

    3.   Windows should maintain consistency in shape and location across the façade. Unifying patterns should include common windows and doors. The overall effect should create a harmonious pattern along the streetscape.

    f.    Awnings/Canopies.

    1.   Awning/canopies over building entries shall be incorporated into the design of the building, including colors and material detailing.

    2.   Backlighting of transparent or translucent awnings is discouraged.

    3.   Awnings on multi-tenant buildings should be the same color and style.

    4.   Awning design should be consistent with the character and design of the building.

    5.   The awning material should be compatible with the overall design of the building. The use of vinyl and plastic awnings are discouraged.

    g.   Exterior Lighting.

    1.   All exterior lighting should be designed to minimize glare, light trespass, and energy conservation. Full cut-off fixtures, mounting heights, and shielding should be utilized to effectively control glare and light trespass.

    2.   Pedestrian areas needs to be well-marked and well-lit. Pedestrian scale lighting should be incorporated into plazas, along paths, common open space and other pedestrian areas.

    3.   Lighting fixtures shall be attractively designed to complement the architecture of the project, signify building entry locations and improve visual identification of residences and businesses.

    h.   Mechanical Equipment. Rooftops should be designed in a way that acknowledges their visibility from other buildings and the street. Equipment shall be screened on all four sides from both the street and neighboring buildings using parapets. Should parapets not be used the mechanical equipment shall be enclosed within the attic space or ground mounted.

    i.    Walls.

    1.   A six-foot high masonry wall shall be constructed along the property line of any lot where construction of any mixed-use development is adjacent to property zoned and used for residential purposes. Breaks in walls may be provided to provide pedestrian access between mixed-use and adjacent residential developments where desired. A perimeter planter, minimum five feet in depth shall be provided along the wall. A landscape planter of one foot shall be provided for block walls facing an alley or public street to deter graffiti.

    2.   Walls shall have a decorative texture that matches the walls of the development.

    3.   All walls shall be painted with anti-graffiti coating.

    j.    Service Areas, Refuse Areas and Backflow Preventers.

    1.   Service areas, garbage receptacles, utility meters and mechanical and electrical equipment shall be located away from streets, pedestrian traffic and activity areas, and project and building entries.

    2.   Screening of these areas shall be integrated into the overall building and landscape design.

    3.   Trash enclosures shall be constructed to match the color, texture and architectural detailing that shall be consistent with the overall site and building design and with a six-foot high wall/gate.

    4.   Roofs of enclosures should be designed to complement the project buildings, roof style and colors.

    5.   Where trash compactors are visible, they shall be screened from public view within a trash enclosure or within a building volume.

    6.   Backflow prevention devices shall be fully screened from public view through the use of landscaping, berms, low walls or other screening techniques. They should be located inside the building where possible.

    k.   Shared Parking. Two or more uses may share parking facilities, subject to the approval of the community development director and the provisions of this section. A parking demand analysis for the uses proposed to share parking facilities shall be prepared. The parking demand analysis shall be prepared by a registered traffic engineer. When such analysis demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the director, that the uses have different peak parking requirements, then the parking space requirement may be reduced by the director. In no event, however, shall the parking requirement be reduced below the highest peak parking requirement of the use demanding the most parking. The following conditions shall apply.

    1.   The uses sharing the parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or contiguous lots.

    2.   A legal agreement shall be signed by all parties sharing parking facilities. Such agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and community development director, shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County recorder’s office, and shall continue to be valid upon change of ownership of any property subject to the agreement or any lawfully existing building or structure on said properties.

    l.    Landscaping.

    1.   Development in the mixed-use overlay should have extensive landscaping of large parking areas, along streetscapes and for pedestrian-oriented spaces. Landscaping can also help to define areas and separate areas thereby bringing a human scale to these intense uses.

    2.   Parking lots shall be landscaped to improve the views of parking areas and to help reduce the apparent size and amount of impervious surface as further defined in Section 18.44.050, Note 18.

    3.   Parking lots, loading and maintenance areas shall be screened to reduce the negative visual impact of parking lots and parked vehicles. Screening also improves the edge of the streetscape and helps to define the street.

    4.   All landscaping shall comply with the water efficient landscape provisions of Chapter 13.90.

    m.  Screening of Above-Ground Parking Garages. Parking floors within multi-story parking garages must be screened or concealed by one or more of the following methods:

    1.   Ground-Floor Retail/Office. When a parking garage is proposed for a street where the predominant use is retail or office, the garage’s ground-level street frontage (except for driveways and pedestrian entrances) must be improved with retail, office or other active use types as permitted by the zoning district.

    2.   Ground-Floor Residential. Ground-floor residential uses may be used to conceal a parking garage.

    3.   Landscaping is required for all parking garages (except fully enclosed garages) at ground level or on each street façade above ground-level in the form of perimeter planters with openings and the incorporation of hanging baskets, flower boxes or planting trellises.

    4.   A parking garage that does not incorporate ground-floor nonresidential or residential use or is not otherwise screened or concealed at street frontages on the ground level, must provide a densely planted landscape perimeter that is a minimum ten feet in depth.

    n.   Maintenance of Buildings, Structures and Parking Lots. All buildings, structures and parking lots shall be maintained to protect the appearance, character and integrity of nonresidential zoned properties and promote a safe and decent environment by establishing minimum standards as they relate to the maintenance of nonresidential buildings and structures.

    o.   Underground Utilities. All utilities shall be underground and aboveground equipment shall be located away from major pedestrian streets and corners. Equipment boxes and vaults must be placed in back of the sidewalk and where landscaping can minimize or screen their impact.

    p.   Usable Open Space Defined. Usable open space areas are an open area or an indoor or outdoor recreational facility which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. Usable open space shall not include any portion of parking areas, streets, driveways, sidewalks, or turnaround areas.

    q.   The following standards shall apply to the requirements for open space:

    1.   Private Residential Open Space.

    A.  For stand-alone multi-family residential projects or as part of a mixed-use development, each residential unit shall be provided with at least one area of private open space accessible directly from the living area of the unit, in the form of a fenced yard or patio, a deck or balcony at a minimum area of one hundred fifty square feet per unit for 1st floor units or one hundred square feet per unit for upper floors. (Mechanical equipment may not be located within the open space area.)

    B.   The minimum dimension, width or depth, of a patio, deck or balcony shall be six feet.

    C.   The minimum dimension, width or depth of a yard shall be ten feet.

    2.   Common Residential Open Space.

    A.  For stand-alone multi-family residential developments of over twenty units, each residential unit shall be provided with at least two hundred square feet of common residential open space.

    B.   All common open space shall be conveniently located and accessible to all dwelling units on the site.

    C.   Common open space areas may include landscaping, pedestrian paths, and recreational facilities. These recreational facilities could include:

    i.    Clubhouse.

    ii.   Swimming pool.

    iii.  Tennis court (one per court).

    iv.  Basketball court (one per court).

    v.   Racquetball court (one per court).

    vi.  Weightlifting facility.

    vii. Children’s playground equipment.

    viii. Sauna.

    ix.  Jacuzzi.

    x.   Day care facility (two).

    xi.  Other recreational amenities deemed adequate by the community development director.

    D.  In projects containing twenty or more units, the minimum width and depth shall be twenty feet.

    r.    This section provides operational and compatibility standards for the development of live/work units within the mixed-use overlay.

    1.   Allowed Uses.

    A.  The nonresidential component of a live/work unit shall only be a nonresidential use allowed within a mixed-use overlay zone, except that certain uses are determined to not be appropriate within a residential environment and are therefore prohibited as provided in subsection B, below.

    B.   The residential component of a live/work unit shall only be a residential use allowed within the MU overlay zone.

    2.   Any use or activity not identified in Table 18.40.040, or any use or activity not interpreted by the community development director, shall be prohibited.

    3.   Site Planning and Design Standards.

    A.  Each live/work unit fronting a public right-of-way shall have a pedestrian-oriented frontage.

    B.   Each live/work unit shall have a clearly identified, separate access from other live/work units within the structure or development. Access to individual units shall be from common access areas, parking lots, or walkways. Access to each unit shall be clearly identified to provide for emergency services.

    C.   The living space within the live/work unit shall be contiguous with the working space, with direct access between the two areas.

    4.   Operational Standards.

    A.  No portion of a live/work unit shall be separately sold or rented.

    B.   The owner or developer of a structure containing live/work units shall provide written notice to all occupants, tenants, and users that the surrounding area may be subject to higher impacts associated with nonresidential uses (e.g., noise) than exist in more predominantly residential areas.

    C.   All activities related to the “work” component of a live/work unit shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.

    D.  Up to two additional persons who do not reside in the live/work unit may work in the unit.

    E.   Client and customer visits to live/work units are allowed.

    F.   A live/work unit shall not be converted to either entirely a residential use or entirely a nonresidential use.

    G.  A live/work unit shall be limited to forty percent office or commercial use of floor area within a mixed use development.

    H.  A live/work use may display a window or building-mounted sign up to a maximum of five percent of the building frontage area used for commercial purposes. Signs shall not be illuminated, including neon signs.

    s.    Signage. All development within the mixed-use overlay zone shall have a “sign program” as part of the project design. The sign program shall identify the location for all signage that may be located on the building or freestanding, the allowable sign materials, lighting methods and sign design. The sign program will also require coordination for multiple buildings within a defined complex. In addition, temporary signs and banners will be included in the sign program, as to whether or not they are allowed, and if they are allowed, then where these signs may be located within the development project. At no time, shall the sign program allow for signage in excess of those standards within Chapter 18.46 (Signs and Advertising). “Box” signs, “canister” or “can” signs, painted signs, foam letters and neon signs are prohibited.

    Note 65. Bedrooms must be connected via a common hallway. (Ord. 1126 § 13, 2018; Ord. 1116 §§ 19, 22, 23, 2018; Ord. 1089 § 13, 2014; Ord. 1083 § 12, 2014; Ord. 1082 § 9, 2014; Ord. 1049 § 5, 2008; Ord. 922 §§ 7—11, 1999; Ord. 887 § 4, 1996; Ord. 880 §§ 4—8, 1996; Ord. 857 § 13, 1994; Ord. 856 § 4, 1994; Ord. 852 § 45, 1994; Ord. 834 §§ 3—10, 1993; Ord. 830 § 7, 1993; Ord. 823 § 5, 1993; Ord. 785 § 9, 1990; Ord. 765 §§ 24—32, 1989; Ord. 764 § 4, 1989; Ord. 664 § 4, 1983; prior code § 9207.05)

 

Article II. Public Image Enhancement Program
18.42.060 Purpose.
    The purpose of this section is to enhance the overall image of the city through aesthetic and cultural improvements. The program also serves to help implement the image enhancement program of the 1993 adopted city general plan. (Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

18.42.070 Fund created.
    There is created a fund to be known as the “public image enhancement fund” to account for fees paid pursuant to this article. The fund shall be maintained by the city treasurer, and shall be used solely for the implementation of the public image enhancement program. (Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

18.42.080 Applicability.
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all new development in residential zones of building valuation of one hundred thousand dollars or more, or for new or remodeled development in all commercial and industrial zones of building valuation of one hundred fifty thousand dollars or more. For the purposes of determining overall project applicability, the estimated valuation of the ultimate completed development proposal; or, in the case of phased development or phased subdivision, the overall estimated project valuation upon completion of the final phase shall determine applicability. Building valuation shall be computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the city building division. (Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

18.42.090 Fees.
    Fees are to be paid at time of certificate of occupancy issuance in the following amounts:

    Residential: 0.5% of building valuation. For an owner-constructed and -occupied single-family residential unit, the first one hundred thousand dollars of building valuation is exempt from fee calculations; fees shall be calculated based on valuations greater than one hundred thousand dollars. For all other uses, fees shall include the first one hundred thousand dollars of building valuation.

    Commercial or industrial: 1.0% of building valuation. Expenditure of fee may only be allotted for public space and right-of-way improvements. (Ord. 923 § 5, 1999; Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

18.42.100 Exemptions.
    The following projects are exempt from the provisions of this article:

    A.  Remodel of existing single-family development where such remodeling does not entail the complete demolition of the unit down to foundation;

    B.   Residential units covenanted for low or moderate income housing;

    C.   Seismic retrofit;

    D.  Reconstruction due to damage inflicted by an earthquake or natural disaster if so declared by the mayor of the city. (Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

18.42.110 Priority program.
    There is hereby established the public image enhancement priority program to delineate the categories and priorities of various public image enhancement projects. Such priorities shall consist of signage, landscape or median improvements at key entry points to the city; art in public places; street banners or pole flags; railroad overpass or overhead pedestrian crosswalk signage; median and parkway improvements or similar image enhancement programs as determined by the city council. The actual list of program priorities shall be adopted or amended by resolution of the city council upon recommendation by the planning commission. Specific project enhancements or expenditures from the public image enhancement fund can only be made for those enhancements contained in the priority program. (Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

18.42.120 Public image enhancement program approvals.
    The planning commission shall act as the advisory body to the city council involving expenditures from the public image en-

hancement fund. (Ord. 923 § 6, 1999; Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

18.42.130 Return of fees.
    Fees paid into the public image enhancement fund which are not committed within five years from the date of payment may be returned to the current owner of the development project, with all interest earned, if a written request for return is filed with the city clerk after the fifth year anniversary of payment, and refund of fees is approved by the city council. No refund shall be appropriate if the city council determines that the fee is needed for the public image enhancement program within an additional two years or that the administrative costs of refunding uncommitted fees pursuant to this article exceeds the amount to be refunded. (Ord. 887 § 5, 1996)

 

Article III. Density Bonus Provisions
18.42.140 Intent and purpose.
    This article provides incentives for the development of housing that is affordable to the types of households and qualifying residents identified in Section 18.42.150, below. The incentives include the ability to construct up to thirty-five percent more residential dwelling units than the maximum residential density permitted by the applicable general plan designation and applicable zoning, and other incentives provided by this chapter. In offering these incentives, this chapter is intended to implement the requirements of state law (Government Code Sections 65302, 65913, and 65915 through 65918 et seq.). In enacting this chapter, the city also intends to implement the goals, objectives and policies of the city’s general plan housing element to encourage the production of affordable housing in the city. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.150 Types of bonuses and incentives allowed.
    A.  Very Low and Lower Income Housing and Senior Citizen Housing. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one density bonus of twenty percent over the maximum residential density (except in the case of senior citizen housing, as provided below), provided that the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with one of the following criteria:

    1.   Very Low Income Households. Five percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to very low income households; or

    2.   Lower Income Households. Ten percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable rent or ownership costs to lower income households; or

    3.   Senior Citizen Housing Development. For senior citizen housing developments, the density bonus shall be twenty percent of the number of senior housing units provided.

    B.   Moderate Income Housing. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development is eligible for one density bonus of five percent over the maximum residential density if the applicant agrees to construct the housing development in accordance with all of the following criteria:

    1.   At least ten percent of the total dwelling units, excluding any units permitted by the density bonus, are provided at affordable ownership costs to moderate income households; and

 

    2.   The housing development is a common interest project as defined by Section 1351 of the California Civil Code; and

    3.   All of the dwelling units in the housing development are offered for sale to the public.

    C.   Higher Density Bonus for Greater Contribution of Affordable Units. Upon written request to the city, an applicant for a housing development that is eligible for a density bonus based upon the contribution of affordable units, may receive a higher amount of density bonus if the percentage of very low, lower, and moderate income housing units exceeds the base percentage established in subsection A or B of this section, as follows:

    1.   Very Low Income Units. For each one percent increase above five percent in affordable units for very low income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as follows:

 

Table 1: Very Low Income Units

Percentage of Very Low Income Units

Percentage of Density Bonus

5

20

6

22.5

7

25

8

27.5

9

30

10

32.5

11

35

 

    2.   Lower Income Units. For each one percent increase above ten percent in the affordable units for lower income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as shown in Table 2:

 

Table 2: Lower Income Units

Percentage of Very Low Income Units

Percentage of Density Bonus

10

20

11

21.5

12

23

13

24.5

14

26

15

27.5

16

29

17

30.5

18

32

19

33.5

20

35

 

    3.   Moderate Income Units. For each one percent increase above ten percent in affordable units offered for sale to moderate income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one percent up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as shown in Table 3:

 

Table 3: Moderate Income Units

Percentage of Very Low Income Units

Percentage of Density Bonus

10

5

11

6

12

7

13

8

14

9

15

10

16

11

17

12

18

13

19

14

20

15

21

16

22

17

23

18

24

19

25

20

26

21

27

22

28

23

29

24

30

25

31

26

32

27

33

28

34

29

35

30

36

31

37

32

38

33

39

34

40

35

 

    D.  Continued Affordability. Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall remain affordable as follows:

    1.   Very low income and low income household units shall remain affordable to the designated income group for a minimum of thirty years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program applicable to the dwelling units.

    2.   Moderate income household units shall remain affordable for a minimum of thirty years, or for a longer period of time if required by any construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program applicable to the dwelling units.

    3.   Upon resale, the city shall enforce an equity sharing agreement, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The equity sharing agreement shall include the following provisions:

    a.   Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller’s proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy as defined in subsection (D)(3)(b) of this section, and its proportionate share of appreciation, as defined in subsection (D)(3)(c) of this section, which amount shall be used within five years for any of the purposes described in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e).

    b.   The city’s initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of the initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate income household, plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value.

    c.   The city’s proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the city’s initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale.

    4.   Any contract, deed restriction, or other instrument used to implement the continued affordability pursuant to this section, shall be signed by the applicant and by the city as parties. If the housing development is located in or found by the Pico Rivera housing assistance agency to benefit a previously identified redevelopment project area, such contract, deed restriction, or other instrument shall be signed by the Pico Rivera housing assistance agency as a party or, at the Pico Rivera housing assistance agency’s election, the contract, deed restriction, or other instrument shall identify the Pico Rivera housing assistance agency as an express third party beneficiary with the right to enforce the terms of such contract, deed restriction, or other instrument.

    E.   Specification of Basis for Density Bonus. Each applicant who requests a density bonus pursuant to this section, shall elect whether the bonus will be awarded on the basis of subsection (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3) or (B) of this section. Each housing development is entitled to only one density bonus, which may be selected based on the percentage of either very low income affordable housing units, lower income affordable housing units or moderate income affordable housing units, or the development’s status as a senior citizen housing development. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.160 Additional density bonus for donations of land.
    A.  Land Suitability. Upon written request, when an applicant for a tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval qualified for a density bonus pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article also donates land to the city in accordance with this section, the applicant shall be entitled to an additional density bonus. Applicants donating land to the city shall be eligible for an additional fifteen percent density bonus at the site of the housing development if the donated land is suitable for the construction of very low income units equaling at least ten percent of the market rate units being constructed for the project. The density bonus provided pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any density bonus granted pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article, up to a maximum combined density bonus of thirty-five percent.

    B.   Qualification Criteria. To qualify for the additional density bonus described in subsection A of this section, the donation of land must meet all of the following criteria:

    1.   The tentative map, subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development must otherwise be subject to a density bonus pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article; and

    2.   The land must be transferred no later than the date of the approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or housing development application; and

    3.   The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred must be sufficient to permit construction of dwelling units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the total number of market rate dwelling units in the proposed development (i.e., the proposed development before the addition of any density bonus); and

    4.   The donated land is at least one acre in size or is large enough to permit development of at least forty units, has the appropriate general plan land use designation, has the appropriate zoning and development standards for affordable housing and, at the time of project approval is, or at the time of construction will be, served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure; and

    5.   No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, the donated land must have all of the applicable permits and approvals (other than building permits) necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the donated land, except that the city may subject the proposed housing development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by California Government Code Section 65583.2 subsection (i) if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer; and

    6.   The donated land is subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the very low income units consistent with Section 18.42.150(D) of this article, which deed restriction shall be recorded upon the donated property at the time of its transfer; and

    7.   The land will be transferred to the city, the Pico Rivera housing assistance agency, or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city reserves the right to require the applicant to identify a developer and to require that the land be transferred to that developer; and

    8.   The land is within the boundary of the proposed housing development or within one-fourth mile of the boundary of the proposed housing development; and

    9.   No later than the date of approval of the final map, parcel map, or other development application for the housing development, a proposed source of funding for the construction of the very low income units shall be identified.

    C.   Additional Density Bonus Based on Greater Suitability of Land for Very Low Income Housing. For each one percent increase above the minimum ten percent in the number of very low income housing units that can be accommodated on the donated land, the maximum density bonus shall be increased by one percent, up to a maximum of thirty-five percent, as follows:

 

 

 

Table 4: Land Donation

Percentage of Very Low Income Units that Can Be Accommodated on Donated Land

Percentage of Additional Density Bonus

10

15

11

16

12

17

13

18

14

19

15

20

16

21

17

22

18

23

19

24

20

25

21

26

22

27

23

28

24

29

25

30

26

31

27

32

28

33

29

34

30

35

(Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.170 Condominium conversions.
    A.  An applicant for a conversion of existing rental apartments to condominiums is eligible for either a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value, at the option of the city, if the applicant agrees to provide: (1) at least thirty-three percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code; or (2) at least fifteen percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code; and (3) the applicant agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the city pursuant to this section.

    B.   Condominium conversions qualified under subsection A of this section, may receive one of the following, at the city’s option:

    1.   A flat density bonus of twenty-five percent to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion, except that a condominium conversion is ineligible for this bonus if the apartments to be converted originally received a density bonus or incentives pursuant to any other provisions of this article or pursuant to California Government Code Section 65915. An applicant may choose to implement a lower density bonus.

    2.   Incentives of equivalent financial value in the form of a reduction or waiver of requirements or fees which the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval. “Other incentives of equivalent financial value” shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation to the condominium conversion project or its applicant.

    C.   The city reserves the right to place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value pursuant to this section as it finds appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions which assure continued affordability of units to subsequent purchasers who are persons and families of low and moderate income or lower income households.

    D.  Condominium conversions are eligible only for the granting of a density bonus or incentive of equivalent value pursuant to this section, which bonus or incentive may not be granted in addition to, or combined with, any other incentives, concessions, density bonuses or waivers and reductions of development standards pursuant to other sections of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert rental apartments into condominiums. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.180 Childcare facilities.
    A.  A housing development that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article, and also includes a childcare facility qualified under this section is eligible for either of the following, at the option of the city, if requested in writing by the applicant:

    1.   An additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the childcare facility; or

    2.   An additional concession or incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the childcare facility.

    B.   A childcare facility will only qualify the housing development for an additional density bonus or incentive or concession if it is: (1) located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the housing development; and (2) the housing development is otherwise eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article. As a condition of approving the additional density bonus for the housing development, the childcare facility must meet all of the following criteria:

    1.   The childcare facility may be used only for childcare for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable as stated in deed restrictions and pursuant to Section 18.42.150(D) of this article; and

    2.   Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the percentage of children of very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households shall be equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are proposed to be affordable to very low income households, lower income households, or moderate income households pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article.

    C.   Notwithstanding any requirement of this section, the city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or concession or incentive for a childcare facility if it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the community already has adequate childcare facilities. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.190 General provisions governing density bonus calculations.
    A.  For the purposes of any provisions in this article, an applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus than that to which the housing development is eligible.

    B.   When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units, any calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next larger whole number.

    C.   For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the dwelling units shall be on contiguous sites that are the subject of one development application, but do not have to be based upon individual subdivision maps or parcels. The density bonus shall be permitted in geographic areas of the housing development other than the areas where the affordable units are located.

    D.  For the purposes of this article, the “total units” or “total dwelling units” in a housing development does not include those units added by any density bonus.

    E.   Regardless of the number or extent of affordable units, senior housing, land dedication, childcare facilities or other qualifications for a density bonus provided in any single housing development, no housing development may be entitled to a total density bonus of more than thirty-five percent.

 

 

Table 5: Density Bonus Summary

Types of Affordable Units Providing Eligibility for a Density Bonus

Minimum Percent

Bonus Granted

Additional Bonus for Each 1% Increase in Affordable Units

Percent of Affordable Units Required for Maximum 35% Bonus

Affordable Housing Type:

Very Low Income

5%

20%

2.5%

11%

Lower Income

10%

20%

1.5%

20%

Moderate Income

10%

5%

1%

40%

Senior Citizen Housing

Qualified development

20% of the units

-

-

Land Donation for Very Low Income Housing

Land donated can accommodate 10% of market rate units, plus housing development qualified for density bonus as an affordable or senior project

15%

1%

30% of market rate units (assuming housing development provides 5% very low income units)

Condominium Conversions:

Lower Income

15%

25%1

-

-

Low/Moderate Income

33%

25%1

-

-

Childcare Facility

Housing development qualifies for density bonus as an affordable or senior project

Square feet in childcare facility1

 

 

Note:

1   Maximum of twenty-five percent bonus for condominium conversions, or an incentive of equal value, at the city’s option.

 

(Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

 

 

18.42.200 Incentives and concessions for affordable housing.
    A.  Definition of a Qualified Incentive or Concession. A qualifying project shall be entitled to at least one but no more than three of the following incentives identified by state law:

    1.   A reduction in the parcel development standards (e.g., coverage, setback, zero lot line and/or reduced parcel sizes, architectural design requirements and/or parking requirements). Development standard means any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation. In no case may the city apply a development standard that will have the effect of precluding the construction of affordable units. A waiver or modification to development standards may be requested by the applicant, and shall be approved unless such waiver or modification creates an adverse impact as described in subsection (C)(2).

    2.   Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing project, and the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing project and existing or planned development in the area where the proposed development will be located.

    3.   Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the applicant or the city that will result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.

    B.   Number of Incentives or Concessions. The number of incentives shall be based on the percentage of affordable units in the project:

    1.   One incentive or concession shall be entitled for projects where at least five percent of the total units are for very low income households, ten percent of the total units are for lower income households, or ten percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households.

    2.   Two incentives or concessions shall be entitled for projects where at least ten percent of the total units are for very low income households, twenty percent of the total units are for lower income households, or at least twenty percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households.

    3.   Three incentives or concessions shall be entitled for projects where at least fifteen percent of the total units are for very low income households, thirty percent of the total units are for lower income households, or thirty percent of the total units in a common interest development are sold to moderate income households.

 

Table 6: Incentives and Concessions
Summary

Affordable Units or Category

Percent of Affordable Units

Affordable Housing Types:

Very Low Income

5%

10%

15%

Low Income

10%

20%

30%

Moderate Income

10%

20%

30%

Maximum Incentive(s)/ Concession(s)1, 2, 3

1

2

3

Notes:

1     An incentive or concession may be requested without obtaining a density bonus.

2     Incentives or concessions may be selected from only one category (very low, lower, or moderate).

3     No incentives or concessions are available for land donation.

 

    C.   Findings to Deny Incentive or Concession. The city shall grant the incentive or concession requested by the applicant unless the city makes a written finding based upon substantial evidence of any of the following:

    1.   The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for affordable rents for the restricted units; or

    2.   The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low and moderate-income households. A specific adverse impact means a significant, unavoidable impact, as provided in written standards, policies, or conditions; or

    3.   The incentive or concession would be contrary to state or federal law.

    D.  Exceptions. This section does not limit or require the provision of direct financial incentives for the housing development, including the provision of publicly owned land, by the city or the waiver of fees or dedication requirements. Nor does any provision of this section require the city to grant an incentive or concession found to have a specific adverse impact.

    E.   Amendment, Zone Change. The granting of a concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, local coastal plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.210 Waivers and modifications of development standards.
    A.  Applicants granted a density bonus pursuant to Section 18.42.150 of this article may, by written proposal, seek a waiver, modification or reduction of development standards that would otherwise have the effect of physically precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted pursuant to this article. The applicant may also request a meeting with the city to discuss such request for waiver and modifications.

    B.   In order to obtain a waiver or modification of development standards, the applicant shall show that the development standards will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing development meeting the criteria of Section 18.42.150 of this article, at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by this article.

    C.   A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards pursuant to this section shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives or concessions to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to Section 18.42.200 of this article.

    D.  The city may deny a request for any waiver, modification or reduction of development standards if the wavier, modification or reduction would have a specific adverse impact. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.220 Parking incentives.
    Upon the written request of the applicant for a housing development meeting the criteria for a density bonus under Section 18.42.150 of this article, the city shall not require a vehicular parking ratio that exceeds the following:

    A.  Zero to one bedroom units: one on-site parking space.

    B.   Two to three bedroom units: two on-site parking spaces.

    C.   Four and more bedroom units: two and one-half parking spaces.

    Guest parking and handicapped parking shall be included within the maximum number of spaces that may be required. If the total number of parking spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this section, a housing development may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. For purposes of this article, the parking ratios set forth in this section shall be deemed a concession or incentive available to the applicant under Section 18.42.200 of this article. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.230 Standards for density bonus housing developments.
    A.  Affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the housing development and compatible with the design of market rate units in terms of appearance, materials, and finished quality. The applicant may reduce the interior amenities and square footage of inclusionary units, provided all units conform to all other requirements of this municipal code.

    B.   For developments with multiple market rate units containing differing numbers of bedrooms, affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be representative of the market rate unit mix.

    C.   All building permits for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be issued concurrently with, or prior to, issuance of building permits for the market rate units, and the affordable units shall be constructed concurrently with, or prior to, construction of the market rate units. Occupancy permits and final inspections for affordable units qualifying a housing development for a density bonus shall be approved concurrently with, or prior to, approval of occupancy permits and final inspections for the market rate units. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.240 Application requirements.
    A.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this section shall be submitted with the first approval of the housing development and processed concurrently with all other applications required for the housing development.

    B.   For affordable units qualifying the housing development for a density bonus, the application shall include the following information:

    1.   A site plan identifying the base project without the density bonus, number and location of all inclusionary units, affordable units qualifying for the project for a density bonus, and proposed density bonus units; and

    2.   Proposed category(ies) qualifying the housing development for a density bonus; and

    3.   Level of affordability of all affordable and inclusionary units and proposals for ensuring affordability, if applicable; and

    4.   A description of any requested incentives, concessions, waivers or modifications of development standards, or modified parking standards;

    5.   If a density bonus or concession is requested for a land donation, the application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide evidence that each of the findings included in Section 18.42.160 of this article can be made;

 

    6.   If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, the application shall demonstrate that the project meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 18.42.170 of this article;

    7.   If a density bonus or concession is requested for a childcare facility, the application shall show the location and square footage of the childcare facility and provide evidence that the findings included in Section 18.42.180 of this article can be made.

    C.   Upon submission of the application to the city, the zoning administrator or designee shall determine if the application is complete and conforms to the provisions of this article. No application for a first approval for a housing development requesting a density bonus, incentives, concessions, or waivers may be deemed complete unless an affordable housing plan is submitted conforming to the provisions of this article.

    D.  A request for a minor modification of an approved application may be granted by the zoning administrator or designee if the modification is substantially in compliance with the original application and the conditions of approval. Other modifications to the affordable housing plan shall be processed in the same manner as the original application. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.250 Application review.
    A.  An application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard pursuant to this article shall be reviewed as part of the first approval of the housing development by the approval body with authority to approve the housing development, unless additional review by the planning commission or city council is required. An applicant proposing a housing development pursuant to this article, may submit a preliminary application prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a housing development.

    B.   Within ninety days of receipt of the preliminary application the city shall provide to an applicant, a letter which identifies project issues of concern and the procedures for compliance. The zoning administrator shall inform the applicant that the requested additional incentives shall be recommended for consideration with the proposed housing development, or that alternative or modified additional incentives pursuant to Section 18.42.200 of this article shall be recommended for consideration in lieu of the requested incentives. If alternative or modified incentives are recommended by the zoning administrator, the recommendation shall establish how the alternative or modified incentives can be expected to have an equivalent affordability effect as the requested incentives.

    C.   Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or modification, the approval body shall make the following findings:

    1.   The housing development is: (a) eligible for a density bonus; and/or (b) any concessions, incentives, waivers, modifications, or reduced parking standards requested conform to all requirements of this article; and (c) supported by a financing mechanism for all implementation and monitoring costs.

    2.   If the density bonus is based all or in part on dedication of land, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 18.42.160 of this article.

    3.   If the density bonus or incentives of equivalent financial value are based upon a condominium conversion with affordable units or senior citizen housing, that the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 18.42.170 of this article.

    4.   If the density bonus, incentive, or concession is based all or in part on the inclusion of a childcare facility, the application meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 18.42.180 of this article.

    5.   If a waiver or modification is requested, the applicant has shown that the waiver, modification or reduction of development standards meets the qualifications and findings stated in Section 18.42.210 of this article.

    D.  If the findings stated in subsection C of this section can be made, and a request for an incentive or concession is otherwise consistent with this article, the approval body may deny a concession or incentive based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in Section 18.42.200 of this article for the denial or disqualification of a concession or incentive.

    E.   If the required findings stated in subsection C of this section can be made, and a request for a waiver or modification is otherwise consistent with this article, the approval body may deny the requested waiver or modification based upon written findings of any of the factors stated in Section 18.42.210 of this article for the denial or disqualification of a waiver or modification.

    F.   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to grant an incentive or concession or to waive or reduce development standards if that incentive, concession, waiver, or reduction has a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

    G.  Any decision regarding a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, modification, or revised parking standard may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18.64 of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. In accordance with state law, neither the granting of a concession or incentive, nor the granting of a density bonus, shall be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

 

18.42.260 Developer affordable housing agreement.
    A.  Applications requesting a density bonus shall agree to enter into a density bonus housing agreement with the city. The terms of the draft agreement shall be reviewed and revised as appropriate by the zoning administrator, who shall formulate a recommendation to the planning commission for final approval. A density bonus housing agreement shall be made a condition of the discretionary planning permits for all housing developments pursuant to this article and shall be recorded as a restriction on any parcels on which the affordable units or density bonus units will be constructed.

    B.   The density bonus housing agreement shall be recorded prior to final or parcel map approval, or, where the housing development does not include a map, prior to issuance of a building permit for any structure in the housing development. The density bonus housing agreement shall run with the land and bind future owners and successors in interest. (Ord. 1083 § 6, 2014)

Chapter 18.43 RECYCLING SPACE ALLOCATION
18.43.010 Intent and purpose.
    A.  Currently, cities and counties are required to divert fifty percent of all solid waste by January 1, 2000, through source reduction, recycling and composting activities. This diversion of solid waste requires the cooperation of the residential, commercial, industrial and public sectors.

    B.   The California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act of 1991 (ACT) identified lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses as a significant impediment to diverting solid waste, and constitutes an urgent need for state and local agencies to address access to solid waste for source reduction, recycling and composting activities. The act further required each local agency to adopt an ordinance relating to adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials in development projects. This chapter has been developed to meet that requirement. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

 

18.43.020 Definitions.
    The following definitions shall apply to the language contained in this chapter:

    A.  “Development project” means any of the following:

    1.   A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial, industrial or institutional building, or residential building having five or more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location serving five or more living units;

    2.   Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste;

    3.   The definition of development project only includes subdivisions or tracts of single-family detached homes if, within such subdivisions or tracts, there is an area where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location which serves five or more living units. In such instances, recycling areas as specified in this chapter are only required to serve the needs of the living units which utilize the solid waste collection and loading area.

    B.   “Improvement” means an improvement added to the value of a facility, prolongs its useful life, or adapts it to new uses. Improvements should be distinguished from repairs. Repairs keep facilities in good operating condition, do not materially add to the value of the facility, and do not substantially extend the life of the facility.

    C.   Public Facility. The definition of public facility includes but is not limited to buildings, structures and outdoor recreation areas owned by a local agency.

 

    D.  “Recycling area (areas for recycling)” means space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for recyclable materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for those who deposit as well as those who collect and load any recyclable materials placed therein. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

 

18.43.030 Applicability.
    The following criteria to be implemented in accordance with the city of Pico Rivera’ s recycling program:

    A.  Any new development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1994, shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

    B.   Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and loading solid waste shall include adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

    C.   Any existing development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1994, for a single alteration which is subsequently performed that adds thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

    D.  Any existing development project for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after September 1, 1994, for multiple alterations which are conducted within a twelve-month period which collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

    E.   Any existing development project for which multiple applications for building permits are submitted within a twelve-month period beginning on or after September 1, 1994, for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.

    F.   Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of which submits on or after September 1, 1994, an application for a building permit for a single alteration which is subsequently performed that adds thirty percent or more to the existing floor area or that portion of the development project which said tenant leases, shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

    G.  Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of which submits on or after September 1, 1994, an application for a building permit for multiple alterations which are conducted within a twelve-month period which collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases, shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

    H.  Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of which submits within a twelve-month period beginning on or after September 1, 1994, multiple applications for building permits for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add thirty percent or more to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases, shall provide adequate, accessible and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which said tenant leases.

    I.    Any costs associated with adding recycling space to existing development projects shall be the responsibility of the party or parties who are responsible for financing the alterations. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

 

18.43.040 Guidelines for all development projects.
    A.  Recycling areas should be designed to be architecturally compatible with adjacent structures and with the existing topography and vegetation, subject to approval by the zoning administrator. Recycling enclosure should include landscape screening where practical.

    B.   The design and construction of recycling areas may be of such a manner to prevent the theft of recyclable materials. However, no barbed wire or similar material to be utilized.

    C.   The design, construction and location of recycling areas shall not be in conflict with any applicable federal, state or local laws relating to fire, building, zoning, access, transportation, circulation or safety.

    D.  Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse environmental conditions, such as rain, which might render the collected materials unmarketable.

    E.   Driveways and/or access aisles shall, at a minimum, conform to local zoning and building code requirements for access and clearance. Driveways or access aisles should provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel.

    F.   Signage for Exterior Recycling Enclosures.

    1.   Recycling receptacles to be clearly marked listing what material to be disposed of in that receptacle. General instructions on what/how to recycle to be posted in a visible location within the recycling enclosure.

    2.   One sign identifying each exterior recycling storage enclosure required. Sign not to exceed one square foot and to be placed on exterior of enclosure adjacent to the access point. However, exterior signage for combined trash/recycling enclosures not required.

    3.   The international recycling logo, limited to one and not exceeding one square foot, to be placed on the exterior door of each recycling enclosure.

    G.  Development and transportation corridors adjacent to recycling areas shall be adequately protected for any adverse impacts such as noise, odor, vectors or glare through measures including, but not limited to, maintaining an adequate enclosure, separation, fencing and landscaping, subject to zoning administrator approval. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

 

18.43.050 Single tenant development projects.
    A.  Areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number and distribution to serve the development project.

    B.   Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate receptacles sufficient to meet the recycling needs of the development project.

    C.   An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development project should be located within the recycling area. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

 

18.43.060 Multiple tenant development projects.
    A.  Recycling areas shall at a minimum be sufficient in capacity, number and distribution to serve that portion of the development project leased by the tenant(s) who submitted an application or applications resulting in the need to provide recycling area(s) pursuant to Section 18.43.030 of this chapter.

    B.   Dimensions of recycling areas shall accommodate an adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection and loading of recyclable materials generated by that portion of the development project leased by the tenant(s) who submitted an application resulting in the need to provide recycling area(s) pursuant to Section 18.43.030 of this chapter. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

 

18.43.070 Location.
    A.  Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required to be constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to any applicable federal, state or local laws relating to fire, access, building, zoning, transportation, circulation or safety.

    B.   Any and all recycling area(s) shall be located so they are at least as convenient for those persons who deposit, collect and load the recyclable materials placed therein as the location(s) where solid waste is collected and loaded. Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials shall be adjacent to the solid waste collection areas.

    C.   Recycling areas to be screened from off-site view, subject to zoning administrator review and approval. (Ord. 856 § 3, 1994)

Chapter 18.44 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
18.44.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing off-street parking and loading facilities in the various zone classifications of the city, and to recognize the need to control and require adequate facilities for the parking of vehicles within reasonable boundaries consistent with the overall goals and objectives affecting the city as a whole. (Prior code § 9208.01)

 

18.44.020 Parking and loading chart—Adopted.
    The chart and text illustrated in Section 18.44.040 of this chapter are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 9208.02)

 

18.44.030 Parking and loading chart—Directions for use.
    The off-street parking and loading regulations chart is divided into three basic categories—residential, commercial, and industrial uses—which are the minimum regulations required for the use and development of property in the various zone classifications. In order to determine the zone in which the regulations governing off-street parking and loading are subject to, application and use of the chart is as follows:

    A.  Find the applicable use in the “Land Use” column as set forth in Section 18.44.040 of this chapter.

    B.   Read across the chart to the zone column in which the requirement sought appears.

    C.   If a specific requirement appears in a zone column, this means that it is the minimum regulation required for the particular zone classification represented by the column in which the regulation appears.

    D.  If parenthetic numbers appear in a column, this means that the specific regulation required for the particular zone classification represented by the column in which the parenthetic numbers appear is subject to compliance with the special conditions, requirements and limitations set forth in and corresponding with the numbered conditions of subsection B of Section 18.44.050.

    E.   If neither a specific regulation nor parenthetic number appears in a zone column, this means that the governing regulation set forth in Table 18.44.040 in the “Land Use” column thereof does not apply to the zone classification represented by the column, or may not be permitted. (Prior code § 9208.03)

 

18.44.040 Parking and loading chart—Contents.
    The basic off-street parking and loading regulations are categorized, enumerated and set forth in Table 18.44.040, Off-Street Parking and Loading, set out following this section.

 

Table 18.44.040

OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING

 

 

Land Use

R-E, S-F, R-I, and PUD Zones

R-M Zone

A.

Residential Uses

Parking Spaces and/or Facilities Required

1.

Single-family dwelling units, duplexes and garage conversions

Two parking spaces in a garage for each dwelling unit with the exception of nonconforming dwellings requiring compliance to Section 18.54.060.

a.  Guesthouse

One garage or carport attached to the guesthouse.

 

2.

Multiple-family dwelling units

Two parking spaces in a garage or carport for each dwelling unit.

a.  Apartment developments containing eight or more dwelling units

 

One open guest parking space that shall be provided for each eight dwelling units or fraction thereof

b.  Rooming houses and boarding houses, and other similar such uses having guestrooms

 

Two parking spaces in a garage or carport for each three guestrooms. In dormitories, each 100 square feet of habitable floor area shall be considered equivalent to one guestroom.

3.

Other uses permitted in residential zones

 

 

a.  Child care centers, day nurseries and such other similar uses

One open parking space for each 300 square feet of net building floor area, or for each 10 children the facility is designed and/or licensed for, whichever is greater.

b.  Religious places of worship

One open parking space for each 4 fixed seats or for each 40 square feet of floor area used for seating purposes and educational classrooms, whichever provides the greater number of parking places. No additional parking required for classrooms solely dedicated to the instruction of children under the age of 18. Adequate instructor parking to be provided.

c.  Convalescent, nursing and/or resthomes

One open parking space for each two beds and/or residents for which the facility’s capacity is licensed

d.  Mobilehome parks

 

Two open parking spaces on each mobilehome site, and one open guest parking space for each four mobilehome sites

e.  Senior citizen housing

 

One parking space for each three dwelling units

4.

Other applicable regulations governing off-street parking requirements

(1, 2-a, 3, 4-10, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27)

(1, 2-a, 3, 4, 6-10, 12-20, 23)

 

Table 18.44.040

OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING (continued)

 

 

Land Use

P-A, C-N, C-M, C-C, C-G and CTP Zones

B.

Commercial Uses

Parking Spaces and/or Facilities Required

1.

All retail stores and other uses except as provided elsewhere in this section

One open parking space for each 250 square feet of net building floor area

2.

Bowling alleys and skating rinks

Two open parking spaces for each alley, and one open parking space for each three fixed seats or for each 30 square feet of floor area used for assembly and/or seating purposes, whichever provides the greater number of parking spaces

3.

Hotels and motels

One open parking space for each sleeping room without kitchen facilities and one space in a garage or carport for each dwelling unit

4.

Places of public assembly

One open parking space for each three fixed seats or for each 30 square feet of floor area used for assembly or seating purposes, whichever provides the greater number of parking spaces

5.

Religious places of worship

One open parking space for each four fixed seats or for each 40 square feet of floor area used for seating purposes and educational classrooms, whichever provides the greater number of parking places. No additional parking required for classrooms solely dedicated to the instruction of children under the age of 18. Adequate instructor parking to be provided.

6.

Other applicable regulations

(1, 2-b, 2-c, 3-6, 9-a, 10-22, 23)

 

 

I-L, I-G, IPD Zones

C.

Industrial Uses

Parking Spaces and/or Facilities Required

1.

Industrial uses

Sufficient parking facilities shall be provided, but in no case shall there be less than one open parking space for each 1,000 square feet of net building area

2.

Religious places of worship

One open parking space for each four fixed seats or for each 40 square feet of floor area used for seating purposes and educational classrooms, whichever provides the greater number of parking places. No additional parking required for classrooms solely dedicated to the instruction of children under the age of 18. Adequate instructor parking to be provided.

3.

Other applicable regulations governing off-street parking requirements

(1, 2-b, 2-c, 3-6, 9-a, 10-22, 23)

 

(Ord. 1082 § 5, 2014; Ord. 968 §§ 9—11, 2001; Ord. 922 § 12, 1999; Ord. 857 § 14, 1994; Ord. 835 § 4, 1993; Ord. 834 § 11, 1993; Ord. 830 § 8, 1993; Ord. 765 §§ 33—38, 1989; prior code § 9208.04)

 

18.44.050 Special use conditions and chart notes.
    The regulations governing off-street parking and loading requirements set forth in Table 18.44.040, as may be applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of this section, as follows:

    A.  Relationship to Chart. Special conditions, requirements and limitations governing off-street parking and loading regulations indicated by parenthetic numbers appearing in the zone column of Table 18.44.040, correspond to the specific numbered conditions, requirements and limitations set forth in subsection B of this section.

    B.   Conditions, Requirements and Limitations Enumerated. Special conditions, requirements and limitations governing off-street parking and loading set forth in the charts are as follows:

    Note 1. Permanent Off-street Parking and Loading Spaces Required. Every building and/or portion of a building erected shall be provided with off-street parking and loading facilities, as provided in this chapter, and such facilities shall be made accessible from an improved street or alley and shall be permanently maintained.

    Note 2. Location of Off-street Parking and Loading Facilities. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located only as follows:

    a.   Residential Uses. Required parking facilities for residential uses, as specified in this chapter, shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land with the use in which it is intended to serve. In addition, no owner or operator of a motor vehicle of the passenger automobile variety, self-propelled recreation vehicle, motor truck or commercial vehicle, shall park or store such vehicles within the front yard, and including the side yard adjacent to the street of a corner lot, or land used for residential purposes, and no person in possession of land used for residential purposes shall permit another person to so park or store such vehicles thereon, except on a legally permitted driveway in compliance with this chapter and Section 18.54.060 of this title. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided for in Section 1.20.010 of this code.

    (i)   As used in this section, “front yard” and “side yard” refer to the required front and side yards, as defined in Chapter 18.04 of this title.

    (ii)  As used in this section, “driveway” means a paved area providing vehicular access from a public street or alley leading or adjacent to parking required by this chapter. Such driveway may be widened to but not exceed a width of thirty feet, provided that the width is not greater than fifty percent of the total frontage of the residential property, with the width measured over the shortest distance lying between the vehicular entrance to a garage or carport and the point of access to a street or highway.

    (iii) Existing driveways located within the front yard setback or side yard setback may be expanded beyond the width of a garage or carport, subject to the following conditions:

    1.   The driveway leading to a garage or carport may be expanded towards the adjoining property line.

    2.   The driveway approach shall be widened to match the width of the driveway, in compliance with the department of public works’ standards and subject to necessary permits and issuance fees. Permits for improvements within the public right-of-way will only be issued to appropriately licensed and insured individuals pursuant to Chapter 12.08 of this code. Accessibility design compliance, topographic feature relocations and an engineering analysis may also be required as a condition of approval, as determined by the city engineer, at the expense of the property owner; and

    3.   Driveways, driveway expansions and driveway approaches shall not consist of asphaltic materials, stepping stones, gravel, small stones or mulch; and

    4.   Driveways serving side loading garages shall maintain a minimum inside turning radius of fifteen feet; and

    5.   Expansion of a driveway that does not lead to a garage or carport is prohibited except as permitted in Section 18.54.060 of this title; and

    6.   Walkways adjoining a driveway shall be subject to Section 18.42.050(B)(27) of this title; and

    7.   In addition to provisions in Section 18.44.050(B) Note (2)(a)(iii)(1) through (6), nonconforming single-family dwellings with a legally permitted attached one-car garage or carport may expand the driveway to a maximum width of eighteen feet provided that not more than four feet of the width of the driveway is located within the frontage of the residence as shown in Figure A.

 

Figure A



 

Side-loading one-car garages and carports may also expand the driveway to a maximum width of eighteen feet provided that a minimum interior turning radius of fifteen feet is provided, as shown in Figure B. Corner lots containing a one-car garage or carport may expand the driveway to a maximum width of eighteen feet provided that no portion of the driveway nor the approach is located between the points of curvature as shown in Figure C.

 

 

Figure B



 

 

Figure C



    (iv) Existing driveways located in the rear one-third of interior lots may be widened to a maximum width of forty feet, with the exception of corner lots. Corner lot properties may not expand existing driveways beyond a thirty foot width. Driveway expansions adjoining an alley shall be provided with a six-foot high solid gate.

    (v)  Circular driveways are permitted within the front yard on lots that contain a minimum of fifty-eight feet in width. Circular driveways shall be designed to lead to an enclosed garage or carport. The circular driveway shall not exceed ten feet in width and shall be provided with a continuous twenty-six-foot turning radius. Properties with lot widths of one hundred feet or wider and lot depths of over thirty feet may contain a circular driveway with a width of sixteen feet and a turning radius approved by the community and economic development director. Vehicles parked on circular driveways may not be parked perpendicular to the circular driveway.

    (vi) Existing driveways and approaches shall be removed upon conversion of a garage or carport and replaced with landscape screening as required by the zoning administrator.

    b.   Uses Other Than Residential. Required parking facilities for all uses other than residential, as specified in this chapter, shall be provided in one of the following ways:

    (i)   On the same lot or parcel of land with the use in which it is intended to serve; or

    (ii)  By membership in a vehicle parking district that provides off-street parking facilities for several such other uses; or

    (iii) As may be provided for in an adopted specific plan of development; or

    (iv) On a lot or parcel of land located within a radius of three hundred feet, measured from the external boundaries of the lot for the use of land it is intended to serve, subject to the execution and recordation of a covenant and agreement regarding use and maintenance of conjunctional parking space.

    c.   Loading Facilities. Required loading facilities shall be located on the same lot or parcel of land with the use in which they are intended to serve, and shall be exclusive of the required parking facilities.

    Note 3. Required Parking Spaces. The regulations included in this chapter indicate the spaces and facilities required for off-street parking, and shall apply at the time a building or structure is erected or placed on the ground. These regulations shall also apply when an existing building or structure is altered or enlarged by the addition of dwelling units or guestrooms, or the use in question is intensified by the addition of floor space, seating capacity or change of use except nonconforming conditions requiring compliance to Section 18.54.060 of this title.

    Note 4. Parking Requirements for Unspecified Uses. Where the parking requirements for a use are not specifically listed in this chapter, the parking requirements for such a use shall be determined by the zoning administrator. Such a determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable and/or similar use listed in sub-

sections A, B or C of this section. The findings on such matters shall be set forth by a written determination of the zoning administrator.

    Note 5. Waiver of Parking Provisions. The zoning administrator may, by written determination, waive and/or modify the off-street parking provisions, as set forth in this chapter, for uses such as electrical power generating plants, electrical transformer station, utility, and/or those uses which involve a very limited number of persons.

    Note 6. Computation of Required Number of Off-street Parking Spaces. In computing the required number of off-street parking spaces, fractional requirements of one-half space or more shall be construed as one full parking space.

    Note 7. Parking and/or Storage of Mobilehomes, Trailers, Dismounted Campers, Boats and/or Vehicles Incapable of Movement Under Their Own Power Prohibited. No mobilehome, trailer, dismounted camper, boat and/or vehicle incapable of movement under its own power shall be stored or parked on private property in the front yard in any residential zone.

    Note 8. Storing and/or Parking of Commercial Vehicles in O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD, R-M and P Zones Prohibited. It is unlawful to store and/or park any commercial vehicle exceeding a gross weight of six thousand pounds on any lot in the O-S, R-E, S-F, PUD, R-M or P zones, and on any street serving and/or adjacent to such zoned property.

    Note 9. Size and Access. The following provisions governing the size and access of all off-street parking facilities shall apply:

    a.   Each open off-street parking space shall have a minimum width of not less than nine feet and a minimum length of not less than twenty feet. The access to such open off-street parking space shall be as specified in the Parking Standards Diagram for Note B21 of Section 18.44.050, following Note B21 of this section.

    b.   Each off-street parking space in a garage or carport shall have a minimum width of not less than nine feet and a minimum length of not less than twenty feet. All carports shall have not less than one hundred sixty cubic feet of enclosed storage space for each off-street parking space therein. Access to each such parking space shall be provided with a paved driveway having a minimum width of not less than nine feet, except as follows:

    (i)   A two-way driveway serving more than two dwelling units shall have a minimum width of not less than twenty feet.

    (ii)  All driveways shall be unencumbered from the pavement upward, with the exception of legally permitted porte-cocheres.

    Note 10. Off-street Parking Plan. The plan of proposed off-street parking facilities shall be subject to approval by the city planner.

    Note 11. Off-street Parking Facilities for Mixed Occupancies Within a Building Structure and/or a Lot. In the case of mixed uses in a building structure and/or a lot, the total number of off-street parking spaces shall be the sum total required for the various uses computed separately. Off-street parking spaces for any other use except as specified in Note 12 of this subsection.

    Note 12. Development and Maintenance of All Paved Parking Areas. Every lot or parcel of land used for off-street parking purposes, including vehicle sales areas and service station sites, shall be subject to this chapter.

    Note 13. Surfacing and Drainage. All off-street parking areas used by motor vehicles shall be paved and maintained with an impervious material so as to eliminate dust or mud, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water. Drainage shall be taken to the curb or gutter and away from adjoining property. In no case shall such drainage be allowed across the surface of a public sidewalk. The paving required above may be waived by the zoning administrator through the approval of a precise plan of design as allowed in Chapter 18.48.

    Note 14. Walls and Barricades. Driveways and open off-street parking areas which abut property in any residential zone shall be separated therefrom by a six-foot- high solid masonry wall. Such wall shall be reduced to forty-two inches in height abutting any required front or side yard of the adjacent property. All parking areas not separated by a wall from any street, alley, property line and/or side property line upon which it abuts, shall be provided with a six-inch-high concrete curb and/or a six-inch-high, six-inch-wide and three and one-half foot long concrete wheelstop, located not less than four feet from any such property lines. Such curb and/or wheelstop shall be securely installed as specified in the Parking Standards Diagram following Note 21 of this subsection.

    Note 15. Parking Area Lighting. All parking areas shall be provided with outdoor lighting. Performance standards and specifications for such outdoor lighting shall be subject to approval by the director of building and planning. All outdoor parking area lighting shall be permanently maintained, directed away from residential dwellings, and concentrated toward the parking area it is to serve.

    Note 16. Entrance and Exit Identification. Whenever an entrance or exit to off-street parking facilities is provided from a street, such entrance or exit shall be clearly marked and visually identified.

    Note 17. Loading Space Requirements. Every hospital, institution, hotel, commercial and/or industrial building hereafter erected or established shall have and maintain loading space and/or space as hereinafter set forth:

    a.   General Requirements. When the lot upon which the loading space is located abuts upon an alley, such loading space shall adjoin and/or have access from the alley and shall be established as follows:

    (i)   The length of the loading space shall be measured perpendicular to and/or parallel with the centerline of the alley. Where such loading space is parallel with the alley, the loading space shall extend across the full width of the lot, except that if only two spaces are required, the length of the loading area need not exceed sixty feet.

    (ii)  No loading shall be permitted in any required off-street parking area, nor shall any part of an alley and/or street be used for loading maneuvering purposes.

    b.   Requirements for Various Uses. All hospitals, institutions, hotels, motels, motor hotels, commercial, industrial and large-scale office building uses shall provide commercial loading spaces having not less than ten feet in width, forty feet in length, and unencumbered to fourteen feet in height. Hotels, motels, motor hotels and large-scale office buildings shall also provide passenger loading and unloading spaces having not less than ten feet in width, twenty feet in length, and unencumbered to twelve feet in height. The number of such loading spaces shall be determined as set out in Table for

Note 17 of Section 18.44.050, following this section.

 

Table for Note 17, Section 18.44.050

 

Total Square Feet of Gross Building Floor Area

Commercial Loading Spaces

Passenger Loading and Unloading Spaces Required

Commercial Buildings

 

 

3,000—15,000

1

 

15,001—45,000

2

 

45,001—75,000

3

 

75,001—105,000

4

 

105,001 or greater

5

 

Industrial Buildings

 

 

3,500—20,000

1

 

20,001—50,000

2

 

50,001—80,000

3

 

80,001—110,000

4

 

110,001 or greater

5

 

Hospitals and Institutions

 

 

2,500—30,000

1

1

30,001—90,000

2

3

90,001 or greater

3

5

Hotels, Motels and Office Buildings

 

 

3,500—40,000

1

1

40,001—90,000

2

2

90,001 or greater

3

3

 

 

    Note 18. Landscaping Requirements for All Off-street Parking Areas. The following shall be required in all zones, and shall be substantially of the design as specified in the Landscape Standards Diagram following Note 22 of this subsection.

    a.   A minimum of three percent of all off-street parking areas, including vehicle sales lots and service station sites, shall be landscaped with trees and other suitable plants, and shall be permanently maintained.

    b.   All landscaping shall be contained in planting areas. Each planting area shall be bound by a concrete curb having a minimum height and width of not less than six inches. Raised planters constructed of similar materials may be permitted and shall be subject to review and approval by the zoning administrator.

    c.   All planting areas shall be served by an approved permanent water irrigation system.

    d.   Landscape planter areas shall be located throughout the parking areas in order to obtain the maximum desirable amount of dispersion.

    Note 19. Additional Facilities. Additional off-street parking facilities may be required by the planning commission when a use of land is subject to the approval and issuance of a conditional use permit.

    Note 20. Additional off-street parking facilities may be required by the zoning administrator when a use of land is subject to the approval of a precise plan of design.

    Note 21. The chart entitled “Parking Standards, City of Pico Rivera,” and set out in the Parking Standards Diagram for Note B21 of Section 18.44.050 following this subsection, is adopted and made a part of this chapter.

    Note 22. The chart entitled “Landscape Standards, City of Pico Rivera,” and set out in the Landscape Standards Diagram for Note B22 of Section 18.44.050 following this subsection, is adopted and made a part of this chapter.

    Note 23. Compact Parking Spaces—Whenever compact parking is proposed, it shall be subject to the following:

    a.   Compact parking stalls shall measure as a minimum 7.5 feet x 15 feet.

    b.   Maximum percentage of allowed compact parking shall not exceed 25% of the required parking for commercial and industrial uses.

    c.   No compact parking allowed for residential uses unless assigned to specific residents and not to exceed 25% of the required residential parking.

    d.   Back-up distances and aisle width to be the same as that required for standard stalls.

    e.   Identify compact spaces by signs or other markings to be approved by the zoning administrator.

    Note 24. Carport placement shall be limited to the rear third of the lot. The design of the carport and/or garage shall match the architectural roof style of the main residence for single-family residential zones only.

    Note 25. Conversion of any portion of a one or two-car garage requires construction of a two-car garage in conformance to this title.

    Note 26. New nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand square feet or greater shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 18.47 of this title.

    Note 27. Porte-cocheres shall be subject to the following conditions:

    1.   Porte-cocheres must be placed over a driveway which leads to a permitted garage or carport.

    2.   Porte-cocheres must be attached to the residence as follows:

    a.   A porte-cochere must be fully attached to the side of the residence. The porte-cochere may not project beyond the adjacent front porch, as shown in Figure F, or the adjacent street-facing residential building wall, as shown in Figure G, and shall not be located within any required setback area; or

    b.   Properties with a permitted circular driveway may also place a porte-cochere over the circular driveway if the length of said structure is fully attached to the front of the residence, as shown in Figure H; or

    c.   Where the existing location of an attached garage makes it impossible to place the porte-cochere attached to the side of the residence, the porte-cochere may be constructed attached to the front of the garage provided that the porte-cochere does not exceed six feet in depth and is not located within any required setback area as shown in Figure I; or

    d.   A porte-cochere which projects beyond the adjacent street-facing residential building wall may be constructed if such porte-cochere is attached to the residence via a five-foot long shared wall and maintains a forty-foot front-yard setback, as shown in Figure J.

 

Figure F



 

 

Figure G



 

 

Figure H



 

Figure I



 

 

Figure J



 

    3.   All porte-cocheres must comply with setback requirements except as permitted in Section 18.42.050(B) Note 27.

    4.   Porte-cocheres must have a minimum width opening of nine feet, a maximum length of forty feet and a maximum sheltering capacity of two vehicles at nine feet by twenty feet per vehicle. The porte-cochere can accommodate the two vehicles in tandem or side-by-side.

    5.   The roof style, colors, finish, materials and plate height of the porte-cochere shall match the residence, as shown in the following figure:

 



    6.   Porte-cocheres shall be limited solely to roof supporting posts or columns and shall not be enclosed nor have any walls except for the common walls of the residence and/or garage. Storage space may be provided within the attic space of the porte-cochere provided that access to the storage area is by means of a pull-down ladder. Said ladder shall remain closed when not in use. Habitable space, storage rooms and/or roof decks cannot be located above the porte-cochere.

    7.   The roof height for a porte-cochere shall not exceed the roof height of the dwelling.

    8.   Metal or plastic supporting columns are not permitted unless encased with masonry, wood or other decorative and compatible treatment so as to match the residence.

    9.   Porte-cocheres shall be used solely for the shelter of operable vehicles and shall not be used for the storage or shelter of any articles, furniture or other property. (Ord. 1126 § 12, 2018; Ord. 1116 § 24, 2018; Ord. 1082 §§ 6—8, 2014; Ord. 922 § 13, 1999; Ord. 835 § 3, 1993; Ord. 834 §§ 12, 13, 1993; Ord. 830 § 9, 1993; Ord. 765 §§ 39—41, 1989; Ord. 736 § 1, 1987; Ord. 720 § 1, 1986; prior code § 9208.05)

Chapter 18.46 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING
18.46.010 Purpose of provisions.
    A.  The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing signs and other advertising media within the various zone classifications of the city and to expressly prohibit all signs and other advertising of any type whatsoever except as herein specifically permitted. This chapter shall not regulate the construction and/or structural phases of signs and other advertising, which are regulated by the city building laws.

    B.   It is also the intent and purpose of this chapter to alleviate signs and other advertising which are more detrimental to the community than the conveyance of their intended message. The environment, image, character, design and identity of the city must be effectively recognized through its application to all existing new development and redevelopment. The city’s resources for attracting commerce, trade, industry and servicing the community constitutes one of its leading economic activities. Failure to recognize this significant fact would result in blinding the reality of the responsibility to provide the best possible environmental interests and welfare for the community.

    C.   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to also recognize and strongly subscribe to the right to advertise, and to keep such right within reasonable boundaries consistent with goals and objectives of the community by restraining its image, character, community design, and the economic advantages which rest largely on the quality of the city’s appearance. Advertising must be balanced between the right to advertise and the right of the community to be protected against a visual and public trumpeting of overbearing commercialism. In order to protect the best interests of the community, the regulations contained in this chapter will prevent the invasion, abuse and intrusion of blatant commercialism that is not conducive to manmade and natural beauty and the environmental dignity of the city. (Prior code § 9209.01)

 

18.46.020 Sign and advertising chart—Adopted.
    The chart and text illustrated in this chapter, including Table 18.46.050 following Section 18.46.050, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter. (Prior code § 9209.02)

 

18.46.030 Sign and advertising chart—Directions for use.
    The sign and advertising regulations chart set out in Table 18.46.050 following Section 18.46.050 is divided into basic categories of permitted signs and advertising for uses of land in the various zone classifications. In order to determine the zone in which permitted signs and advertising regulations apply, application and use of the chart is as follows:

    A.  Find the specific zone classification, as set forth in subsection A, B, C, D, E, F or G of Table 18.46.050.

    B.   Read down the chart under the “Permitted Signs and Advertising Regulations” column in which the type of sign sought appears. If a parenthetic number(s) appears with the specific type of sign, this means that the type of sign is subject to special conditions, requirements and/or limitations set forth in and corresponding with the numbered conditions of subsection B of Section 18.46.060.

    C.   When the specific type of sign sought is found, read across the chart under the “Regulations” column to determine the requirements governing the sign. If a specific regulation appears under the headings “Size,” “Height,” “Number” and/or “Location,” this means that it is the specific requirement governing the specific type of sign.

    D.  If a parenthetic number(s) appears under the regulations headings “Size,” “Height,” “Number” and/or “Location,” this means that the specific regulation for the particular requirements represented by the column in which the requirement and/or parenthetic number(s) appears is subject to compliance with the special conditions, requirements and limitations set forth in and corresponding with the numbered conditions of subsection B of Section 18.46.060.

    E.   If neither a specific requirement nor parenthetic numbers appear under the “Regulations” column heading, this means that the specific type of sign is not governed by size, height, number or location, but shall be governed by other conditions so specified. (Prior code § 9209.03)

 

18.46.040 Types of signs and advertising—Classification.
    For the purpose of this chapter, all signs and other advertising shall be classified in the following categories:

    A.  Nameplates. This category shall include signage which displays only the business name and property address, hours of operation, credit card accepted (or equivalent) and employment advertisement relating to the business located on the subject premises.

    B.   Real Estate Signs. This category shall include signs or other advertising which relate only to the sale, lease or other disposition of the building, property or premises upon which such signs and other advertising are located, and shall only be temporary in nature, and shall be removed upon disposition of such property or building.

    C.   Construction Signs. This category shall include signs or nameplates which relate only to individuals, businesses or firms directly connected with construction or development projects of a building, property or premises upon which such signs or nameplates are located, and shall only be temporary in nature, and shall be removed upon completion of such projects.

    D.  Directional Signs. This category shall only include signs or sign structures only relating or pertaining to identifying and/or directing vehicular traffic to off-street parking facilities for a business or business complex located on the same property or premises with the business or business complex upon which such parking facilities and directional signs are intended to serve.

    E.   Business Signs. This category shall include all signs and/or sign structures only relating or pertaining to those services rendered or to the use conducted on the property or premises upon which such signs or sign structures are located.

    F.   Promotional Advertising. This category shall only include the display of banners, flags (except flags of the United States, state of California, or similar political subdivisions), pennants, or any other similar type attention-getting devices which are directly related to the promotion of grand openings, seasonal sales and/or special events for business establishments. Promotional advertising that does not consist of the use of banners, flags, pennants or similar type attention-getting devices shall be subject to review, approval and/or conditional approval by the zoning administrator. All such promotional advertising shall be subject to the specific regulations as set forth in Note 8 of subsection B of Section 18.46.060. The following definitions shall apply:

    1.   A promotional banner is a temporary display of professional quality, mounted flush against the façade of a building, constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, nylon or other similar material, with or without a structural frame, and which does not require a building permit for its construction or installation.

    2.   Promotional pennants are a temporary display of a string of small, usually triangular flags, of professional quality, constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, nylon or other similar material, usually strung from light poles within a parking lot or mounted flush against the façade of a building with the bottom ends flying freely.

    3.   A promotional flag is a temporary freestanding sign of professional quality constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, nylon or other similar material with one side attached to a pole and the other end flying freely. Such advertising is not attached to nor a part of any building or structure. All such signs are securely fastened to resist displacement by wind or similar disturbances.

    G.  Nonconforming Signs. This category shall include all signs and/or other advertising of any type whatsoever which do not specifically conform to the provisions of this chapter.

    H.  Illegal Signs. Signs and/or other advertising which were illegal under the provisions of any other ordinance in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall still be deemed illegal, and shall be subject to the abatement of and/or compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

    I.    Window Signage. This category is established to allow professionally painted, attached, glued or otherwise affixed signs within fifteen feet of a window designed to be viewed by the public. Signage to include advertising relating to the business name, services rendered, sales and products subject to zoning consistency review and approval.

    J.    Freestanding Sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on or anchored in the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure.

    K.  Monument Signage. A freestanding sign of low, solid design whose entire bottom is in contact with the ground.

    L.   Building Identification Signage.

    1.   Wall-Mounted. A sign attached parallel to a wall erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building. The sign shall have only one display surface, oriented toward a public street or right-of-way. See following diagram:

 



    2.   Parallel-Projecting. A sign located parallel to a wall erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure; affixed to, supported by, or an integral part of a projecting architectural feature, such as a metal awning or canopy, that is permanent and not retractable. The sign shall have only one display surface. See following diagram:

 



 

    M.  Pedestrian-Oriented Signage: A double-faced nonilluminated identification sign installed perpendicular to a building’s façade that is either directly attached to the façade or installed under a canopy so as to be suspended perpendicular above the nearest entrance. The sign shall contain only the name of the business. See following diagram:

 



 

    N.  Creative Signage. An accessory sign with a high quality of design that meets the creative design criteria within Section 18.46.060(B) Note 46. (Ord. 1073 § 5, 2012; Ord. 1070 § 5, 2012; Ord. 849 §§ 3—5, 1994; Ord. 802 §§ 1—2, 1991; prior code § 9209.04)

 

18.46.050 Sign and advertising chart—Contents.
    The basic signs and advertising regulations are categorized, enumerated and set forth in Table 18.46.050, the Signs and Advertising Regulations Chart, following this section.

 

Table 18.46.050

SIGNS AND ADVERTISING REGULATIONS

 

Permitted Signs and Advertising Regulations

Zone Regulations

 

O-S, Public Facilities and P Zones

CPD Zone

IPD Zone

Signs and advertising generally

(12)

(13)

(27)

R-E, S-F, R-I, and PUD Zones

Type Sign

Size

Height

Number

Location

Nameplate

1 sq. ft.

42 inches

2 per lot

(3)

Real estate

9 sq. ft.

6 feet

2 per lot

(3)

Subdivision (17)

150 sq. ft

12 feet

2 per tract

(3)

Construction

12 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot

(3)

Building identification (36)

20 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot (15)

 

Monument signage (36, 38)

40 sq. ft.

5 feet

1 per lot (37)

(3)

Other conditions

 

 

(1—5, 10, 14)

 

R-M Zone

Type Sign

Size

Height

Number

Location

Nameplate

1 sq. ft.

42 inches

1 per dwelling unit

(3)

Real estate

9 sq. ft.

6 feet

2 per lot

(3)

Subdivision (17)

150 sq. ft

12 feet

2 per tract

(3)

Construction

16 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot

(3)

Building identification (18, 36)

20 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot (15)

On the wall of a building fronting a dedicated public street

Monument signage (36, 38)

40 sq. ft.

5 feet

1 per lot (37)

(3)

Other conditions

 

 

(1—5, 10, 14)

 

P-A Zone

Type Sign

Size

Height

Number

Location

Nameplate

2 sq. ft.

 

1 per business

Above entrance doorway

Real estate

24 sq. ft.

6 feet

2 per lot

(3)

Subdivision (17)

150 sq. ft

12 feet

2 per tract

(3)

Construction

30 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot

(3)

Directional

6 sq. ft.

42 inches

1

Next to each driveway entrance or exit from off-street parking facilities

Building identification; wall-mounted (21, 26)

2 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. 75 sq. ft. maximum

 

1 per business (2)

Exterior building wall fronting a public street (20)

Freestanding identification (23, 24)

1 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. May increase 3 sq. ft. for each 1 foot setback from nearest property line to a maximum of 150 sq. ft.

20 feet

1 per lot (19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve (22)

 

Permitted Signs and Advertising Regulations

Zone Regulations

P-A Zone (cont’d)

Freestanding complex (24, 25)

1 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. May increase 3 sq. ft. for each 1 foot setback from nearest property line to a maximum of 150 sq. ft.

20 feet

1 per lot (19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve (22)

Creative signage (46)

 

 

 

On same lot with business it is intended to serve

Other conditions

 

 

(1—11)

 

C-N Zone

Type Sign

Size

Height

Number

Location

Nameplate

2 sq. ft.

 

1 per business

Above entrance doorway

Real estate

24 sq. ft.

6 feet

2 per lot

(3)

Subdivision (17)

150 sq. ft

12 feet

2 per tract

(3)

Construction

30 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot

(3)

Directional

6 sq. ft.

42 inches

1

Next to each driveway entrance or exit from off-street parking facilities

Building identification; wall-mounted (21, 26)

2 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. 75 sq. ft. maximum

 

1 per business (19)

Exterior building wall fronting a public street (20)

Creative signage (46)

 

 

(19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve

Other conditions

 

 

(1—11)

 

C-C, C-G and C-M Zones

Type Sign

Size

Height

Number

Location

Nameplate

10 sq. ft. (27)

(28)

1 per business

Store front window and front and/or rear doors (29)

Real estate

36 sq. ft.

6 feet

2 per lot

(3)

Subdivision (17)

150 sq. ft

12 feet

2 per tract

(3)

Construction

49 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot

(3)

Directional

6 sq. ft.

42 inches

1

Next to each driveway entrance or exit from off-street parking facilities

Pedestrian-oriented (41)

4 sq. ft. (sign copy area 3 sq. ft. maximum)

 

1 per public entrance of business (19)

Within 5 feet horizontal of public entrance sign is intended to serve. Shall not be closer than 15 feet from any other pedestrian-oriented sign (43, 44)

Permitted Signs and Advertising Regulations

Zone Regulations

C-C, C-G and C-M Zones (cont’d)

Building identification, wall-mounted or parallel-projecting (21, 26, 41)

3 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. 175 sq. ft. maximum

 

1 per business (16, 19, 31, 39, 42)

Exterior building wall fronting a public street (20, 43, 45)

Freestanding identification (23, 25)

2 sq. ft. for each 25 feet front linear foot of building. May increase 3 sq. ft. for each 1 foot setback from nearest property line to a maximum of 175 sq. ft. (32)

25 feet

1 per lot (19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve (22)

Freestanding complex (24, 25)

2 sq. ft. for each 25 feet front linear foot of building. May increase 3 sq. ft. for each 1 foot setback from nearest property line to a maximum of 200 sq. ft.

25 feet

1 per lot (19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve (22)

Creative signage (46)

 

 

(19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve

Window signage

Not to exceed 25% of any window area of each building side fronting a public street or off-street parking facility

 

(30)

Within fifteen feet of window(s) fronting a public street or off-street parking facility (34)

Other conditions

 

 

(1—11, 33, 35)

 

I-L and I-G Zones

Type Sign

Size

Height

Number

Location

Nameplate

2 sq. ft.

 

1 per business

Above entrance doorway

Real estate

54 sq. ft.

6 feet

2 per lot

(3)

Subdivision (17)

150 sq. ft.

12 feet

2 per tract

(3)

Construction

54 sq. ft.

6 feet

1 per lot

(3)

Directional

6 sq. ft.

42 inches

1

Next to each driveway entrance or exit from off-street parking facilities

Pedestrian-oriented (41)

4 sq. ft. (sign copy area 3 sq. ft. maximum)

 

1 per public entrance of business (19)

Within 5 ft. horizontal of public entrance sign is intended to serve. Shall not be closer than 15 ft. from any other pedestrian oriented sign (42, 43)

Permitted Signs and Advertising Regulations

Zone Regulations

I-L and I-G Zones (cont’d)

Building identification, wall-mounted or parallel-projecting (21, 26, 41)

3 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building to a maximum of 300 sq. ft.

 

1 per business (19, 42)

Exterior building wall fronting a public street (20, 43, 45)

Freestanding identification (23, 24)

1 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. May increase 1 sq. ft. for each 1 foot setback from nearest property line to a maximum of 250 sq. ft.

25 feet

1 per lot (19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve (22)

Freestanding complex (24, 25)

1 sq. ft. for each front linear foot of building. May increase 1 sq. ft. for each 1 foot setback from nearest property line to a maximum of 250 sq. ft.

25 feet

1 per lot (19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve (22)

Creative signage (46)

 

 

(19)

On same lot with business it is intended to serve

Other conditions

 

 

(1—11)

 

 

(Ord. 1073 § 6, 2012; Ord. 1032 § 5, 2007; Ord. 959 § 4, 2000; Ord. 922 § 14, 1999; Ord. 857 § 15, 1994; Ord. 849 § 6, 1994; Ord. 765 §§ 42, 43, 1989; prior code § 9209.05)

 

18.46.060 Special use conditions and chart notes.
    The regulations governing signs and other advertising requirements set forth in the charts in Table 18.46.050, as may be applicable, shall be subject to the provisions of this section, as follows:

    A.  Relationship to Chart. Special conditions, requirements and limitations governing signs and other advertising regulations indicated by parenthetic numbers appearing in the “Regulations” columns of the charts correspond to the specific numbered conditions, requirements and limitations set forth in subsection B of this section.

    B.   Conditions, Requirements and Limitations Enumerated. Special conditions, requirements or limitations governing signs and other advertising set forth in the charts found in Table 18.46.050 are as follows:

    Note 1. All signs and/or other advertising shall conform to the provisions of this chapter.

    Note 2. No signs and/or other advertising, except nameplates permitted in the R-E, S-F, PUD and R-M zones, real estate signs, and construction signs, shall be installed, placed, erected, constructed, attached to and/or painted on any building, structure, lot or parcel of land unless such signs and other advertising are first reviewed, approved and/or conditionally approved by the zoning administrator or other pertinent reviewing body.

    Note 3. All signs and/or other advertising shall only be located on the same lot, parcel of land, property or premises with the building structure or use for which such signs or other advertising are intended to serve.

    Note 4. All signs and/or other advertising shall not project or be located in any portion of public rights-of-way.

    Note 5. No signs and/or other advertising shall be designed to flash and/or blink on and off, or be designed to rotate or revolve in such a manner so as to create the illusion of flashing or blinking on and off.

    Note 6. Animated signs are prohibited.

    Note 7. Any electrical service and facilities provided for signs and/or other advertising shall be installed and located underground, and shall be completely concealed from exterior exposure.

    Note 8. Promotional advertising, as specified in Section 18.46.040, may only be permitted in the C-C, C-G, C-M and CPD zones; provided, however, that a promotional advertising permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator, for which there shall be a permit issuance fee and cash bond in amounts established by a resolution of the city council posted with the city to guarantee the removal of such promotional advertising upon termination of the permit time period, and executed right-of-entry to the city by the owner. The cumulative display days issued to the same business, permittee, or location during any one calendar year shall not exceed one hundred fifty days. The applicant has the option of one annual application with a cash bond covering all events for that calendar year. A promotional advertising permit shall not be issued until a minimum of seven days has expired from the ending date of the last promotional advertising permit approval. During the Christmas holiday, businesses are allowed to display holiday greetings in windows without a permit provided that such window signage does not exceed twenty-one consecutive days. The application fee for new businesses shall be waived for the initial promotional advertising banner and pennant permit and/or promotional advertising flag permit within the first thirty days of business operations, all other regulations shall remain in effect and a cash bond is required for each application submitted.

    a.   Unless otherwise specified, the number, size, location and consecutive display days of promotional advertising shall be at the discretion of the zoning administrator subject to the condition that all promotional advertising is orderly, legible and kept in pristine conditions and constructed of durable material that will not deteriorate during the time period in which it is displayed.

    i.    Banner and Pennants. No promotional advertising permit shall be issued for a period of time exceeding thirty consecutive days or sixty consecutive days.

    ii.   Flags. No promotional advertising permit shall be issued for a period of time exceeding seven consecutive days and are only to be posted within a period encompassing a federal or state holiday or Valentine’s Day, Easter, Mother’s Day, Father’s Day, Halloween, grand opening or graduation day. Promotional flags shall require a separate promotional advertising permit and the display days shall be deducted from the cumulative display days permitted within any one calendar year, even when posted concurrently with banners and pennants. Maximum one flag per business or permittee to be located a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way or sidewalk and ten feet from any driveway with a minimum distance of fifty feet to a maximum of one hundred feet, to be determined at the discretion of the zoning administrator, to be maintained between any other promotional flag(s).

    Note 9. No signs and/or other advertising shall be installed, placed, erected, constructed, painted, attached to or project above the roof of any building, or be located in any portion of the public rights-of-way. Such signs and/or other advertising, when determined to be an integral part of a building or which possess such architectural values and characteristics as to make or be impractical their being subject to the provisions of this chapter, shall be subject to the review, approval or conditional approval of the zoning administrator or other pertinent reviewing body.

    Note 10. Any nonconforming sign and/or other advertising, or any portion thereof, which is removed or structurally altered, shall only be replaced or altered structurally with signs or other advertising which conform to the regulations as specified in this chapter.

    Note 11. Rotating or revolving signs, all roof-mounted signs, any type of balloon signs, air dancers, and any blow-up advertising are prohibited.

    Note 12. In the O-S, public facilities and P zones, all signs and other advertising of any type or kind whatsoever are hereby expressly prohibited, except those specifically approved by the zoning administrator or other pertinent reviewing body.

    Note 13. Proposed signage for occupancy of existing commercial buildings to comply with sign regulations of C-C, C-G and C-M zoned properties set forth in Table 18.46.050F.

    Note 14. For special uses which may be permitted in residential zones, as provided elsewhere in this code, all signs or other advertising are hereby expressly prohibited, except that signs or other advertising may be permitted as specifically provided for by the zone classification in which such uses may be located, or as may be provided elsewhere in this chapter.

    Note 15. For corner lots, one sign shall be allowed for each street frontage located on an exterior building wall, facing a public street or right-of-way or located on the side of the building facing off-street parking facilities or vehicular entrance. Church/school combinations may be allowed to have one building identification sign for each use.

    Note 16. Where there is more than one building used for the same business, under the same control or ownership, such building may have one building identification sign pertaining and relating to such business.

    Note 17. Subdivision signs shall be located within the boundaries of the recorded tract map. A building permit shall be obtained for the installation, placement, erection and maintenance of such subdivision signs, and such signs shall be removed within eighteen months from the date of issuance of the building permit. A cash bond plus twenty percent, in an amount determined by the building official, shall be posted with the city, accompanied by an executed agreement to guarantee the removal of the subdivision sign upon termination of the building permit.

    Note 18. Building identification signs shall be permitted except when there are less than three dwelling units on any separate lot or parcel of land.

    Note 19. Such signs shall only indicate the name of the tenant for which the sign is intended to serve; any and all proposals to include signage relating to services rendered or to the use conducted in the building shall be approved for façades with lengths over fifty feet at the discretion of the zoning administrator.

    Note 20. A building identification sign shall utilize any existing building fascia and the sign or wall shall not project above the roofline except as provided in Note 9 of this subsection.

    Note 21. Building identification signs, designed to be uniform in nature, and serving a group or complex of businesses within a single building, may be permitted subject to Note 9 of this subsection.

    Note 22. Such signs shall be located in a landscaped planting area equal in size to the total area of the sign, and such landscaped area shall be exclusive of any landscaped planting areas required for off-street parking facilities.

    Note 23. Freestanding identification signs are only permitted when there is no more than one business in a building on a separate lot or parcel of land.

    Note 24. Each freestanding identification sign shall either have an attached interior lighted sign indicating the street address of the property, business or use conducted upon the premises where such freestanding identification sign is located, or such address sign shall be incorporated as a part of the advertising portion of the freestanding identification sign. The numerals of such address sign shall not be less than eight inches in height.

    Note 25. Freestanding complex signs are only permitted when there is more than one business in a building on a separate lot or parcel of land. Such sign is for the advertising of all the businesses within the complex. Individual businesses are not permitted on individual freestanding signs.

    Note 26. There shall be not more than one building identification sign for each separate business in a building, located on the rear of such building and/or where an entrance therein opens onto improved off-street parking facilities or onto a public alley; provided, however, such sign shall not be more than thirty-five square feet in area for the C-N, C-M and P-A zones, or more than one hundred square feet for the C-C and C-G zones, or more than one hundred fifty square feet for the I-L and I-G zones.

 

    Note 27. Proposed signage or occupancy of existing industrial buildings or uses to comply with sign regulations of I-L and I-G zoned properties set forth in Table 18.46.050G.

    Note 28. Business name and address not to exceed four inches in height. Credit card accepted (or equivalent) not to exceed four inches in height. Hours of operation limited to two inches in height.

    Note 29. Professionally prepared nameplate signage allowed on window(s), and front and/or rear doors fronting off-street parking facilities.

    Note 30. An unlimited number of professional window signs are allowed provided that the signs are consolidated within one area.

    Note 31. Secondary signage limited to allowable commercial uses for end tenants of a commercial center and the sides of a free-standing commercial building, provided that signage fronts on a public street.

    Note 32. Maximum sign area to include the combined total of each sign face.

    Note 33. All signs, together with all supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be kept in good repair, including replacement of defective parts, repainting, cleaning, and otherwise maintained in a presentable and undamaged condition at all times.

    Note 34. Merchandise display located within five feet of the face of the window is limited to fifty percent. If a combination of window signs and merchandise is displayed, the combined display shall not exceed twenty-five percent.

    Note 35. New developments and existing developments conducting site renovations, with more than three nonresidential tenants require submittal of a master sign program establishing criteria of uniform letter style, color, dimensions, area and placement.

    Note 36. Signage permitted for the following uses only: churches and related facilities, educational institutions, hospitals, mobile home parks, rest homes, private recreation and PUD Associations.

    Note 37. Church/school combinations, where the school is accredited for primary or secondary education by a state of California recognized accrediting agency, may have one of the following freestanding signage options:

    a.   A maximum of two monument signs, one for each use, separated by a minimum distance of fifty feet; or

    b.   A pylon type sign instead of a monument sign for the school portion of the site, consisting of a maximum height of fifteen feet, with a two-sided sign face not exceeding eight feet in width and five feet in height. Pylon base to be a minimum of twenty percent of sign width and designed to conceal structural support of a sign. Internal illumination acceptable. Sign to be located in a planter area consisting of a minimum two feet in depth around sign perimeter. Building identification signage would be limited to school name only.

    Note 38. Monument structure to be a maximum of five feet in height and eight feet in length. Allowable sign area within monument structure limited to twenty-four square feet, resting on monument base or surrounded in part or whole, by monument structure. Structure to be centered in landscape planter of equal or greater size than total monument structure face area (total of largest two surfaces). The landscape planter must consist of a minimum two feet in depth around perimeter of monument structure. Monument to maintain a minimum of five feet from any right-of-way or sidewalk, and ten feet from any driveway. Internal illumination permitted, provided no light spillover occurs off-site. A graffiti resistant finish is required for the monument base.

    Note 39. The primary tenant occupying a single user building with street facing frontage of at least one hundred fifty feet and building size of twenty-five thousand square feet or more will be considered an anchor tenant. Such an anchor tenant will be allowed up to two additional secondary signs located on primary frontage. Such signage must relate to the existing business located within the structure, (such as “Bakery” associated with a grocery store), or related to a separate subtenant located within the primary business (such as “XYZ Savings” with a grocery store) which has an approved office located within. Each such sign is restricted in size to fifty percent of height and width of anchor tenant building identification sign, up to a maximum of one hundred square feet. Such signage must consist of single channel letter. Location will be subject to zoning administrator approval. Registered trademarks are included as permitted signage. Sign cans prohibited.

    Note 40. Large, multi-screen theatre buildings, of a minimum of fifty thousand square feet in building area with building identification signage, secondary signage and other necessary signage deemed to be an integral part of the building or which posses architectural value and characteristics as to make or be impractical their being subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the review, approval or conditional approval of the zoning administrator or other applicable reviewing body.

    Note 41. Pedestrian-oriented and parallel-projecting signs are permitted within all commercial and industrial developments. Centers with more than three nonresidential tenants must first obtain approval of a master sign program.

    Note 42. Stand-alone businesses or centers with two or more nonresidential tenants may install one parallel-projecting sign and one wall-mounted sign on the same building façade(s) only when such stipulations are included within the approval of a master sign program. Signs shall be massed and spaced so as not to create an area encumbered by signage. The sum area of the two signs shall not exceed total allowed per zone.

    Note 43. Pedestrian-oriented and parallel-projecting signs shall maintain minimum of eight feet vertical height clearance from the bottom of the sign to the level of pedestrian walkway and no portion of the sign shall project into any driveway, off-street parking area, public right-of-way, roadway, or alley.

    Note 44. Pedestrian-oriented signs shall be double-faced and limited to ground floor tenants, all portions of the sign shall project out a maximum of five feet, sign support and brackets shall be compatible and architecturally integrated, and in cases where the minimum fifteen-foot distance requirement between pedestrian-oriented signs cannot be accommodated approval may be granted at the discretion of the zoning administrator.

    Note 45. Parallel-projecting signs shall be attached to, or an integral part of a projecting architectural feature, installed parallel to and confined within the limits of the façade of the business the subject sign is intended to serve with only one display surface. Cabinet signs are not permitted as parallel-projecting signs.

    Note 46. Creative Signage. The intent of a creative sign is to encourage signs of unique design that exhibit a high degree of imagination, inventiveness, and spirit and provide a process that will allow creatively designed signs that make a positive visual contribution to the overall image of the city, while mitigating the impacts of large or unusually designed signs.

    a.   Design Criteria. When approving a creative sign, the approving authority shall ensure that a proposed sign meets the following:

    i.    Design Quality. The sign shall constitute a substantial aesthetic improvement to the site and shall have a positive visual impact on the surrounding area, be of unique design and exhibit a high degree of imagination, inventiveness, and spirit, and provide a strong graphic character through the imaginative use of color, graphics, proportion, quality materials, scale, and texture.

    ii.   Contextual Criteria. The sign shall contain at least one of the following elements classic historic design style, demonstrated trademark or logo is integral to the business, creative image reflecting current or historic character of the city, or inventive representation of the use, name, or logo of the structure or business.

    iii.  Architectural Criteria. The sign shall utilize the architectural elements of the building, be placed in a logical location in relation to the overall composition of the building’s façade and not cover any key architectural features or details of the façade.

    iv.  Impact to Surrounding Uses. The sign shall be located and designed not to cause light and glare impacts nor a public nuisance on surrounding uses, especially residential uses, nor threaten the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Any and all impacts shall be mitigated to eliminate any possible public nuisance to surrounding uses.

    b.   Approval Authority. Subject to zoning consistency review approved by zoning administrator when the maximum development limitations per zone are not exceeded. In all other cases approval of a conditional use permit shall be required per Chapter 18.56, with the findings per Section 18.56.090 as herein modified:

    i.    The proposed signage is consistent with the purpose of creative signage and meets all design criteria within Note 46(a) of this section;

    ii.   The proposed project can be adequately conditioned so as not to endanger, jeopardize, or otherwise constitute a menace to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use;

    iii.  The new structure is compatible with the scale, bulk and mass of existing structures in the vicinity of the subject property, and does not impair the integrity and character of the zoning district in which it is to be located;

    iv.  That the creative design is not close to other design features, signage that causes an over-bearing visual nuisance;

    v.   That adequate consideration for the protection of the environment has been satisfactorily demonstrated; and

    vi.  The granting of such creative sign approval will be consistent with the provisions and objectives of the general plan. (Ord. 1073 § 7, 2012; Ord. 1070 §§ 6, 7, 2012; Ord. 1032 § 4, 2007; Ord. 959 § 5, 2000; Ord. 857 § 16, 1994; Ord. 852 §§ 46—48, 1994; Ord. 849 §§ 7—10, 1994; Ord. 802 § 5, 1991; Ord. 799 §§ 7, 8, 1991; Ord. 765 § 44, 1989; prior code § 9209.06)

Chapter 18.47 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
18.47.010 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to encourage reduction in vehicle trips by promoting alternative transportation methods such as carpools, vanpools, transit, bicycles, and walking. This section is designed to meet requirements of the Congestion Management Program of Los Angeles County, authorized by State Legislation and Proposition 111, as well as requirements of federal and state air quality regulations. (Ord. 835 § 2, 1993)

 

18.47.020 Definitions.
    In addition to the definitions set forth in Chapter 18.04, certain additional definitions are required to implement the intent and provisions of the chapter as follows:

    A.  “Alternative transportation” means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

    B.   “Applicable development” means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 18.47.050.

    C.   “Buspool” means a vehicle carrying sixteen or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule.

    D.  “Carpool” means vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.

    E.   “The California Environmental Quality Act” (CEQA) is a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the state of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.

    F.   “Developer” means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

    G.  “Development” means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of this chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 18.47.050 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.

H. “Employee parking area” means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees.

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/professional

85%

Industrial/manufacturing

90%

 

    I.    “Preferential parking” means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles.

    J.    “Property owner” means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his or her agent.

    K.  “South Coast Air Quality Management District” (SCAQMD) is the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties).

    L.   “Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.

    M.  “Transportation Demand Management” (TDM) means the alteration of travel behavior usually on the part of commuters through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupancy vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

    N.  “Trip reduction” means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles.

    O.  “Vanpool” means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis.

    P.   “Vehicle” means any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. (Ord. 835 § 2, 1993)

 

18.47.030 Review of transit impacts.
    A.  Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for which a Notice of Preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 835, adopted May 17, 1993, shall be exempted from its provisions. The “Transit Impact Review Worksheet,” contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft environmental impact report prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.

    B.   Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR. (Ord. 835 § 2, 1993)

 

18.47.040 Applicability of requirements.
    A.  Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures, as noted in Section 18.47.050.

    B.   This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed complete by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 835, adopted May 17, 1993.

    C.   All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. (Ord. 835 § 2, 1993)

 

18.47.050 Development standards.
    A.  Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand square feet or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the city:

    1.   A bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

    a.   Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

    b.   Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

    c.   Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

    d.   Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

    e.   A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.

    B.   Nonresidential development of fifty thousand square feet or more shall comply with subsection (A)(1) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city:

    1.   Not less than ten percent of employee parking areas (employee parking is defined below) shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential car-pool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand square feet to one hundred thousand square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

    Employee parking can be calculated utilizing the following percentages:

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/professional

85%

Industrial/manufacturing

90%

 

    2.   Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas.

    3.   Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the city.

    C.   Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand square feet or more shall comply with subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the city.

    1.   A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers.

    2.   Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development.

    3.   If determined necessary by the city to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.

    4.   Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities on-site. (Ord. 835 § 2, 1993)

 

18.47.060 Monitoring and enforcement.
    Monitoring and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 18.06 of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. No permit or license for any use, building or purpose whatsoever shall be issued by any official or employee of the city of same that would be in conflict with or in violation of this title. (Ord. 835 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 18.48 PRECISE PLAN OF DESIGN REGULATIONS
Article I Requirements and Procedures
18.48.010 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is:

    A.  To set forth provisions and regulations for the review of land development which, when allowed in a particular zone classification, must be given special development consideration to assure the orderly and harmonious consistency and continuity with sound principles of land planning therefor;

    B.   To be certain that adequate consideration is given to further assure the conservation, promotion and stabilization of the property value, development and environmental setting;

    C.   To assure consistency in the direction of land development planning of the community and the several zone classifications therein; and

    D.  To assure that the character and functional design, image, atmosphere and architectural appeal of any proposed development and developments already existing in the several zone classifications and areas of the city have been given adequate consideration for their peculiar suitability for particular land developments consistent with the community’s overall planning program. (Prior code § 9210.01)

 

18.48.020 Precise plan of design required when.
    Any land development proposed for a use of land set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title that requires approval of a precise plan of design in a particular zone classification shall be subject to the provisions of Article I of this chapter prior to the issuance of any permit or other entitlement of any type or kind whatsoever. (Prior code § 9210.02)

 

18.48.030 General requirements.
    Application and procedures for precise plan of design approval shall be subject to the requirements set out in Sections 18.48.040 through 18.48.090 of this article. (Prior code § 9210.03)

 

18.48.040 Application filing—Form and contents.
    A.  Whenever any proposed development is subject to the provisions of this chapter, the legal owner of property upon which such development is proposed to be located shall file with the zoning administrator an application and fee in the amount established by a resolution of the city council for precise plan of design approval, verified by the owner, on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator.

    B.   The application shall set forth and include such information as the zoning administrator may require, and each such application shall be accompanied by seven copies of a proposed precise plan of design being not less than eighteen inches wide and twenty-four inches long, and shall specify and include the following information:

    1.   A general description of the scope, nature and purpose of the proposed development;

    2.   A key diagram showing the general location of the property in relationship to the general area in which the development is proposed to be located;

    3.   The exact zone classification of the subject property and surrounding properties;

    4.   The location, size, height, dimensions and type of all existing and proposed buildings and other structures, including signs, walls and fences;

    5.   The location, size and exact dimensions of the property upon which the development is proposed to be located;

    6.   The location, size and dimensions of all yards, building setbacks and spaces between buildings, and all other open spaces, including landscape areas;

    7.   The exact legal description of the property upon which the development is proposed to be located; and

    8.   The location, dimensions and method of improvement of all driveways, off-street parking facilities, walkways, means of access, ingress and egress, existing and/or proposed off-site street improvements, property to be dedicated to the public, and any public and private utility easements. (Ord. 765 § 45, 1989; prior code § 9210.03 (A))

 

18.48.050 Approval procedure.
    Upon accepting an application for precise plan of design approval, the zoning administrator shall cause the following, as set out in Sections 18.48.060 through 18.48.090. (Prior code § 9210.03 (B)(part))

 

18.48.060 Investigations and reports.
    The zoning administrator shall cause to be made such investigations by the various departments and other agencies of the city of facts bearing upon an application when, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, such departments and/or agencies may be concerned therewith. All such investigations shall be in writing, completed, and filed with the zoning administrator within fourteen days after acceptance of an application. In event there is no written investigative response received within such time period from any city department or agency so notified thereof, it shall be deemed that such department or agency has no interest in or concern with the application. (Prior code § 9210.03 (B)(1))

 

18.48.070 Zoning administrator findings.
    The zoning administrator, following an inspection of the property and an examination and review of the application and other written investigations, prior to the approval of a precise plan of design, shall make the following findings of fact:

    A.  That the application and proposed precise plan of design is consistent with this title, the general plan, and the zone classification in which it is to be located;

    B.   That the proposed physical land development project will not in any way be detrimental to existing or planned developments of surrounding properties in the area in which it is proposed to be located;

    C.   That adequate protection against excessive vehicular traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibrations and other factors which tend to make the general environment less desirable, and which are efficiently and reasonably satisfactory for existing and planned developments of surrounding properties in the area in which the proposed development is to be located;

    D.  That requirements of other city departments and agencies have been given adequate consideration and, where applicable, made a part of precise plan of design approval relative to the physical characteristics of the land development project;

    E.   That the proposed physical land development characteristics will not be detrimental in any way to the character and functional design, image, atmosphere and architectural appeal of any existing or planned developments of the zone classification, and its peculiar suitability for particular developments, in which the proposed development is contemplated to be located; and

    F.   That the physical, architectural and environmental appeal, design, image, atmosphere, character and functional plan of the proposed development, when completed, will not be at such variance with existing development or those in the course of development or other planned development of the area in which the proposed development is contemplated to be located, so as to cause a substantial depreciation, demotion, or instability of the value of property in the immediate neighborhood. (Prior code § 9210.03 (B)(2))

 

18.48.080 New application not required when.
    A.  Whenever a land use development requires precise plan of design approval, and such approval has been previously granted and is currently in effect for the location of a new land use development, no new application for precise plan of design approval shall be required. The zoning administrator shall, however review and approve the new land use development for conformity with any previously approved precise plan of design applicable thereto.

    B.   This section shall also apply to minor modifications to an approved precise plan of design currently in effect where the zoning administrator has determined, pursuant to Section 18.48.060 of this chapter that such modifications are in fact minor in scope and nature and will not affect the overall integrity of such previously approved precise plan of design. (Prior code § 9210.03 (B)(3))

 

18.48.090 Findings and decisions—Announcement and finality.
    A.  The zoning administrator shall announce his or her findings and decisions by written declaration not more than twenty-one days after acceptance of an application. Such declaration shall recite and set forth, among other things, the facts, reasons and/or conditions which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, make the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application and proposed precise plan of design considered necessary to carry out the provisions of this title and the general plan, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny same. The zoning administrator shall give the applicant and/or any other persons connected with or having an interest in any application, including other city departments and agencies, written notice forthwith of his or her actions and decisions accompanied by a copy of the declaration.

    B.   The actions and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. Such appeal shall be filed with the design review board in the same manner prescribed for the planning commission, as set forth in Section 18.64.040 of this title. (Prior code § 9210.03 (B)(4))

 

18.48.095 Permit—Issuance, term, expiration and revocation.
    A.  All conditions of approval as set forth by the zoning administrator, design review board or city council shall be fully complied with and completed within the time period specified in the precise plan of design grant. In the event that no time period is set forth, a building permit and/or certificate of occupancy must be obtained within one year from the effective date of the grant, whichever is deemed appropriate by the zoning administrator.

    B.   Failure to comply with the specified time periods of such permits shall automatically render the precise plan of design grant null and void and it shall not be reconsidered except upon filing a new application.

    C.   During the course of exercising the precise plan of design grant, the applicant may file a written extension request at least thirty days prior to the expiration date of the grant, to the zoning administrator for review and approval.

    D.  In the case of a revocation, the zoning administrator shall inspect the property, other written reports and investigations and review all of the facts which may warrant revocation. The zoning administrator shall set the matter of revocation for hearing before the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall give fifteen days prior written notice of the hearing to the permit holder that they may present evidence and contest the revocation.

    In reviewing the factors for revocation of a precise plan of design, the zoning administrator shall consider the following:

    1.   That the permit holder is in violation of any of the terms and conditions of approval set forth in the precise plan of design grant;

    2.   That the permit holder is in violation of any provision of the Health and Safety Code constituting a public nuisance by improper operation or maintenance of the property and or structures;

    3.   That the permit holder is in violation of any provision of the adopted Uniform Building Code; Uniform Mechanical Code; Uniform Plumbing Code; National Electrical Code; and or the Uniform Housing Code;

    4.   That the grant is being exercised in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance.

    E.   Failure to comply with any of the conditions or terms set forth in the precise plan of design permit shall be considered a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 18.06.130 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 830 § 11, 1993)

 

Article II Design Review Board—Appeal Procedure
18.48.100 Establishment of board.
    A design review board is created and established to principally serve as an appeal board most appropriate for rendering decisions on appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator relative to precise plans of design as set forth in this title and Section 18.64.040 which will further assure promotion, maintenance, protection, preservation and perpetuation of the orderly and harmonious development of the city consistent with the provisions of this title and the goals and objectives of the general plan, and to do such other things for the furtherance of the community’s overall planning program. (Ord. 830 § 10, 1993; prior code § 9211.01)

 

18.48.110 Purpose and intent of board.
    The intent and purpose of the design review board is:

    A.  To principally review and render decisions on all appeals of the zoning administrator’s actions relative to precise plans of design, being certain that adequate consideration is given to the conservation, promotion and stabilization of property and development values and the environmental setting consistent with sound principles of land use planning;

    B.   To further assure direction of development and land use planning of the community and the several zone classifications therein; and

    C.   To further assure that the character and functional design, image, atmosphere and architectural appeal of any proposed development and developments already existing or planned in the several zone classifications and areas of the city have been given adequate consideration, and their peculiar suitability for particular land use developments are consistent with the community’s overall planning program, when the design review board is required to do so pursuant to the provisions of Article II of this chapter. (Prior code § 9211.02)

 

18.48.120 Membership, powers and duties.
    Membership of the design review board and its powers and duties shall be as follows:

    A.  Membership. Members of the design review board shall consist of the voting members of the planning commission.

    B.   Powers and Duties. In order to effectively implement the provisions of this title, the design review board shall have and be vested with the powers and duties to perform the following:

    1.   To make findings, reports and recommendations on all matters requested by the community redevelopment agency;

    2.   To make findings, reports and recommendations on all matters requested by the city council;

    3.   To make findings, reports and recommendations, and to advise the city council on all architectural and development matters relating to land use development in the O-S and civic center zones, and to development of any other city owned or controlled property where the physical environmental design is of significant value to the community as a whole;

    4.   To review, uphold, modify and/or deny all appeals relative to precise plans of design;

    5.   To do such other things as shall be deemed necessary to carry out the community’s overall planning program; and

    6.   To adopt such bylaws as is deemed necessary to provide for the following:

    a.   The time, date and place of all meetings,

    b.   The method of electing officers,

    c.   The taking of minutes, and

    d.   Such other matters relative to its organization and methods of administration of its duties which are not otherwise provided by statute or ordinance.

    C.   Board Not Required to Hold Public Hearings. Unless otherwise ordered by the city council, the design review board shall not be required to hold a public hearing on any matter which it is required to review, but all meetings conducted thereby shall be open to the public. (Prior code § 9211.03)

 

18.48.130 Appeal review and procedures.
    Upon receipt of an appeal of the decision of the zoning administrator relative to a precise plan of design, the design review board shall cause the following:

    A.  Investigations. The design review board shall cause to be made by its own members such investigations of facts bearing upon an appeal that will assure appropriate disposition thereof consistent with the provisions of Article II of this chapter. The zoning administrator shall prepare and transmit forthwith a report, based on an inspection of the property and an examination of the application, other written investigations, reasons for his or her decisions, and declaration of findings, to the design review board for its investigative appeal review.

    B.   Findings. The design review board, following an inspection of the property and an examination of the appeal and report of the zoning administrator, shall uphold, modify or deny the appeal based on the following findings of fact:

    1.   That the application and proposed precise plan of design is either consistent or inconsistent with this title, general plan, and/or the zone classification in which it is to be located;

    2.   That the proposed development for the use of land either will or will not in any way be detrimental to existing or planned developments of surrounding properties in the area in which it is proposed to be located;

    3.   That either adequate or inadequate protection against excessive vehicular traffic-generating capacity, noise, vibrations, and other factors which tend to make the general environment less desirable, are reasonably and efficiently satisfactory for existing and planned developments of surrounding properties in the area in which the proposed development is to be located;

    4.   That requirements of other city departments and agencies either have or have not been given adequate consideration and made a part of precise plan of design approval to protect the general welfare in the best interest of the community;

    5.   That the proposed development for the use of land either will or will not be detrimental in any way to the character and functional design, image, atmosphere and architectural appeal of any existing or planned developments of the zone classification, and its peculiar suitability for the particular use development in which the proposed development is to be located; and

    6.   That the physical, architectural and environmental appeal, design, image, atmosphere, character and functional plan of the proposed development, when completed, either will or will not be at such variance with existing development or those in the course of development or other planned development of the area in which the proposed development is contemplated to be located, so as to cause a substantial depreciation, demotion or instability of the value of property and development in the immediate neighborhood.

    C.   Announcement of Findings Notice, Finality and Decisions.

    1.   The design review board shall announce its findings and decisions by formal resolution not more than ten days after rendering its decision on any appeal. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, reasons, conditions and/or other matters which, in the board’s opinion, make upholding, modification or denial of an appeal considered necessary to carry out the purpose and provisions of Article II of this chapter, and shall uphold, modify or deny same.

    2.   The design review board shall forthwith give the applicant and/or other persons connected with or having an interest in any appeal, including other city departments and agencies, written notice of its findings and decisions, accompanied by the board’s resolution setting forth its actions thereon. The actions and decisions of the design review board shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Prior code § 9211.04)

Chapter 18.49 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES
18.49.010 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide a comprehensive set of standards for the development of wireless telecommunication facilities in the city. The regulations contained herein are designed to protect and promote the safety, welfare, image and aesthetic values of the community as set forth in the goals, objectives and policies of the Pico Rivera general plan; while allowing the orderly development of wireless telecommunication facilities. As such, the intended goals of these standards are as follows:

    A.  Expand the areas of the city where wireless telecommunication facilities would be permitted;

    B.   Protect local interests through the use of setbacks and aesthetic enhancements;

    C.   Encourage the location of telecommunication technology in appropriate areas through the use of nondiscretionary or administrative applications. (Ord. 893 § 9, 1997)

 

18.49.020 Definitions.
    The definitions of wireless telecommunication related terminology as used in this chapter can be found in Chapter 18.04 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 893 § 9, 1997)

18.49.030 General requirements.
    All wireless telecommunication facility proposals shall be subject to the following provisions:

    A.  Colocation Required Where Feasible. Subject to zoning administrator requirements, the applicant and/or existing provider may be required to provide written verifiable proof why colocation is not structurally or technically feasible. Lease agreements may not preclude prohibition colocation or contain an exclusivity clause. Violation of this provision subjects provider or property to revocation of permit.

    B.   Structures to be Removed if No Longer in Use. Should a wireless telecommunications facility become unused for a continuous period of one hundred eighty days, then the property owner shall be responsible for removing the structure and equipment within sixty days of notification from city, should purveyor fail to do so. Lease agreement between purveyor and property owner cannot prohibit property owners’ ability to remove equipment should above condition occur. Lease agreements to be drafted to fit within “commercial lease” provisions of federal bankruptcy law. Applicant may be required to verify compliance with these provisions.

    C.   Provider to provide proof of compliance with existing federal or ANSI (American National Standards Institute) standards relative to RF (Radio Frequency) or EMF (Electromagnetic Field) transmissions. Letter from certified RF engineer fulfills this requirement. Additional compliance verification may be required should federal standards be modified.

    D.  Interference caused by facility or transmissions to TV, ham radio or similar uses to be rectified within thirty days by fa-

cility operator upon notification by the city. Facility operator to be responsible for any expense involved in rectifying problems arising from such interference.

    E.   Applicant to comply with all other provisions of Title 18 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code not in conflict with this chapter.

    F.   Small Cell Facilities Within the Public Rights-of-Way. The installation of a small cell wireless facility within a public right-of-way shall be governed by and be subject to the small cell regulations of the city of Pico Rivera, as adopted by resolution of the city council, and subject to the payment of any associated fees established by resolution of the city council. For purposes of this subsection, the term “small wireless facility” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 1.6002(l) of Subpart U, of Part 1, of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 1134 § 3, 2019; Ord. 893 § 9, 1997)

 

18.49.040 Development standards.
 

Zone

Standards

RE, SF

CUP required.

 

Maximum height fifty-five feet.

 

Cannot be located on parcel utilized for residential purpose.

 

Must be of stealth design; such as church bell tower, water storage tank, etc.

 

Antenna and associated accessory equipment should be oriented away from neighboring properties or public right-of-way (ROW).

RM

Roof-mounted antennas and equipment allowed on multiple-family dwellings, provided such antennas and equipment are of stealth design.

 

All other requirements same as RE and SF zones.

PUD, SP301, P, CN

Only stealth type design with CUP approval and must be located in public ROW.

 

Intended for those types of microcell devices (or similar) that can be attached to light or telephone poles and are small or unobtrusive enough to be obscure from view.

PF, OS

Roof-mounted, building-mounted or freestanding (all of stealth design), permitted with PPD approval. Freestanding stealth structure must appear as natural complement to existing structures or landscaping. For example, structure to be designed as clock tower or incorporated into signage that effectively screens antenna from view.

 

Nonstealth monopole type structures permitted with PPD approval. Structure must be located at least two hundred feet from residential property, at least one hundred feet from public ROW, and located adjacent to or among structures or landscaping (trees) of comparable height. Accessory structures must have solid finished screening compatible with existing structures. In addition, landscape screening with irrigation may be required.

CG, CM, CC

Same as PF/OS requirements with following exceptions for non-stealth monopole design:

 

Height of structure limited to fifty-five feet.

 

Structure to be oriented toward back or rear of property, oriented away from public ROW.

 

Designed to appear as flower tower or similar design if architecturally compatible with existing structures.

CPD

Roof-mounted, building-mounted, or freestanding (all of stealth design), permitted with PPD approval. Maximum height of freestanding structure is fifty-five feet.

PA

Same as CPD zone, but cannot be located in conjunction with existing residential use.

IG, IPD

Roof-mounted, building-mounted, or freestanding type facilities (all of stealth design), require ZCR review only.

 

Freestanding monopole type structures or roof-mounted panel antennas located at least two hundred feet from residential property, and at least one hundred feet from public ROW subject to ZCR review. Color of structure(s) to be determined by Zoning Administrator.

IL

Same as IG/IPD zones for stealth construction. PPD required for freestanding monopole structures located at least two hundred feet from residential property and at least one hundred feet from public ROW.

 

(Ord. 893 § 9, 1997)

 

18.49.050 Signs and advertising.
    Nonsafety related signage or advertising is prohibited unless a natural part of a stealth design. (Ord. 893 § 9, 1997)

 

18.49.060 Lighting.
    Lighting to be kept to minimum necessary for safety purposes. Lighting plan to be submitted for review and approval prior to permit issuance. (Ord. 893 § 9, 1997)

Chapter 18.50 ANIMALS, POULTRY AND LIVESTOCK
18.50.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures applicable to unusual uses of land where the circumstances and conditions require special attention, and where the application of this chapter during the course of the administration and enforcement results in the inconsistency with the general intent and purpose thereof. (Prior code § 9213.01)

 

18.50.020 Regulations applicable.
    Regulations governing the keeping of animals, poultry and fowl shall be as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9213.02)

 

18.50.030 Dogs and cats.
    No person shall keep or maintain more than three dogs and/or cats, or any combination thereof totaling three, being more than three months of age upon any lot or premises located in any residential zone of the city. Such dogs and/or cats shall be kept only for the personal use and enjoyment of the occupants of the premises upon which such dogs or cats are so kept or maintained. (Prior code § 9213.02 (D))

 

18.50.040 Poultry, fowl, rabbits and small animals.
    No person shall keep or maintain any combination of poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals exceeding nine, or more than three of each type, kind or species upon any lot or premises in any residential zone, except in the R-E zone. In the R-E zone, no person shall keep or maintain any combination of poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals exceeding twenty for each ten thousand square feet of lot area. These restrictions shall apply regardless of the age of such poultry, fowl, rabbits or small animals. (Prior code § 9213.02 (E))

 

18.50.045 Pigeons.
    A.  Permit—Required When. No person shall keep or maintain on any property zoned or used for residential uses and purposes more than three pigeons, in any residential zone. A conditional use permit is required to maintain pigeons greater than the amount identified above. Compliance with the keeping and care of pigeons is required at all times.

    B.   Keeping and Care of Pigeons. In addition to the terms and provisions of any conditional use permit issued for maintenance and care of pigeons, each permittee shall at all times comply with the following conditions:

    1.   All feed shall be stored in containers which offer protection against rodents;

    2.   All pigeon droppings and food scraps shall be removed from the premises at least once a week, and disposed of in a sanitary manner;

    3.   The lofts or pigeon houses shall be soundly constructed, properly maintained and adequately landscaped to blend with and conform to the surrounding area;

    4.   The lofts or pigeon houses shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in compliance with all health regulations of the city of Pico Rivera;

    5.   City officers, or the health representatives of the city, shall have the right to inspect each such loft and pigeon house at such time as they deem advisable;

    6.   No permittee shall maintain at any time in excess of the number of pigeons authorized under this section or by any conditional use permit;

    7.   The lofts or pigeon houses shall not be located closer than thirty-five feet from any opening in a habitable building. (Ord. 1015 § 4, 2004; Ord. 1007 § 4, 2004)

 

18.50.050 Horses.
    A.  No horse shall be kept or maintained on any lot or parcel of land in any residential zone, except in the R-E zone. In the R-E zone, no such horse shall be kept or maintained on any property having less than ten thousand square feet of lot area. Any lot or parcel of land containing ten thousand square feet of lot area or more may keep and maintain such horse(s), including their respective offspring (up to one year of age); provided, however, that there shall be not less than ten thousand square feet of lot area for horses so kept and maintained for the first two and not less than five thousand square feet of lot area for each animal thereafter. A maximum of four horses (to include offspring up to one year of age) may be kept on premises. Such horses shall only be kept for the personal use and enjoyment of the occupants of the property or premises.

    B.   All areas devoted to and utilized for the keeping and maintenance of horses shall be subject to the following minimum requirements, and such requirements shall also be subject to the provisions of Chapter 18.42 of this title relative to property development regulations:

    1.   Corral Size. Every corral to be provided shall have a minimum dimension of not less than twelve feet, and shall contain not less than two hundred forty square feet of area.

    2.   Box Stalls. Every box stall to be provided shall have a minimum of twelve feet of length and width.

    3.   Fencing. Fencing to be provided shall be subject to the following:

    a.   Materials and Construction. Fencing may be constructed of wood, chain-link, masonry, or metal equivalent in structural strength to the use and employment of two-inch by six-inch wood railings installed horizontally and spaced vertically eighteen inches on center; for use in conjunction with stud stalls, such railings to be installed horizontally shall be spaced vertically twelve inches on center.

    b.   Fence Posts. Fence posts may be constructed of wood, metal or concrete, equivalent in structural strength to four-inch by six-inch wood posts installed vertically and spaced horizontally six feet on center; for use in conjunction with stud stalls, such posts to be installed vertically shall be spaced horizontally four feet on center.

    c.   Fence Height. Fences to be provided for enclosures shall be maintained not less than five feet in height. For use in conjunction with stud stalls, such fence shall be maintained not less than six feet in height.

    4.   Roofed Area. In conjunction with corrals, a roofed area shall be provided having minimum dimensions of not less than eight feet in width and twelve feet in length.

    5.   Water Facilities. Running, potable water facilities shall be provided within fifty feet of each stall and/or corral, and such facilities shall be maintained accessible thereto by the animals to be served thereby.

    6.   Maintenance. All stalls and corrals shall be continuously maintained with preservatives, fasteners and other materials so as to maintain appearance and prevent deterioration and animal escape.

    7.   Containment Devices. Substantial and acceptable locking and/or latching devices shall be provided and installed on all gates and doors to animal areas located thereon in such a manner so as to be inaccessible to animals and small children for the prevention of animal escape and unauthorized entry.

    8.   Feeding Facilities. Feeding facilities and/or boxes shall be provided in each corral and/or box stall, located in such a manner so as to be maintained above ground, and such facilities shall be maintained accessible thereto by the animals to be served thereby.

    9.   Hay and Grain Storage. The storage of hay shall take place on a Portland cement concrete slab floor, or stored not less than eighteen inches above ground. Such storage of hay shall not exceed a height above ground level greater than twelve feet, and shall not be located less than five feet from any property line. The storage of grain shall be confined to rodent-proof containers only.

    10. Drainage. All areas adjacent to any pen, coop, stable, stall, barn, corral, grazing or workout or training areas, or other building structures and areas where animals are kept and maintained, shall be graded to drain away from such facilities so as to prevent ponding and insect harborage.

    11. Dust Control. All areas used as arenas for exercising, training or exhibition of animals shall be continuously maintained in a dust-free manner at all times by dampening with an approved sprinkler system or other acceptable means for the prevention of detrimental and nuisance affects of dust emission to surrounding properties. (Ord. 1126 § 9, 2018; prior code § 9213.02 (F))

 

18.50.060 Sanitation and health regulations.
    A.  The keeping and maintenance of animals, poultry and/or fowl, as provided for in this chapter, shall comply with all regulations and provisions of the health and sanitation laws of the city. In addition thereto, no animal, poultry or fowl, nor any pen, coop, stable, barn, corral, grazing area or other structures or areas where animals, poultry or fowl may be kept or maintained shall be kept or maintained within thirty-five feet of any residence, dwelling or other building used for human habitation or occupancy. No such keeping or maintenance shall be within twenty-five feet of any public street, nor within ten feet of any portion of an adjoining residential zoned property. When such adjoining property is a lot containing twenty thousand square feet or more lot area such ten-foot distance is not required.

    B.   All premises and facilities upon which animals, poultry or fowl are permitted to be kept shall be maintained in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. All manure shall be removed at least once each week, and all premises and facilities shall be treated weekly with biologically, ecologically and environmentally approved pesticides for the control of odors, insects and rodents which in any way can be considered a clear and present nuisance or detriment to the health, safety, comfort, welfare, peace and/or tranquility of the general public. (Prior code § 9213.02 (G))

 

18.50.070 Livestock in residential and commercial zones.
    No person shall keep or maintain any sheep, goats, cattle, jacks, jennies, burros or any other type or kind of livestock on any property or premises within the city in any residential or commercial zone classification, except as may otherwise be regulated and permitted as set forth in Sections 18.50.040, 18.50.050 and 18.50.060 of this chapter. (Prior code § 9213.02 (B))

 

18.50.080 Noisy animals, poultry and fowl.
    No person shall keep or maintain upon any property or premises in the city, any crowing rooster, peacock, guinea fowl, geese, or any other animal, poultry or fowl which by any sound or cry shall unreasonably disturb the peace, quiet, urban environment, tranquility or welfare of the public generally. (Prior code § 9213.02(C))

 

18.50.090 Prohibited animals designated.
    No person shall keep, maintain, cause or otherwise permit to be kept or maintained, any of the following on any property or premises within the city:

    A.  Oxen or swine;

    B.   Dangerous or poisonous reptiles, except in scientific biological laboratories or educational institutions;

    C.   Lions, tigers, elephants; all species of monkeys, apes, chimpanzees; or similar such animals which shall be considered wild and/or dangerous by their nature or ancestry;

    D.  Bees. No person shall keep or maintain, or allow to be kept or maintained, upon premises owned or controlled by him, her or it, in the city, a hive of bees. This provision shall not apply to the keeping of bees within an educational institution for study or observation, or within a physician’s office or laboratory for medical research, treatment or other scientific purposes, provided they are not permitted to fly at large; or

    E.   Any other animals, poultry or fowl not specifically provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 48, 1989; prior code § 9213.02(A))

Chapter 18.52 HOME OCCUPATIONS
Article I. Generally
18.52.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures applicable to unusual uses of land where the circumstances and conditions require special attention, and where the application of this title during the course of the administration and enforcement, results in the inconsistency with the general intent and purpose thereof. (Prior code § 9213.01)

 

18.52.020 General requirements.
    Regulations governing permits for home occupations shall be as set out in this article. (Prior code § 9213.04)

 

18.52.030 Purpose of permits.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide a means by which, for the convenience of maintaining a livelihood and well-being, a restricted and limited business or occupation may be carried on in any dwelling in any residential zone or dwelling in any P-A, C-C, C-G, and M-U overlay zones, but which is clearly subordinate and incidental to the uses permitted in such zone or residential dwelling, and for which its operation could have no detrimental or adverse affects on the neighborhood area in which it may be located. It is also the intent and purpose of this chapter to only allow the issuance of a home occupation permit to the occupant of the residence or dwelling located in the R-E, S-F, R-I, PUD and R-M zones and in the P-A, C-C, C-G, and M-U overlay zones. (Ord. 1102 § 5, 2016; Ord. 830 § 12, 1993; prior code § 9213.04(A))

 

18.52.040 Statement of environmental impact.
    The zoning administrator, prior to accepting an application for a home occupation permit, shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the city council which are currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended. (Prior code § 9213.04(B))

 

 

18.52.050 Permit—Application, fee and conditions.
    A.  Any owner or occupant of any legally permitted dwelling located only in the R-E, S-F, R-I, PUD, R-M, P-A, C-C, C-G, or M-U overlay zone may file with the zoning administrator an application for a home occupation permit, verified by said owner or occupant on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, accompanied by a permit application fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the zoning administrator may require.

    B.   Issuance of a home occupation permit shall not become effective unless and/or until a business license has been obtained therefor, and no business license shall be issued by the director of finance until documentary evidence of the issuance of a home occupation permit has first been shown. Any home occupation permit issued to an illegal dwelling in error shall become null and void. (Ord. 1102 § 6, 2016; Ord. 830 § 13, 1993; Ord. 765 § 52, 1989; prior code § 9213.04(C))

 

18.52.060 Permit—Issuance, expiration and revocation.
    The zoning administrator may issue a home occupation permit which complies with the provisions of this chapter, on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, and may require additional terms and conditions considered necessary to assure the integrity of such permit and the zone in which it is proposed to be located. Should, at any time during the period which a home occupation permit is in effect, the zoning administrator find, after conducting an investigation, that the operation of such home occupation is in violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or the terms and conditions subject thereto, such violations shall be considered a misdemeanor as set forth in Section 18.06.130 and the zoning administrator shall by declaration serve notice of revocation of the home occupation permit. In any case, a home occupation permit shall expire at the same time a business license issued therefor expires, and shall not remain in effect unless and/or until such business license has been renewed by the director of finance, provided such renewal takes place within thirty days after such expiration of business license comes due. (Ord. 830 § 14, 1993; prior code § 9213.04(G))

 

18.52.070 Number, uses and types of occupations.
    Regulations governing the number, uses and types of home occupations shall be as follows:

    A.  Number. Not more than one home occupation permit shall be issued for a dwelling.

    B.   Uses and Types. A home occupation shall be limited to a personal service type use, provided that no employees or assistants in connection therewith are engaged for services on the premises who are not members of the resident family thereon. (Ord. 830 § 15, 1993; prior code § 9213.04 (D))

 

18.52.080 Signs and advertising.
    No signs or other advertising of any form or nature whatsoever, shall be displayed anywhere on the premises in connection with a home occupation. (Prior code § 9213.04(E))

 

18.52.090 Other conditions and restrictions.
    Other conditions, restrictions and regulations governing home occupations shall be as follows:

    A.  Every home occupation permit shall only be issued to the owner or occupant of the property, and such permit shall only be applicable and remain in effect so long as the applicant is a resident of the premises for which such permit is issued, and shall not be transferable to any other person or property.

    B.   The operation of every home occupation permit shall be limited to only the residents of the premises for which such permit is issued and shall not engage more than three such resident persons.

    C.   There shall not be any on-premises sales, displays, or consultation, except by phone or mail; no on-premises manufacturing fabrication or processing; on-premises office or storage use shall not occupy more than fifteen percent of the ground floor of the dwelling used in connection with the operation of a home occupation permit.

    1.   On-Premises Consultation Exception. On-premises consultation may be permitted in connection with a home occupation if the following conditions and restrictions are met:

    a.   Dwelling is located on a property whose front property line directly abuts a major arterial as designated within the Circulation Element of the city of Pico Rivera’s General Plan or whose street-adjacent side property line abuts a major arterial as designated within the Circulation Element of the city of Pico Rivera’s General Plan and provides direct legally permitted vehicular access via a driveway from the major arterial. On-premises consultation is prohibited within dwellings located on properties whose front and or street-adjacent side property lines directly abut a frontage road that runs parallel to a major arterial and is separated from the major arterial by a median.

    b.   Dwelling is not located within an apartment complex or condominium or similar development.

    c.   Property complies with current off-street parking requirements pursuant to Chapter 18.44 and is not a nonconforming dwelling in regards to off-street parking.

    d.   Dwelling possesses at least one off-street parking space for customer/client parking with minimum dimensions of nine feet in width by twenty feet in depth provided on a legally permitted driveway or within a legally permitted carport or garage that does not impede any required drive aisles.

    e.   A maximum of one customer/client may receive on-premises consultation at any one time. A family unit, such as a parent and one or more children, is considered one client or customer for purposes of this restriction.

    f.    On-premises consultation shall be restricted to services typically rendered within a business office.

    g.   On-premises consultation shall be permitted between the hours of seven a.m. to seven p.m.

    D.  All operations of a home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the inside of a dwelling and shall not exceed the use of more than fifteen percent of the ground floor building area in which it is located. Furthermore, no area outside the dwelling shall be used for the home occupation in any manner whatsoever, except for one six thousand pound vehicle used in connection with the operation of the home occupation required to be completely stored in the garage and for one off-street parking space pursuant to subsection (C)(1)(d).

    E.   No interior or exterior alterations or remodeling of any type whatsoever shall be permitted in connection with a home occupation.

    F.   All operations of a home occupation shall comply with the noise compatibility guidelines set forth within the Noise Element of the city of Pico Rivera’s General Plan. (Ord. 1102 § 7, 2016; Ord. 830 § 16, 1993; prior code § 9213.04(F))

 

Article II. Cottage Food Operations
18.52.200 Cottage food operation.
    A “cottage food operation,” as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(a), as may be amended from time to time, is permitted in the zones enumerated in Section 18.40.040(C)(1) subject to the procedures and requirements of this article.

    A.  An application shall be filed on a form prescribed by the city and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

    1.   The applicant name, household member names and address. Name, address and contact information for the property owner, landlord, homeowners’ association or management company, as well as the signature to consenting to the use;

    2.   A copy of the “Self Certification Checklist” registration for a Class A operation or a Class B permit issued by the Los Angeles County department of public health environmental health division;

    3.   Name of each individual involved and/or employed, whether they are a family member of the operator and the number of vehicles registered to the address and license plate number;

    4.   Statement of whether the proposed use will involve “direct sales” known as a Class A Permit or “indirect sales” known as a Class B Permit as those terms are defined in the California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b) as may be amended;

    5.   Frequency of loading and deliveries and anticipated consumer or third party retailer visits to the subject residence;

    6.   A scaled site plan showing: (a) location of all the structures on-site, (b) all vehicle parking spaces for the home or complex, (c) all delivery and/or loading areas, (d) the location of streets and property lines, driveway, pedestrian walkways, etc.;

    7.   A scaled floor plan showing: (a) all rooms for structures on-site, (b) areas registered and/or permitted by Los Angeles County department of public health environmental health division for cottage food preparation, packaging and related exclusive storage, (c) all doors and exits, (d) location of fire extinguishers, etc.;

    8.   Applicant shall pay a processing fee as established by resolution of the city council.

    B.   Action of Zoning Administrator. Within sixty days after submittal of a complete application and fee as required by this section the zoning administrator shall approve, approve in modified form, or deny the application in compliance with the authority and requirements set forth in California Government Code Section 51035, as may be amended from time to time. The zoning administrator shall grant the cottage food operations permit if the proposed cottage food operation, as applied for or as modified, complies with the standards set forth in this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the zoning administrator, in his or her discretion may condition approval of the use upon the cottage food operation’s compliance with any additional reasonable standards related to spacing and concentration, traffic control, parking or noise which the zoning administrator, in his or her sole discretion, deems necessary to mitigate the impact of the proposed use on the surrounding residential neighborhood. The decision of the zoning administrator shall be in writing and supported by reasonable findings. Any action of the zoning administrator may be appealed to the planning commission pursuant to Chapter 18.64 of this code. (Ord. 1085 § 4, 2014)

 

18.52.202 Cottage food operation standards.
    A.  Cottage food operations must meet the following requirements:

    1.   The applicant must be the “cottage food operator,” as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b) as may be amended from time to time.

    2.   Cottage food operations shall not be located within one thousand feet of the property line of another cottage food operation or located within the same building, apartment complex or other multifamily housing development.

    3.   Only one cottage food operation occupancy permit is permitted by address.

    4.   The cottage food operation permit may not be transferred, assigned or used by any person other than the permittee, used at any location other than the one for which the permit is granted.

    5.   Traffic Control.

    a.   Parking.

    i.    For single-family homes, parking spaces in the property’s garage or carport and driveway must be available for the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the household member’s vehicles and a parking space for an employee if an employee is present.

    ii.   For multifamily developments, the cottage food operator’s designated space(s) must be available for the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the household member’s vehicles and a parking space for an employee if an employee is present. On-site parking in an apartment complex or other multifamily residence requires written consent from all of the following that apply: the property owner, landlord, homeowners association or property manager.

    iii.  The cottage food operation shall not result in any appreciable increase in traffic, pedestrian or vehicular.

    b.   The cottage food operator shall only allow vehicular delivery or loading related to the cottage food operation between the hours of eight a.m. and seven p.m. and indicate where on-site loading and deliveries will be made. For multifamily developments, the cottage food operator must obtain written consent from all of the following that apply: the property owner, landlord, homeowners association or property manager.

    c.   The cottage food operator shall not allow any vehicle making a delivery, being loaded, or being used by consumers or third party retailers in relation to the cottage food operation to block or impede the public right-of-way, a vehicular drive aisle or idle at any time.

    d.   Visitation to the residence containing the cottage food operation for the purpose of direct or indirect sales is limited to the hours of eight a.m. to five p.m., Monday through Saturday.

    e.   Visitors shall not be allowed to queue or wait outside of the residence containing the cottage food operation at any time, either on foot or in vehicles.

    6.   Outdoor sales at the residence containing the cottage food operation are prohibited.

    7.   Cottage food operations shall not create noise levels in excess of those allowed in Chapter 8.40 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code and the Pico Rivera general plan.

    8.   The cottage food operation shall conform to all applicable federal, state, and municipal laws and regulations applicable to the residential area in which the cottage food operation is located.

    9.   The cottage food operator shall not employ more than one full- or part-time employee other than a family household member.

    10. External use of material or equipment not recognized as being part of the normal practices in the residential zone are prohibited.

    11. Equipment which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses are prohibited.

    12. On-site advertising is prohibited.

    13. Operations shall not exceed the use of more than fifteen percent of the ground floor building area in which it is located or that area as permitted by the Los Angeles County department of public health environmental health division, whichever is greater.

    14. The area outside the dwelling shall not be used for the operation in any manner whatsoever, except for one six thousand pound vehicle used in connection with the operation of the home occupation required to be completely stored in the garage.

    15. On-site dining or tasting events for customers are prohibited.

    16. Cottage food operations must comply with the restrictions on gross annual sales as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758. In year 2014 sales cannot exceed forty-five thousand dollars and for 2015 and beyond, sales cannot exceed fifty thousand dollars. Should at any time sales exceed the maximum, the permit shall be void and sales may no longer be conducted at the property.

    17. Cottage food operators must at all times maintain applicable tax returns or other proof of gross annual income.

    18. A cottage food operation shall obtain and renew as required, an operating permit with the Los Angeles department of public health environmental health division.

    19. Trash production shall not exceed that which otherwise is produced by normal residential activities.

    20. Cottage food operators shall not conduct sales in an attached garage, detached accessory structure or outside of the dwelling. (Ord. 1085 § 4, 2014)

 

18.52.204 Inspection.
    Per the California Health and Safety Code Section 114365, an initial and no more than one annual inspection may be conducted for a Class B operator that conducts indirect sales. A Class A operator shall not be subject to initial or routine inspections. An inspection may be conducted for any cottage food operation on the basis of a consumer complaint, reason to suspect that adultered or otherwise unsafe food has been produced by the cottage food operation or that the cottage food operation is in violation. (Ord. 1085 § 4, 2014)

 

18.52.206 Permit revocable.
    A permit to operate a cottage food operation obtained under this section is revocable at any time by the zoning administrator if any of the following conditions exist:

    A.  That the condition of the cottage food operation permit or provision for this chapter has been violated.

    B.   That the cottage food operation has become detrimental to the public health or safety, or constitutes a nuisance as designated in Chapter 8.16 of this code.

    C.   That the permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner.

    D.  That the cottage food operation no longer maintains a valid Class A or Class B permit.

    The zoning administrator shall provide the permit holder with at least ten days’ prior written notice of the grounds for the proposed revocation. Within ten days of receipt of the notice of revocation the permit holder may request a hearing before the zoning administrator to contest the revocation of the permit. Upon the receipt of a request for hearing, the zoning administrator shall schedule a hearing with the permit holder within a reasonable time. Within fifteen days after the hearing the zoning administrator shall issue a written decision to the permit holder. The decision shall be supported by findings. (Ord. 1085 § 4, 2014)

 

18.52.208 Appeals.
    Appeals. Any final action of the zoning administrator made under this article may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 18.64 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 1085 § 4, 2014)

Chapter 18.54 NONCONFORMING USES
18.54.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures applicable to unusual uses of land where the circumstances and conditions require special attention, and where the application of this chapter during the course of the administration and enforcement, results in the inconsistency with the general intent and purpose thereof. (Prior code § 9213.01)

 

18.54.020 General regulations.
    Regulations governing nonconforming uses shall be as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9213.03)

 

18.54.030 Nonconformity—Determination.
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the zoning administrator to determine and substantiate the existence of any nonconforming use. (Prior code § 9213.03(A))

 

18.54.040 Regulations applicable.
    The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to all nonconforming uses of land. (Prior code § 9213.03 (B))

 

18.54.050 Legally existing developments of record.
    Whenever a development of record existed legally prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this zoning code, and because of the application thereof such development is nonconforming with respect to the property development regulations of Chapter 18.42 of this title, such development may remain as lawfully existing, provided that any addition or alterations are made to comply with this title, except as further set forth in Section 18.54.060 below. (Prior code § 9213.03 (B)(1))

 

18.54.060 Continuation of use—Conditions.
    Each and every nonconforming use may be continuously maintained and utilized, provided that no intensification or increase in the degree of nonconformity shall be permitted. Continuation of such noncon-

forming use shall be limited by and subject to the provisions and application of Sections 18.54.070, 18.54.080 and 18.54.090(A) of this chapter, and in the following cases:

    A.  Exception I. Nonconforming uses may be intensified, and the degree of nonconformity may be expanded, if the original structure and the expansion are made to conform with the provisions of this title.

    B.   Exception II. Structural alterations, required by law, may be constructed.

    C.   Exception III. Alterations or additions to nonconforming single-family dwellings may be made without complying with the parking regulations of this title provided that the existing dwelling contains a legally permitted one-car garage or carport. In addition to said parking, the existing driveway leading to the garage or carport shall be widened to accommodate a nine-foot by twenty-foot open parking space in compliance to Section 18.44.050B(2) of this title. In the event that the existing driveway cannot be widened due to existing physical obstructions, the existing driveway shall be considered to comply with required parking provisions of this title. Garage conversions shall not be exempt from the parking regulations of this title. Existing single-family dwellings may improve nonconforming driveways that do not lead to required parking provided that the driveway does not exceed ten feet in width and not increase in length.

    D.  Exception IV. Side yard setbacks for nonconforming single-family dwellings and detached accessory structures may be reduced to a minimum of three feet to permit expansion in line with existing building walls.

    E.   Exception V. Minor alterations or additions to existing legal nonconforming commercial or industrial buildings may be constructed, provided that the addition conforms to the provisions of this title.

    F.   Exception VI. Residential structures and uses, and equestrian structures and uses, legally existing and permitted, located on property annexed to the city in 1996—1997 and prezoned industrial general (I-G) shall not be subject to Section 18.54.070 or Section 18.54.080, and may be continued in use and may be reconstructed after any amount of accidental destruction caused by fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God. In all other respects, such uses and structures shall comply with Chapter 18.54 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. (Ord. 888 § 3, 1996; Ord. 834 § 15, 1993; Ord. 778 § 1, 1990; prior code § 9213.03 (B)(2))

 

18.54.070 Termination—By operation of law.
    A.  The nonconforming use of land shall be abated and usage thereof shall be terminated upon the expiration of the periods of time hereinafter set forth in this section. Such periods of time shall be deemed to commence to run as of the effective date of this section or the date that such nonconforming use of land first became nonconforming by reason of application of this zoning code thereto, whichever occurs later.

    B.   Nonconforming Adult Establishments, Businesses or Other Adult Uses Discontinuance Required Within Three Years. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, within three years after the effective date of the ordinance codified in those sections of this code relating to land uses characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, such uses shall be discontinued or shall be brought into full compliance with local regulations.

    C.   Where the property is unimproved, including, but not limited to, areas used for vehicle off-street parking facilities, one year.

    D.  Where the property is unimproved, except for structures of a type for which the building code does not require a building permit, three years.

    E.   Where the property is unimproved except for a structure which contains less than one hundred square feet of gross floor area, three years.

    F.   A nonconforming use housed in a nonconforming building, as set forth by subsection H or change of use, whichever comes first.

    G.  A nonconforming use of a conforming building or structure, ten years or change of use, whichever comes first.

    H.  Termination of Nonconforming Buildings or Structures by Operation of Law. Nonconforming buildings or structures shall be abated and usage thereof shall be terminated upon the expiration of the period of time indicated hereafter.

    1.   Type IV and type V buildings (light incombustible frame and wood frame), thirty-five years;

    2.   Type III building (heavy timber construction and ordinary masonry), forty years;

    3.   Type I and type II buildings (fire resistive), fifty years. (Ord. 765 § 49, 1989; Ord. 611 § 3, 1979; Ord. 610 § 3, 1979; prior code § 9213.03 (B)(4))

 

18.54.080 Termination—By destruction.
    Any nonconforming use of land shall be terminated if destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent at the time of its destruction physically by fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God, and/or destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent of the value existing prior to the time of such destruction. For the purposes of arriving at such value, the building official shall determine the valuation of such nonconforming use that existed prior to such destruction by such accepted principles, practices, methods and other resources available. (Prior code § 9213.03 (B)(3))

 

18.54.081 Termination By abandonment.
    Any nonconforming use of land shall be terminated if it ceases such use for a continuous period of six months and any subsequent uses shall comply fully with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 50, 1989)

 

18.54.090 Abatement—Authorized when Procedures.
    A.  Any nonconforming use may be abated in compliance with the provisions as set forth in Sections 18.54.100 through 18.54.130 of this chapter.

    B.   Procedures for the abatement of nonconforming uses shall be as set out in Sections 18.54.100 through 18.54.130. (Prior code § 9213.03 (B)(5), (C)(part))

 

18.54.100 Abatement—Determination as nuisance.
    The planning commission shall have the authority to make a finding and determination that the continuation of a nonconforming use results in a nuisance, as defined in the Civil Code of the state of California, and/or is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. The planning commission shall provide for the abatement of such nuisance and/or detrimental condition, or, in the alternative, terminate such nonconforming use, in the manner hereinafter provided. (Prior code § 9213.03 (C)(1))

 

18.54.110 Abatement—Investigation by planning commission.
    Whenever any nonconforming use is so exercised so as to constitute a nuisance and/or condition detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare, the planning commission on its own initiative shall make, or cause to be made, such investigations deemed necessary and essential to substantiate same, and shall fix a date upon which such nuisance and/or detrimental condition shall be abated, at a public hearing as hereinafter provided. Such investigation shall also include necessary and essential facts to substantiate and fix a date upon which the nonconforming use shall be terminated in event it is determined, by the planning commission at the hearing, that the conditions or circumstances constituting such nuisance and/or detrimental condition cannot be abated. In performance of this investigative function, the planning commission shall consider all pertinent data in conjunction therewith and shall allow the owner, lessee or other person having a vested interest therein, if there be such, to present such evidence as they may possess and which will bear directly on such matter. (Prior code § 9213.03 (C)(2))

 

18.54.120 Abatement—Notice to owner.
    When the date for abatement of a nuisance, detrimental condition and/or termination of a nonconforming use has been determined, the planning commission, by notice of abatement nuisance and/or detrimental condition or notice of termination of nonconforming use, shall establish such date, and set forth such facts as bear upon the case upon which the determination of the abatement or termination is based, and shall formally notify the owner, lessee or other person having a vested interest therein of its action forthwith. (Prior code § 9213.03 (C)(3))

 

18.54.130 Abatement—Public hearing requirements.
    Prior to the notice of abatement of nuisance and/or detrimental condition or notice of termination of nonconforming use taking effect, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing conducted in the following manner:

    A.  Setting of Hearing. The planning commission shall set a public hearing for consideration of the notice of termination not less than ten days nor more than thirty days from the date of filing or adoption of such notice.

    B.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time, date and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    1.   By at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in an edition published therefor not less than ten days prior to the date set for said public hearing; and

    2.   By the mailing of such notice of public hearing not less than ten days prior to the date set for such hearing to the owner, lessee or other person having a vested interest therein, and to all owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet measured from the external boundaries of the property described in such notice, of which such owners and property appear on copies of the equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County on file in the office of the county assessor. Any error in the copy of the assessment roll shall not invalidate any act of the planning commission or city council, as the case may be. In addition thereto, one copy of such notice shall also be posted on the property for which such public hearing is being held.

    C.   Form, Wording and Content of Notices. The form, wording and content of notices of public hearings shall consist of the words “NOTICE OF TERMINATION OF NONCONFORMING USE,” and shall set forth the day of the week, date, place or exact location, time, file number or other identification, description of the nonconforming condition, exact legal description of the nonconforming condition, exact legal description of the property, and the address or general location thereof relative to the public hearing or hearings to be held on the matter. Such notices shall appear in a format acceptable to the planning commission.

    D.  Findings. The planning commission, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of all submitted evidence, upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, and in conclusion of the public hearing shall by resolution set forth its findings, actions and decisions thereon.

    E.   Announcement of Findings Notice, Finality and Decisions.

    1.   The planning commission shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing. Such resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, reasons, conditions, determinations and other matters which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make the termination of a nonconforming use necessary, and shall order same.

    2.   The planning commission shall forthwith give the owner, lessee or other person having a vested interest therein, and the zoning administrator, written notice of its actions and decisions, together with a copy of the notice of termination of nonconforming use and such resolution.

    3.   The actions and decisions of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Ord. 765 § 51, 1989; prior code § 9213.03 (C)(4))

Chapter 18.56 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
18.56.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures applicable to unusual uses of land where the circumstances and conditions require special attention, and where the application of this title during the course of the administration and enforcement, results in the inconsistency with the general intent and purpose thereof. (Prior code § 9213.01)

 

18.56.020 General regulations.
    Regulations governing special uses of land for which a conditional use permit is required shall be as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9213.07)

 

18.56.030 Purpose of permit.
    A conditional use permit is intended to be used as a zoning instrument for the purpose of reviewing the characteristics and operations of particular uses of land the conduct of which may generally have a distinct impact on the area and in the zone in which they are located. The intent and purpose of this chapter is to also set forth provisions and regulations for the investigation, examination and review of the specific location, site development and other matters of concern wherein these uses of land are potentially capable of creating adversities and special problems not compatible and inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the particular zone classification in which they may be allowed. (Prior code § 9213.07 (A))

 

18.56.040 Permit—Required when.
    Any use of land, as set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title on land use regulations, and Section 18.56.050 of this chapter, that may require a conditional use permit prior to being allowed as a permitted use in the particular zone classification, or for expansion or intensification of such use or structure, shall also be subject to the regulations of this chapter prior to the issuance of any permit or other entitlement of any type or kind whatsoever. (Prior code § 9213.07 (B))

 

18.56.050 Unclassified uses.
    A.  All of the following uses of land, and all matters directly related thereto, are declared to possess characteristics of such unique and special form as to make impractical their being included automatically in any category of land uses as set forth in Chapter 18.40 of this title, and authority for the location, zone classification, operation and conduct thereof shall be determined by and subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, except in the case of unclassified government owned or controlled land and facilities which shall be subject to approval of a precise plan of design. During the course of review, the planning commission or zoning administrator, as the case may be, shall determine that the characteristics of any such unclassified uses shall not be unreasonably incompatible with uses and development permitted in the area in which they may be located, and shall further establish and require such other conditions as may reasonably assure that the general intent and purpose of this title and the general plan will be served.

    B.   The following are declared to be unclassified uses subject to issuance of a conditional use permit:

    1.   Aeronautical landing fields and structures;

    2.   Barrow pits of a depth of two feet or more, and grading projects of excavation or fill of three feet or more;

    3.   Commercial recreation and facilities;

    4.   Development of natural mineral resources;

    5.   Mortuaries;

    6.   Commercial, privately owned and operated radio and television transmitters, antennas and associated facilities, except this shall not apply to satellite dish receiving antennas and to amateur radio/citizen band radio antennas in residential zones. (Ord. 745 § 3, 1988; Ord. 709 § 5, 1985; prior code § 9213.07 (G))

 

18.56.060 Permit—Issuance authority.
    The planning commission and zoning administrator shall have and be vested with the power and authority, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to grant, at their discretion and upon such conditions as they deem necessary, such conditional use permits as may be determined to be in the best interests of the community provided that such permits are in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Division and the General Plan. (Prior code § 9213.07 (C))

 

18.56.070 Statement of environmental impact.
    The zoning administrator, prior to accepting an application for a conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit modification, shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the city council which are currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended. (Prior code § 9213.07 (D))

 

18.56.080 Permit—Application, fees and public hearing.
    Regulations governing the granting and issuance of a conditional use permit are as follows:

    A.  Application and Fees. Whenever a use of land is subject to the provisions of this chapter, the owner of the property upon which such use of land is proposed to be located shall file with the zoning administrator an application for approval of a conditional use permit, verified by said owner on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the zoning administrator may require.

    B.   Hearing on Application. Upon the filing of a verified application, and acceptance thereof, the zoning administrator shall transmit the application forthwith to the planning commission and the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon.

    C.   Public Hearing. The planning commission, upon receipt of an application shall commence to hold a public hearing thereon conducted in the following manner:

    1.   Setting of Hearing. The planning commission shall set a public hearing for consideration of an application for approval of a conditional use permit. The date set for the public hearing shall be not less than ten days nor more than forty days from the date of receipt of the application by the planning commission on the adoption of a motion thereof.

    2.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time, date and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    a.   By at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation with the city in an edition published therefor not less than ten days prior to the date set for said public hearing; and

    b.   By the mailing of such notice of public hearing not less than ten days prior to the date set for such hearing to the owner, applicant, lessee and/or other persons having vested interest therein, and to all owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet measured from the external boundaries of the property described in said notice of which such owners and property appear on copies of the equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County on file in the office of the county assessor. Any error in the copy of the assessment roll shall not invalidate any act of the zoning administrator, planning commission or city council, as the case may be.

    3.   Form, Wording and Content of Notices. The form, wording and content of notices of public hearings shall consist of the words “NOTICE OF PROPOSED CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT,” and shall set forth the day of the week, date, place or exact location, time, file number or other identification, name of the applicant or initiator, description of the matter under consideration, exact legal description of the property, and the address or general location thereof, relative to the public hearing or hearings to be held on the matter. Such notices shall appear in a format acceptable to the city planner.

    4.   Investigations. The planning commission shall cause to be made, by its own members and the zoning administrator, such investigations of facts bearing upon an application that will assure appropriate disposition thereof consistent with the provisions of this title and the general plan. The zoning administrator shall prepare and transmit a written report, based upon an inspection of the property and an examination of the application and other written investigations, to the owners and/or applicant and the planning commission not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing.

    5.   Planning Commission Findings. The planning commission, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of the application and investigations and report of the zoning administrator, upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto and conclusion of the public hearing, shall determine whether or not the requirements for qualification have been shown, as hereinabove set forth, and shall make the appropriate findings applicable therewith.

    6.   Announcement of Findings Notice and Finality of Decisions. The planning commission shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing. Such resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, reasons, conditions, determinations and other matters which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of this title, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny same. The planning commission shall forthwith give the owner, applicant, and/or any other persons connected with or having an interest in the application, including other city departments and agencies, written notice of its actions and decisions, together with a copy of the resolution. The actions and decisions of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Ord. 765 §§ 58, 59, 1989; prior code § 9213.07 (F))

 

18.56.090 Issuance—Mandatory findings.
    A.  Prior to the granting of any conditional use permit or minor conditional use permit modification, the planning commission and zoning administrator, respectively, shall first determine whether or not the application therefor meets the requirements for such and shall make the following findings:

    1.   That the granting of such permit will be in the interest of furtherance of public welfare;

    2.   That the proposed use of land described in the application will not be detrimental in any way to other adjoining and neighboring properties in the general area in which the use is proposed to be located;

    3.   That the property described in the application is suitable for the proposed use of land;

    4.   That the traffic-generating capacity and operation of the proposed use of land will not place a demand for or burden upon other municipal improvements or services, or utilities;

    5.   That adequate consideration for the protection of the environment has been satisfactorily demonstrated;

    6.   That the proposed use of land is consistent with the provisions and objectives of the general plan; and

    7.   That adequate consideration has been given to assure the conservation and stabilization of property values, the direction of development and land use planning of the area in which the use is proposed to be located, that the character of the zone and area in which the use is proposed to be located, and the peculiar suitability of such zone and area for the particular use is maintained and consistent with the community’s overall planning program.

    B.   No property shall qualify for a conditional use permit or conditional use permit minor modification unless each and every requirement and finding hereinabove set forth in this chapter can be shown and that the planning commission and zoning administrator, as the case may be, can make the findings of same. (Prior code § 9213.07 (E))

 

18.56.100 Minor modification conditional use permits.
    Whenever a practical difficulty occurs or unforseen circumstances arise during the course of exercising a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and which may necessitate a minor modification of such conditional use permit, a conditional use permit-minor modification may be issued for such modification in accordance with the provisions as hereinafter set forth:

    A.  Application for Permit Fees. Any owner of property for which a conditional use permit has been issued and is currently in effect, and who is desirous of a minor modification thereof, may file with the zoning administrator an application for approval of a conditional use permit-minor modification, verified by said owner on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the zoning administrator may require.

    B.   Qualifications for Filing. Any application filed for a minor modification that also complies with the requirements and findings as set forth in Section 18.56.090 of this chapter, but which only involves a minor modification in the site development plan or arrangement of facilities adequate to accommodate the operation of the use of land or the interior remodeling of an existing use operating under a valid conditional use permit, or any of the conditions of permit issuance, and determination thereof has been made at the discretion of the zoning administrator, may qualify for a conditional use permit-minor modification.

    C.   Authority of Zoning Administrator. The zoning administrator shall have and be vested with the power and authority to approve a conditional use permit-minor modification at his or her sole discretion; provided, however that such modification is in fact minor in scope and nature and only involves minor adjustments to retain the integrity of the conditional use permit. The zoning administrator shall not issue such minor permit when a conditional use permit has not been issued or is not in effect or there are any violations thereof in existence, or involves the waiver or deletion of any condition of a conditional use permit. The zoning administrator shall have the sole option to hold a public hearing on the matter in the same manner as required for a conditional use permit. The zoning administrator shall process such application for conditional use permit-minor modification, which does not require a public hearing, in the following manner:

    1.   Investigations. The zoning administrator, upon receipt and acceptance of an application, shall make and cause to be made such investigations of the facts bearing upon the application what will assure appropriate disposition thereof.

    2.   Findings. The zoning administrator, upon conducting an inspection of the property involved, upon examination and review of the application and investigations, and upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, shall determine whether or not the requirements for qualification have been shown, as hereinabove set forth in Section 18.56.090, and the application therefor qualifies for a conditional use permit-minor modification, and shall make the appropriate findings applicable therewith.

    3.   Announcement of Findings Finality of Decisions. The zoning administrator shall announce his or her findings and decisions by formal written declaration of findings and decisions not more than fifteen days after acceptance of an application. Such declaration shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, determinations, reasons, conditions and other matters which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, make the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of this title, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny same. The zoning administrator shall forthwith give the owner, applicant and/or any other persons connected with or having an interest in the application, including other city departments and agencies, written notice of his or her actions and decisions together with a copy of the declaration. The actions and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Ord. 765 § 60, 1989; prior code § 9213.07 (H))

 

18.56.110 Permit—Issuance, term, expiration and revocation.
    The zoning administrator may issue a conditional use permit approved by the planning commission and a conditional use permit-minor modification on his or her own approval which comply with the provisions of this chapter, on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, and may require additional terms and conditions of permit issuance considered necessary to assure the integrity of the permit and property in the area, vicinity and zone classification, and to be certain that such permit is not discriminatory or in effect granting a special privilege not otherwise shared. Such permits approved by the planning commission and/or a zoning administrator shall take effect upon such approvals. All conditions established by the planning commission and/or zoning administrator during their respective review processes, shall be fully complied with and completed within ninety days from the date of approval or such permits shall automatically become null and void and shall not be reconsidered except upon filing a new application. The planning commission may, however, establish a greater time period for compliance with conditions of conditional use permit approval as it deems necessary during its review process. During the course of exercising the conditional use permit, the applicant may file a request, in writing, with the planning commission for an extension of the time period, provided that such request is so filed not less than thirty days prior to the expiration date established for compliance with the conditions of permit approval. Should, at any time during the period which such permits are in effect, the zoning administrator finds that performance thereof is in violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or terms and conditions subject thereto, he or she shall forthwith by declaration serve notice of revocation thereof and shall revoke same. (Prior code § 9213.07 (I))

Chapter 18.58 MOVING BUILDINGS AND RELOCATION PERMITS
18.58.010 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures applicable to unusual uses of land where the circumstances and conditions require special attention, and where the application of this title during the course of the administration and enforcement, results in the inconsistency with the general intent and purpose thereof. (Prior code § 9213.01)

 

18.58.020 General regulations.
    Regulations governing the relocation of buildings shall be as set out in this chapter. (Prior code § 9213.05)

 

18.58.030 Relocation permit required when.
    Pursuant to Articles 2 and 3, Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, no person, firm or corporation shall move any building or structure, or part or portion thereof, over, upon, along or across any public street, way or alley within the city in order to relocate a particular building or structure or part or portion thereof upon any lot or parcel of land within the city unless and/or until a relocation permit has first been issued by the zoning administrator to the owner of the premises, lot or parcel of land upon which such building or structure or part or portion thereof is to be relocated, to relocate same. (Prior code § 9213.05 (A))

 

18.58.040 Inspection and correction list.
    Prior to making an application for relocation permit, the owner of the lot or parcel of land upon which a building or structure or part or portion thereof is proposed to be relocated, shall first obtain a relocation inspection and correction list from the building and safety division of the city to determine whether it is practical and economically feasible to perform such relocation. A copy of such inspection and correction list shall be filed with and made a part of an application for relocation permit. (Prior code § 9213.05 (B))

 

18.58.050 Application and fees.
    Whenever any person, firm or corporation desires to move any building or structure or part or portion thereof and to relocate same on any real property in the city, other than where same was originally located, the owner of such real property shall file with the zoning administrator an application for relocation permit, verified by such owner on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include such information as the zoning administrator may require. (Ord. 765 § 53, 1989; prior code § 9213.05 (D)(1))

 

18.58.060 Statement of environmental impact.
    The zoning administrator, prior to accepting an application for relocation permit, shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the city council which are currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended. (Prior code § 9213.05 (C))

 

18.58.070 Issuance procedures.
    Regulations and requirements for issuance of a relocation permit shall be subject to the application and procedures set out in Sections 18.58.080 through 18.58.120. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(part))

 

18.58.080 Public hearing requirements.
    Upon acceptance of an application for relocation permit, the zoning administrator shall hold a public hearing conducted in the following manner:

    A.  Setting of Hearing. The zoning administrator shall set a public hearing for consideration of an application for relocation permit not less than seven days, nor more than ten days from the date of acceptance of the application.

    B.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time, date and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    1.   By posting of a notice of public hearing in a conspicuous place in City Hall not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing;

    2.   By the posting of a notice of public hearing on the lot or parcel of land upon which a building or structure or part or portion thereof is proposed to be relocated, and on the proposed building or structure or part or portion thereof to be relocated, not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing; and

    3.   By the mailing of a notice of public hearing not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing to the owner and/or other person having a vested interest therein. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(2)(part) (b))

 

18.58.090 Notice requirements.
    A.  Wording of Notices. The wording of notices shall be printed on a placard not less than one square foot in area containing the heading “NOTICE OF PROPOSED RELOCATION” in black-faced type letters not less than two inches in height, and shall contain thereon, printed or typewritten, the date, time and place of the public hearing, exact legal description of the property upon which such relocation is proposed to take place, and a brief description of the structure and the general location and addresses from which and to which the relocation is to occur.

    B.   Posting of Notices. Not less than one notice of proposed relocation shall be located and posted in a conspicuous place on the lot or parcel of land upon which the relocation is proposed to take place, in clear view and approximately five feet to the rear of the front lot line of an interior lot. If the relocation is proposed to occur on a corner or reverse corner lot, a second such notice shall be located and posted in a similar position facing the side lot line abutting the street. In addition thereto, not less than one such notice shall also be posted on the building or structure or part or portion thereof proposed to be relocated. All such notices shall be posted not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing thereon, and shall remain posted continuously until the conclusion of said public hearing and the disposition thereof. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(2)(c), (d))

 

18.58.100 Investigations.
    The zoning administrator shall cause to be made such investigations by city departments and agencies of the city of facts bearing upon an application which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, such departments and/or agencies may be concerned therewith. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(2)(e))

 

18.58.105 Hearings—Zoning administrator findings and decisions.
    A.  Required Findings. The zoning administrator, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of the application and investigations, and upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto and conclusion of the public hearing, shall by declaration make the following findings of fact:

    1.   That the proposed building or structure to be relocated is not so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous, infested with pests, unsanitary, or in any other manner unfit for human habitation;

    2.   That the proposed building or structure to be relocated is not dilapidated, defective, unsightly, or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation on the proposed site would cause harm to or be detrimental to property, improvements or environment of the area in which it is to be relocated;

    3.   That the proposed use of the building or structure, when relocated, is not prohibited by the zoning code or will create a nonconformity; and

    4.   That terms and conditions of permit issuance have been established and required to assure that the proposed relocation will not be materially detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the community as a whole.

    B.   Announcement, Notice and Finality of Decisions. The zoning administrator shall announce his or her findings and decisions by formal written declaration of findings and decisions within ten days after conclusion of the public hearing. The findings, notice, finality and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be in accordance with Section 18.06.030 of this title. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(2)(g), (h))

 

18.58.110 Premises—Right of entry authorized when.
    A.  The city, the surety, and the duly authorized representatives of either, shall have the authority to enter the building, structure, part or portion thereof, or the premises for conducting investigations and inspections. In the event of any default in the performance of any terms or conditions of the relocation permit, the surety, the city, or any duly authorized representative of either, shall have the right to enter upon the premises to complete the required work or to remove or demolish the building or structure.

    B.   No owner, his or her representative, successor or assigns, or any other person, shall interfere with right of entry of the surety or city engaged in the process of completing the work, or removing or demolishing the building or structure for which a relocation permit has been issued after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(2)(f))

 

18.58.120 Bond—Posting—Default conditions.
    A.  No relocation permit shall be issued unless and/or until the applicant therefor has first posted a bond with the zoning administrator executed by the owner of the property upon which a building or structure is proposed to be relocated as principal, and a surety company authorized to do business in California as surety. The bond shall be joint and several and shall name the city as obligee, and shall be in an amount equal to the cost, as determined by the building and planning division, plus twenty percent of the work required to be done in order to comply with the terms and conditions of the relocation permit. A cash deposit may be posted in lieu of the surety bond but only upon the same terms and conditions.

    B.   Such bond, whether cash or surety, shall, in addition to those terms and conditions established by the zoning administrator, be subject to the following conditions:

    1.   All terms and conditions of the relocation permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator.

    2.   All the work required to be done pursuant to the terms and conditions established by the zoning administrator shall be completed within ninety days after the relocation permit has been issued, unless otherwise extended by the zoning administrator.

    3.   In event of any default in the terms or conditions of the bond, the city shall proceed forthwith to forfeit the bond and recover any amounts due thereunder for the city. Moneys received by virtue of any such forfeiture shall inure to the general fund of the city. (Prior code § 9213.05 (D)(3))

 

18.58.130 Issuance, expiration and revocation conditions.
    The zoning administrator may issue a relocation permit which complies with the provisions of this chapter, on forms prescribed by him, and may require additional terms and conditions of permit issuance considered necessary to assure the integrity of the permit and the area and zone in which the relocation is proposed to take place. Should, at any time during the period which a relocation permit is in effect, the zoning administrator find that performance of the relocation permit is in violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or terms and conditions subject thereto, he or she shall forthwith by declaration serve notice of suspension or revocation of the relocation permit and shall suspend or revoke same. Unless otherwise set forth as a term or condition of permit issuance, no relocation permit shall be issued for a period of time greater than ninety days, and shall, at the end of such ninety-day period, automatically expire and become null and void. (Prior code § 9213.05 (E))

Chapter 18.60 VARIANCES
Article I General Provisions
18.60.010 Intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and procedures applicable to unusual uses of land where the circumstances and conditions require special attention, and where the application of this title during the course of the administration and enforcement, results in the inconsistency with the general intent and purpose thereof. (Prior code § 9213.01)

 

18.60.020 General regulations.
    Regulations governing permits for variances from the provisions of this title shall be as set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 9213.06)

 

18.60.030 Purpose of variances.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to recognize that the uniform administration and enforcement of the provisions of this title may result in creating inconsistencies with its general intent and purpose. It is also the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a means by which a variance from the provision of this title may be determined, and to prevent discrimination and special privileges not otherwise shared or enjoyed by other property in the same vicinity and zone. The intent and purpose of this chapter is to be only concerned with the inconsistencies created through the administration and enforcement of those regulations governing the physical development of property, and shall not in any manner apply to uses of land. (Prior code § 9213.06 (A))

 

18.60.040 Authority to grant variances.
    Whenever the strict and literal administration, enforcement and interpretation of regulations governing the physical development of property, as set forth in this title, create practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or inconsistencies therewith, the planning commission and zoning administrator shall have the authority, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to grant, upon such conditions as may be determined, such a variance from the provisions thereof as may be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this title, to protect the public health, safety, environment and welfare. (Prior code § 9213.06 (B))

 

18.60.050 Qualifications for variances.
    Prior to the granting of any variance permit or minor variance permit, the planning commission and zoning administrator shall first determine the requirements for qualification by making all the following findings of fact:

    A.  That there are exceptional and extraordinary circumstances and conditions which apply to the property involved or affect the intended use thereof that do not generally apply to other property or uses thereof in the same vicinity and zone classification;

    B.   That, owing to such exceptional and extraordinary circumstances and conditions, the strict and literal enforcement of specified regulations of the zoning code would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship not created by or attributable to the applicant or the owner of the property involved;

    C.   That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property development right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zone classification but which is denied to the property involved;

    D.  That the granting of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, environment and general welfare, or materially injurious to other property, improvements or uses in the same vicinity or zone classification;

    E.   That the granting of such variance will be in harmony with and will not adversely affect the provisions of the zoning code and general plan. (Prior code § 9213.06 (C))

 

18.60.060 Statement of environmental impact.
    The zoning administrator, prior to accepting an application for a variance permit or minor variance permit, shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the city council which are currently in effect. (Prior code § 9213.06 (D))

 

18.60.070 Issuance, expiration and revocation conditions.
    The zoning administrator may issue a variance permit approved by the planning commission and a minor variance permit on his or her own approval which comply with the provisions of this chapter, on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, and may require additional terms and conditions of permit issuance considered necessary to assure the integrity of the permit and property in the area, vicinity and zone classification, and to be certain that such permit is not discriminatory or in effect granting a special privilege not otherwise shared. A variance permit and minor variance permit approved by the planning commission and zoning administrator respectively, shall take effect upon such approvals and shall be exercised within thirty days thereafter or such permits shall expire and automatically become null and void. Should, at any time during the period which such permits are in effect, the zoning administrator find that performance thereof is in violation of the provisions of this chapter and/or terms and conditions subject thereto, he or she shall forthwith by declaration serve notice of violation thereof and shall revoke same. (Prior code § 9213.06 (G))

 

Article II Variance Permits
18.60.080 Issuance limitations.
    A variance permit shall only be considered for variations from the provisions of Chapters 18.42, 18.44, 18.46 and 18.50 of this title. Regulations governing issuance of a variance permit shall be as set out in this article. (Prior code § 9213.06 (E)(part))

 

18.60.090 Application and fees.
    Any owner of property who can show and support the requirements for qualification may file with the zoning administrator an application for approval of a variance permit, verified by the owner on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include such information as the zoning administrator may require. (Ord. 765 § 54, 1989; prior code § 9213.06 (E)(1))

 

18.60.100 Hearing requirements.
    A.  Upon the filing of a verified application, and acceptance thereof, the zoning administrator shall transmit said application forthwith to the planning commission, and the planning commission shall hold one public hearing thereon.

    B.   The planning commission, upon receipt of an application shall commence to hold a public hearing thereon conducted in the following manner:

    1.   Setting of Hearing. The planning commission shall set a public hearing for consideration of an application for approval of a variance permit. The date set for the public hearing shall be not less than ten days nor more than forty days from the date of receipt of said application by the planning commission on the adoption of a motion thereof.

    2.   Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    a.   By at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in an edition published therefor not less than ten days prior to the date set for said public hearing; and

    b.   By the mailing of the notice of public hearing not less than ten days prior to the date set for such hearing to the owner, applicant, lessee and/or other persons having a vested interest therein, and to all owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet measured from the external boundaries of the property described in the notice of which such owners and property appear on copies of the equalized assessment roll of Los Angeles County on file in the office of the county assessor. Any error in the copy of the assessment roll shall not invalidate any act of the zoning administrator, planning commission or city council, as the case may be.

    3.   Form, Wording and Contents of Notices. The form, wording and content of notices of public hearings shall consist of the words “NOTICE OF PROPOSED VARIANCE,” and shall set forth the day of the week, date, place or exact location, time, file number or other identification, name of the applicant or initiator, description of the matter under consideration, exact legal description of the property, and the address or general location thereof, relative to the public hearing or hearings to be held on the matter. Such notices shall appear in a format acceptable to the city planner. (Prior code § 9213.06 (E)(2), (3)(a)—(c))

 

18.60.110 Investigation and report.
    The planning commission shall cause to be made, by its own members and the zoning administrator, such investigations of facts bearing upon an application that will assure appropriate disposition thereof consistent with the provisions of this title and the general plan. The zoning administrator shall prepare and transmit a written report, based upon an inspection of the property and an examination of the application and other written investigations, to the owners and/or applicant and the planning commission not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing. (Prior code § 9213.06 (E)(3)(d))

 

18.60.120 Notice of findings—Finality of decisions.
    A.  The planning commission, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of the application, investigations and report of the zoning administrator, and upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, and conclusion of the public hearing, shall determine whether or not the requirements for qualification have been shown, as hereinabove set forth, and shall make the appropriate findings applicable therewith.

    B.   The planning commission shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing. Such resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, reasons, conditions, determinations and other matters which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of this title, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny same. The planning commission shall forthwith give the owner, applicant and/or any other persons connected with or having an interest in the application, including other city departments and agencies, written notice of its actions and decisions, together with a copy of the resolution. The actions and decisions of the planning commission shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Ord. 765 § 55, 1989; prior code § 9213.06 (E)(3)(e), (f))

 

Article III Minor Variance Permits
18.60.130 Issuance limitations.
    A minor variance permit shall only be considered for minor variations from the provisions of Chapters 18.42, 18.44, 18.46 and 18.50 of this title. Regulations governing issuance of a minor variance permit shall be as set out in this article. (Prior code § 9213.06 (F)(part))

 

18.60.140 Application and fees.
    Any owner of property who can show and support the requirements for qualification, as hereinabove set forth in Section 18.60.060, and who qualified for a minor variance permit as hereinafter provided, may file with the zoning administrator an application for approval of a minor variance permit, verified by such owner on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include such information as the zoning administrator may require. (Ord. 765 § 56, 1989; prior code § 9213.06 (F)(1))

 

18.60.150 Qualifications for minor variance permits.
    Any owner of property who has shown and supported the requirements for qualification, but whose request for approval is minor in scope and nature, and involves only a minor variation not exceeding a twenty-five percent increase or reduction of the particular regulations governing the physical development of property, may qualify for a minor variance permit. (Prior code § 9213.06 (F)(2)(part))

 

18.60.160 Deleted.
 

18.60.170 Zoning administrator authority.
    The zoning administrator shall have the authority to approve a minor variance permit which does not exceed a twenty-five percent increase or reduction of the particular regulations governing the physical development of property without holding a public hearing. Such increase or reduction shall not involve a variation from more than three such regulations. The zoning administrator shall process a minor variance permit in the following manner:

    A.  Investigations. The zoning administrator, upon receipt and acceptance of an application, shall make and cause to be made such investigations of the facts bearing upon the application that will assure appropriate disposition thereof.

    B.   Findings. The zoning administrator, upon conducting an inspection of the property involved, an examination and review of the application and investigations, and upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, shall determine whether or not the requirements for qualifications have been shown, as set out in Section 18.60.050, and the application therefor qualifies for a minor variance permit, and shall make the appropriate findings applicable therewith.

    C.   Notice of Findings Finality of Decisions. The zoning administrator shall announce his or her findings and decisions by formal written declaration of findings and decisions not more than fifteen days after acceptance of an application. Such declaration shall recite and set forth, among other things, the findings of fact, determinations, reasons, conditions and other matters which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, make the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of this title, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny same. The zoning administrator shall forthwith give the owner, applicant and/or any other persons connected with or having an interest in the application, including other city departments and agencies, written notice of his or her actions and decisions, together with a copy of the declaration. The actions and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64 of this title. (Prior code § 9213.06 (F)(3))

Chapter 18.61 TEMPORARY USES
18.61.010 Intent and purpose.
    A temporary use permit is intended to allow for the short-term placement of activities in temporary facilities or outside of buildings. These activities shall be regulated so as to avoid incompatibility between such uses and surrounding areas. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.020 Requirement for a temporary use.
    A temporary use permit shall be required for all uses listed in this chapter and also as set forth in Chapter 18.40, Land Use Regulations, and shall be approved by the zoning administrator prior to the commencement of the use. A public hearing shall not be required for the issuance of a temporary use permit, however, temporary uses may be subject to additional permits, other applicable approvals and licenses and inspections as required by law or regulation. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.030 Application for permit—Fees and licensing.
    Whenever a temporary use of land is subject to the provisions of this section, the owner of the property upon which such use of land is proposed to be located shall file with the zoning administrator an application for approval of a temporary use permit on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

    The application shall set forth and include any information as the zoning administrator may require including that if the applicant is not the owner of the property upon which such use of land is proposed, he/she shall submit written authorization from the property owner to make such application. Issuance of a temporary use permit shall not become effective unless and/or until a business license has been obtained. Therefore, no business license shall be issued by the director of finance until documentary evidence of the issuance of a temporary use permit has first been shown. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.040 Permitted uses.
    A temporary use permit may be issued by the zoning administrator for the following uses:

    A.  Christmas Tree/Pumpkin Patch Sales Lots. Permitted on a temporary basis for a maximum of thirty days in the CPD, C-G, C-M, I-L, I-G and IPD zones. Also permitted in the R-E and S-F zones if operated by a community or nonprofit group.

    B.   Circuses and Carnivals When Sponsored by a Community Nonprofit Organization. Sponsoring organization to be guaranteed a minimum of five percent of gross receipts if event is held at location not owned or leased by the sponsoring organization.

    C.   Fairs, Festivals and Concerts. When not held within premises designed to accommodate such events, such as auditoriums, stadiums or other public assembly facilities.

    D.  Fund Raising Event. Sponsored by a community or nonprofit organization.

    E.   Modular/Trailer Units. Permitted only in industrial zones provided that a permanent primary structure is on the premises and prohibited in all other zones except as an office trailer used during construction; and for occupancy during declared city-wide conditions. This restriction shall not apply to modular/trailer units for government agencies which shall be permitted regardless of the specific zone.

    Permitted modular/trailer units, except for office trailers used during on-site construction, shall be subject to the following review criteria:

    1.   One year temporary grant;

    2.   One year maximum extension;

    3.   Approval of a conditional use permit required if in place for more than two years;

    4.   Located out of setback areas and not visible from the street, unless under declared city-wide conditions;

    5.   Temporary electrical power to terminate with term of grant;

    6.   Skirting to be provided and wheel bases to be dismantled;

    7.   Building code installation requirements and Title 24 state handicap requirements to be met;

    8.   Limited to one unit per parcel less than two acres; limited to one unit per acre per parcel greater than two acres, exception to these provisions permissible under declared city-wide conditions;

    9.   Modular office to be state licensed and specifically designed for office use;

    10. Upon termination of the grant, unit to be removed from the premises requiring a two-year waiting period for subsequent request;

    11. Certification from school district required;

    12. Twenty-four-hour occupancy is prohibited.

    F.   Movie production.

    G.  On-site and off-site contractor’s construction yard related to an active construction project.

    H.  Outdoor religious activity.

    I.    Promotional Sales. Temporary outdoor display/sales of merchandise permitted in any commercial zone, provided that there shall be no more than three such displays/sales in any one twelve-month period and are not conducted for a period of more than four consecutive days; that such merchandise is customarily sold on the premises, and that such premises are utilized for a permanently established business. Besides the fee required for a temporary use permit, a cash bond in an amount established by a resolution of the city council shall be posted with the city to guarantee the removal of all merchandise.

    J.    Real estate sales office in conjunction with new residential development.

    K.  Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the zoning administrator are compatible with the zone and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 857 § 17, 1994; Ord. 852 § 49, 1994; Ord. 799 § 9, 1991; Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.050 Determination.
    Prior to the granting of any temporary use permit, the zoning administrator shall first determine whether the application therefor meets the requirements for such and shall consider the following:

    A.  That the operation of the requested use at the location proposed and within the time period specified will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare;

    B.   That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the temporary use;

    C.   That the proposed site is adequately served by streets or highways having sufficient width and improvements to accommodate the kind and quality of traffic that such temporary use will or could reasonably generate;

    D.  That adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be generated by such use will be available either on-site or at alternate locations acceptable to the zoning administrator;

    E.   That the use would not jeopardize the public peace, safety or general welfare, or be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the proposed location of the activity. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.060 Conditions of approval.
    In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the zoning administrator shall impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure that the permit could be in accord with the above findings. These conditions will involve any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use and will include but are not limited to:

    A.  Provision of temporary parking facilities, including vehicular access;

    B.   Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, gases and heat;

    C.   Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

    D.  Provision of sanitary and medical facilities;

    E.   Provision of solid waste collection and disposal;

    F.   Provision of security and safety measures;

    G.  Regulation of signs;

    H.  Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use to a shorter time period than that requested;

    I.    Submission of a performance bond or other surety device to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used for such proposed temporary use will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition with no trash or debris remaining in the surrounding area;

    J.    Submit a site plan indicating any information required by the zoning administrator;

    K.  The approval of the temporary use permit is contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of other ordinances;

    L.   Such other conditions which will ensure the operation of the requested temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accordance with the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.070 Appeal.
    The actions and decisions of the zoning administrator shall be final and conclusive unless otherwise appealed as provided for in Chapter 18.64, except that the appeal may be filed no more than three days after the decision of the zoning administrator. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

 

18.61.080 Revocation.
    A temporary use permit may be revoked if the zoning administrator finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:

    A.  Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or more of the findings of fact required above are no longer true; or

    B.   The temporary use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; or

    C.   One or more conditions of the temporary use permit have not been complied with. (Ord. 765 § 61, 1989)

Chapter 18.62 AMENDMENTS AND ZONE RECLASSIFICATION
18.62.010 Chapter intent and purpose.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish and set forth provisions and regulations for amending the general plan and zoning code, and for the zone reclassification of property and uses therein. (Prior code § 9214.01)

 

Article I. General Plan Amendments
18.62.020 Permitted when—Method.
    Whenever public necessity, convenience and general welfare require changes in or modifications of the general plan or any element, part or portion thereof, such changes or modifications shall only be made in the form of an amendment thereto as hereinafter provided in this article. (Prior code § 9214.02)

 

18.62.030 Statutory and city council authority.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Articles 5 and 6, Chapter 3, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, the city council shall have and be vested with the power and authority, subject to the provisions of this article, to amend the general plan or any element, part or portion thereof. (Prior code § 9214.02 (A))

 

18.62.040 Statement of environmental impact.
    The community and economic development director, prior to accepting an application for or the initiation of an amendment to the general plan, shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the City Council which are currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1116 § 6, 2018; prior code § 9214.02 (B))

 

18.62.050 Initiation of amendments.
    Amendments to the general plan may be initiated by motion of the city council, planning commission, or the community and economic development director. (Ord. 1116 § 7, 2018; prior code § 9214.02 (C))

 

18.62.060 Public hearing—Required.
    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendments to the general plan initiated under Section 18.62.050. (Ord. 1116 § 8, 2018; prior code § 9214.02 (D))

 

18.62.070 Public hearing—Notice, conduct and decisions.
    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing conducted in the following manner:

    A.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of the time, date and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    1.   By at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in an edition published therefor not less than ten days prior to the date set for said public hearing;

    2.   By the posting of a notice of public hearing in a conspicuous place in City Hall, not less than ten days prior to the date set for the public hearing.

    B.   Form, Wording and Content of Notices. The form, wording and content of notices for public hearings shall consist of the words “NOTICE OF PROPOSED GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT,” and shall set forth the day of the week, date, place or exact location, time, file number or other identification, name of initiator, description of the matter under consideration, exact legal description of the property, and the address or general location thereof, relative to the public hearing or hearings to be held on the matter. Such notices shall appear in a format acceptable to the city planner.

    C.   Investigations. The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members and the director of planning, such investigations of facts bearing upon the proposed amendment that will assure appropriate disposition thereof consistent with the goals, provisions, objectives, spirit and integrity of the general plan. The director of planning shall prepare and transmit a written report, based upon an examination and review of the proposal and other written investigations, to the planning commission not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing.

    D.  Findings by Planning Commission. The planning commission, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of the investigations and report of the director of planning, upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, and upon conclusion of the public hearing shall make such determinations and findings of fact as deemed necessary.

    E.   Announcement of Planning Commission Findings and Decisions. The planning commission shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing. Such resolution shall recite and set forth, among other matters, the findings of fact, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make approval, conditional approval or denial of the proposed amendment considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of the general plan, and shall recommend the approval, conditional approval, or denial of same. The planning commission, not more than ten days after concluding its action shall transmit a copy of such resolution to the city council.

    F.   Council Hearing on Planning Commission Resolution. The city council, upon receipt of the resolution from the planning commission, shall commence to hold a public hearing thereon, conducted in the same manner as required for the planning commission and as set forth in this section.

    G.  Reference to Planning Commission of Adverse Decision by City Council. During its course of deliberations on the resolution, should the city council decisions be in any way contrary to the actions and recommendations of the planning commission, the city council shall, prior to rendering any final action thereon, refer its findings and determinations to the planning commission requesting further review, examination, reconsideration and report by the planning commission on the matter. Should the planning commission fail to file its report with the city council within forty days after reference thereto, it shall be deemed that the planning commission has approved such reference, and the city council shall render appropriate action thereafter.

    H.  Announcement of Findings, Notice, Finality and Decisions of the City Council. The city council shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of its public hearing, or upon receipt of a planning commission report on the matter of referral thereto. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other matters, findings of fact, reasons, and determinations which, in the opinion of the city council, make approval, conditional approval or denial of the proposed amendment considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of the general plan, and shall approve, conditionally approve or deny same. The city council, not more than ten days after concluding its action, shall transmit a copy of such resolution to the planning commission, and the actions and decisions of the City Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1116 § 9, 2018; Ord. 765 §§ 62, 63, 1989; prior code § 9214.02 (E))

 

Article II. Zoning Code Amendments
18.62.080 Permitted when—Method.
    Whenever it is deemed essential, or public necessity, convenience and general welfare require changes in or modifications of the text or provisions of this title or any part or portion thereto, such changes or modifications shall only be made in the form of an amendment by ordinance of the city council adding to or repealing the zoning code, or any part or portion thereof, as provided in Article II of this chapter. (Prior code § 9214.03)

 

18.62.090 Statutory and city council authority.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Article 2, Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, the city council shall have and be vested with the power and authority, subject to the provisions of this article, to amend the text or provisions of the zoning code or any part or portion thereof. (Prior code § 9214.03 (A))

 

18.62.100 Statement of environmental impact.
    The community and economic development director shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the city council which are currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1116 § 10, 2018; prior code § 9214.03 (B))

 

18.62.110 Initiation procedures.
    Amendments to the zoning code may be initiated by the city council, planning commission, or the community and economic development director shall initiate amendments to the zoning code. (Ord. 1116 § 11, 2018; prior code § 9214.03 (C))

 

18.62.120 Public hearing—Required.
    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment to the zoning code initiated under Section 18.62.110. (Ord. 1116 § 12, 2018; prior code § 9214.03 (D))

 

18.62.130 Public hearing—Notice, conduct and decisions.
    The planning commission, upon its own motion, shall commence to hold a public hearing for a proposed amendment, conducted in the following manner:

    A.  Notice of Hearing. Notice of time, date and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    1.   By at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in an edition published therefor not less than ten days prior to the date set for such public hearing; and

    2.   By the posting of a notice of public hearing in a conspicuous place in City Hall not less than ten days prior to the date set for said public hearing.

    B.   Form, Wording and Content of Notices. The form, wording and content of notices for public hearings shall consist of the words “NOTICE OF PROPOSED ZONING CODE AMENDMENT,” and shall set forth the day of the week, date, place or exact location, time, file number or other identification, name of the applicant or initiator, description of the matter under consideration, exact legal description of the property and the address or general location thereof, relative to the public hearing or hearings to be held on the matter. Such notices shall appear in a format acceptable to the city planner.

    C.   Investigations. The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members and the director of building and planning, such investigations of facts bearing upon the proposed amendment that will assure appropriate disposition thereof consistent with the goals, provisions, objectives, spirit and integrity of the zoning code. The director of building and planning shall prepare and transmit a written report, based upon an examination and review of the proposal and other written investigations, to the planning commission not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing.

    D.  Findings by Planning Commission. The planning commission, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of the investigations and report of the director of building and planning, upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, and upon conclusion of the public hearing, shall make such determinations and findings of fact as deemed necessary in the best interests of the city which bear on the disposition of the proposed amendment.

    E.   Announcement of Planning Commission Findings and Decisions. The planning commission shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing. Such resolution shall recite and set forth, among other matters, the findings of fact, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make approval, conditional approval or denial of the proposed amendment considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of the zoning code, and shall recommend the approval, conditional approval or denial of same. The planning commission, not more than ten days after concluding its action shall transmit a copy of the resolution to the city council.

    F.   Council Hearing on Planning Commission Resolution. The city council, upon receipt of the resolution from the planning commission, shall commence to hold a public hearing thereon, conducted in the same manner as required for the planning commission and as hereinabove set forth in Sections 18.62.130 through 18.62.150.

    G.  Reference to Planning Commission of Adverse Decision by City Council. During its course of deliberations on the resolution, the city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendations of the planning commission, provided that for any modification not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearings, the city council shall, prior to rendering any final action thereon, refer its findings and determinations to the planning commission requesting further review, examination, reconsideration and report by the planning commission on the matter. Should the planning commission fail to file its report with the city council within forty days after reference thereto, it shall be deemed that the planning commission has approved said reference and the city council shall render appropriate action thereafter.

    H.  Announcement of Findings, Notice, Finality and Decisions of City Council. The city council shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing, or upon receipt of a planning commission report on the matter of referral thereto. Such resolution shall recite and set forth, among other matters, findings of fact, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the city council, make approval, conditional approval or denial of the proposed amendment considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of the zoning code and general plan, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny same. The city council, not more than ten days after concluding its action, shall transmit a copy of said resolution to the planning commission and applicant, as the case may be, and the actions and decisions of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1116 § 13, 2018; Ord. 765 §§ 64, 65, 1989; prior code § 9214.03 (E)(1)—(9))

 

18.62.140 Ordinances enacting amendments.
    Whenever the city council approved an amendment to the zoning code by the adoption of a resolution to that effect, it shall forthwith adopt an ordinance enacting such amendment, and the amendment shall not take effect until thirty days after final reading and adoption of the ordinance. (Prior code § 9214.03 (E)(10))

 

18.62.150 Notation of amendments in code.
    Upon the adoption of any amendment to the zoning code, appropriate notations of such adoption shall be made in the various volumes of the zoning code pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.66 of this code. (Prior code § 9214.03 (E)(11))

 

Article III. Zone Reclassification
18.62.160 Amendment by ordinance required.
    Whenever the owner of property is desirous of, or whenever it is deemed essential, or public necessity, convenience and general welfare require a change or modification of the boundaries of any zone classification as established in Chapters 18.10 through 18.38 of this title, and/or set forth on the Official Zone Map, such change or modification shall only be in the form of an amendment by ordinance to this title, and the Official Zone Map, as provided in Article III of this chapter. (Prior code § 9214.04)

 

18.62.170 Criteria and conditions—Statutory authority.
    Authorization and criteria for qualification for zone reclassification shall be as follows:

    A.  Authorization. Pursuant to the provisions of Articles 1 and 2, Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, the city council shall have and be vested with the power and authority, subject to the provisions of this article, to change or modify the boundaries of any zone classification by amending the provisions of the zoning code and the Official Zone Map, as provided for in Chapter 18.66 of this title.

    B.   Criteria for Qualification. Prior to the adoption of any ordinance changing or modifying any zone classification, it shall first be found and determined that a zone reclassification is fully consistent with the provisions of the general plan. In the event a proposed zone reclassification is inconsistent with the provisions of the general plan, no ordinance shall be adopted enacting such zone reclassification unless and/or until the zone reclassification proposal has been modified so that it is consistent with the general plan, or the general plan has been amended so that the proposed zone reclassification is consistent therewith. In the event the zoning reclassification is not modified nor the general plan amended to provide consistency with one another, no zone reclassification shall take place. (Prior code § 9214.04 (A))

 

18.62.180 Statement of environmental impact.
    The community and economic development director, prior to accepting an application for or the initiation of a zone reclassification, shall determine whether or not a statement of environmental impact is to be required pursuant to the rules, guidelines or regulations duly adopted by the city council which are currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended. (Ord. 1116 § 14, 2018; prior code § 9214.04 (B))

 

18.62.190 Initiation—Methods and conditions.
    Zone reclassifications may be initiated by the city council, planning commission, the community and economic development director, or by any property owner upon filing a verified application. Any zone reclassification initiated by the city council, planning commission, or community and economic development director shall not be subject to an application and related fees, but shall be subject to all other requirements as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 1116 § 15, 2018; prior code § 9214.04 (C))

 

18.62.200 Application and fees.
    Any owner of property may file with the community and economic development director an application for zone reclassification, verified by such owner on forms prescribed by the community and economic development director, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the community and economic development director may require. (Ord. 1116 § 16, 2018; Ord. 765 § 66, 1989; prior code § 9214.04 (D))

 

18.62.210 Transmittal to planning commission.
    Upon the filing of a verified application, or upon the initiation by the city council, planning commission, or the community and economic development director, the application or initiation shall be transmitted to the planning commission and the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on such application or initiation. (Ord. 1116 § 17, 2018; prior code § 9214.04 (E))

 

18.62.220 Public hearing—Required.
    The planning commission, upon receipt of an application or initiation, shall commence to hold a public hearing thereon conducted in the manner set out in Sections 18.62.230 through 18.62.250. (Prior code § 9214.04 (F))

 

18.62.230 Public hearing—Notice, conduct and decisions.
    A.  Notice. Notice of time, date, and place of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner:

    1.   By at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the city in an edition published therefor not less than ten days prior to the date set for the public hearing; and

    2.   By the mailing of such notice of public hearing not less than ten days prior to the date set for such hearing to the owner, applicant, lessee and/or other persons having a vested interest therein, and to all owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet measured from the external boundaries of the property described in said notice of which such owners of property appear on copies of the equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County on file in the office of the county assessor. Any error in the copy of the assessment roll shall not invalidate any act of the planning commission or city council, as the case may be.

    B.   Form, Wording and Contents of Notice. The form, wording and content of notices for public hearings shall consist of the words “NOTICE OF PROPOSED ZONE RECLASSIFICATION,” and shall set forth the day of the week, date, place or exact location, time, file number or other identification, name of the applicant or initiator, description of the matter under consideration, exact legal description of the property, and the address or general location thereof, relative to the public hearing or hearings to be held on the matter. Such notices shall appear in a format acceptable to the city planner.

    C.   Investigations. The planning commission shall cause to be made by its own members and the director of building and planning, such investigations of facts bearing upon the proposed zone reclassification that will assure appropriate disposition thereof consistent with the goals, provisions, objectives, spirit and integrity of the zoning code and general plan. The director of building and planning shall prepare and transmit a written report, based upon an examination and review of the proposal and other written investigations, to the planning commission, and to the applicant or owner in the case of an application, not less than five days prior to the date set for public hearing.

    D.  Findings by Planning Commission. The planning commission, upon hearing all testimony, upon examination and review of the investigations and report of the director of building and planning and application, as the case may be, upon ascertaining all other pertinent facts relative thereto, and upon conclusion of the public hearing, shall make such determinations and findings of fact as deemed necessary in the best interests of all parties concerned and which bear on the disposition of the proposed zone reclassification.

    E.   Announcement of Planning Commission Findings and Decisions. The planning commission shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of the public hearing. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other matters, the findings of fact, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the planning commission, make approval, conditional approval or denial of the proposed zone reclassification considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of the zoning code and general plan, and shall recommend the approval, conditional approval, or denial of same. The planning commission, not more than ten days after concluding its action, shall transmit a copy of the resolution to the city council and applicant, as the case may be.

    F.   Council Hearing on Planning Commission Resolution. The city council, upon receipt of the resolution from the planning commission, shall commence to hold a public hearing thereon, conducted in the same manner as required for the planning commission and as hereinabove set forth in Sections 18.62.220 through 18.62.250.

    G.  Reference to Planning Commission of Adverse Decision by City Council. During its course of deliberations on the resolution, the city council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendations of the planning commission, provided that for any modification not previously considered by the planning commission during its hearings, the city council shall, prior to rendering any final action thereon, refer its findings and determinations to the planning commission requesting further review, examination, reconsideration, and report by the planning commission on the matter. Should the planning commission fail to file its report with the city council within forty days after reference thereto, it shall be deemed that the planning commission has approved said reference and the city council shall render appropriate action thereafter.

    H.  Announcement of Findings, Notice, Finality and Decisions of the City Council. The city council shall announce its findings and decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of its public hearing, or after receipt of a planning commission report on the matter of referral thereto. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other matters, findings of fact, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the city council, may make approval, conditional approval or denial of the proposed zone reclassification considered necessary to carry out the general purpose and provisions of the zoning code and general plan, and shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny same. The city council, not more than ten days after concluding its action, shall transmit a copy of the resolution to the planning commission and applicant, as the case may be, and the actions and decisions of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1116 § 18, 2018; Ord. 765 §§ 67, 68, 1989; prior code § 9214.04 (F)(1)—(9))

 

18.62.240 Enacting ordinance required.
    Whenever the city council adopts a resolution approving a zone reclassification, it shall commence to adopt an ordinance enacting such reclassification. In the event the resolution conditionally approves the reclassification, final reading and adoption of the ordinance shall be withheld until the conditions of approval as set forth in the resolution have been complied with, and failure to comply with such conditions within six months after the first reading of the enacting ordinance shall automatically terminate the zone reclassification proceedings. In any event, no zone reclassification shall become effective until thirty days after final reading and adoption of the enacting ordinance. (Prior code § 9214.04 (F)(10))

 

18.62.250 Notations in code and on zoning map.
    Upon the adoption of any ordinance enacting a zone reclassification, such ordinance shall include and set forth provisions for amending the zoning code and Official Zone Map, and appropriate notations of such adoption shall be made in the various volumes of the zoning code pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 18.66 of this title. (Prior code § 9214.04 (F)(11))

Chapter 18.64 APPEALS
18.64.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish provisions and regulations for any person aggrieved by the decisions of the zoning administrator, director of building and planning, design review board or planning commission, to appeal such decisions to the city council for final disposition thereof. (Prior code § 9215.01)

 

18.64.020 City council and statutory authority.
    Pursuant to the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state, the city council shall have and be vested with the power and authority, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to hear and decide upon all appeals from the decisions of the zoning administrator, director of building and planning, design review board, and/or planning commission. (Prior code § 9215.02)

 

18.64.030 Filing procedures.
    Any person who is not satisfied with or who is aggrieved by the decisions made relative to the administration and enforcement of this title may file an appeal in the manner as set forth in Sections 18.64.040 through 18.64.080 of this chapter. (Prior code § 9215.03)

 

18.64.040 Appeals from zoning administrator decisions.
    Any person dissatisfied with the actions and decisions of the zoning administrator resulting from the administration of this title may file an appeal therefrom with the planning commission at any time not more than fourteen calendar days after the decision of the zoning administrator has been rendered except as set forth in Chapter 18.48. The appeal shall be made in the following manner:

    A.  Application and Fees. Any person appealing the decision of the zoning administrator shall file with the director of community development an application therefor on forms prescribed thereby, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the director of community development may require. Upon the filing of a verified application, the director of community development shall transmit the application forthwith to the planning commission or the design review board as set forth in Section 18.48.100, and the planning commission or design review board shall investigate, examine, review, hear testimony from and on behalf of the applicant, and render its findings and decisions on the matter in the same manner as required for a decision to be rendered by the zoning administrator. In the event the zoning administrator was required to hold and conduct a public hearing, so shall the planning commission in the same manner required therefor.

    B.   Announcement of Planning Commission Decisions. The planning commission or design review board shall announce its decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of its proceedings on the matter. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the facts, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the planning commission or design review board, make upholding or reversing the actions and decisions of the zoning administrator considered necessary to assure that due process and justice have been done, and shall uphold or reverse same. The planning commission or design review board shall forthwith give the applicant, zoning administrator, and/or any other persons having a vested interest therein, written notice of its actions and decisions together with a copy of the resolution. (Ord. 830 § 17, 1993; Ord. 765 §§ 69, 70, 1989; prior code § 9215.03 (A))

 

18.64.050 Appeals from design review board decisions.
    Any person dissatisfied with the action and discretionary decisions of the design review board resulting from the administration of this title may file an appeal therefrom with the city council at any time not more than fourteen calendar days after the decision of the design review board has been rendered. The appeal shall be made in the following manner:

    A.  Application and Fees. Any person appealing the decision of the design review board shall file with the director of building and planning an application therefor on forms prescribed thereby, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount as established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the director of building and planning may require. Upon the filing of a verified application, the director of building and planning shall transmit the application forthwith to the city council, and the city council shall investigate, examine, review and render its findings and decisions on the matter in the same manner as required for a decision to be rendered by the design review board. In event the design review board was required to hold and conduct a public hearing, so shall the city council in the same manner require therefor.

    B.   Announcement of City Council Decisions. The city council shall announce its decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of its proceedings on the matter. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the facts, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the city council, make upholding or reversing the actions and decisions of the design review board considered necessary to assure that due process and justice has been done, and shall uphold or reverse same. The city council shall forthwith give the applicant, design review board and/or any other persons having a vested interest therein, written notice of its actions and decisions together with a copy of the resolution. (Ord. 830 § 18, 1993; Ord. 765 §§ 71, 72, 1989; prior code § 9215.03 (B))

 

18.64.060 Appeals from planning commission decisions.
    Any person dissatisfied with the actions and decisions of the planning commission resulting from the administration of this title may file an appeal therefrom with the city council at any time not more than fourteen calendar days after the decision of the planning commission has been rendered. The appeal shall be made in the following manner:

    A.  Application and Fees. Any person appealing the decision of the planning commission shall file with the city clerk an application therefor on forms prescribed thereby, accompanied by an application filing fee in an amount established by a resolution of the city council. The application shall set forth and include any information as the city clerk may require. Upon the filing of a verified application, the city clerk shall transmit the application forthwith to the city council, and the city council shall investigate, examine, review and render its findings and decisions on the matter in the same manner as required for a decision to be rendered by the planning commission. In event the planning commission was required to hold and conduct a public hearing, so shall the city council in the same manner be required therefor.

    B.   Announcement of City Council Decisions. The city council shall announce its decisions by formal written resolution within forty days after conclusion of its proceedings on the matter. The resolution shall recite and set forth, among other things, the facts, reasons and determinations which, in the opinion of the city council, make upholding or reversing the actions and decisions of the planning commission considered necessary to assure that due process and justice have been done, and shall uphold or reverse same. The city council shall forthwith give the applicant, planning commission and/or any other persons having a vested interest therein, written notice of its actions and decisions together with a copy of the resolution. (Ord. 830 § 19, 1993; Ord. 765 §§ 73, 74, 1989; prior code § 9215.03 (C))

 

18.64.070 City council—Decisions final.
    Upon the rendering of any action on an appeal matter, the actions and decisions of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Prior code § 9215.03 (D))

 

18.64.080 City council—Decision review authority.
    The city council may, at its own discretion, review the decisions of the zoning administrator, design review board and/or planning commission, even though such decisions have not been appealed; provided, however, that a request for same has been made within the prescribed limits for appealing such decisions. In any case, the city council shall not be required to pay fees in connection therewith. (Prior code § 9215.03 (E))

Chapter 18.66 AMENDMENTS—PROCEDURES AND EXAMPLES
18.66.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide and establish the methods and form of amending and adding to the zoning code, Official Zone Map, and zone classifications. (Prior code § 9216.01)

 

18.66.020 Zoning code amendments.
    A.  Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to the zoning code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the city clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the various volumes of the zoning code of the rendering of such action, noting thereon the numbers of the ordinances pursuant to which such action is rendered and the date of adoption. Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in the zoning code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference. The city clerk shall also prepare printed copies of such changes in the zoning code for insertion in the looseleaf copies thereof.

    B.   Every chapter, section and/or subsection so changed shall have printed thereon, immediately following the end of the content thereof, a parenthetical notation of the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted.

    C.   At least once yearly, the city clerk shall cause the looseleaf pages of the zoning code in which changes have been made, to be reprinted, including the notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted, in order that at least once yearly the looseleaf copies of the zoning code prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general public may be brought up to date. In addition, each looseleaf page so reprinted, after the initial first printing, shall contain therein in the lower righthand corner an editor’s parenthetical notation of the date of such reprinting thereof, e.g., “(Pico Rivera 3-15-76).” In the case of repealing any provision of the zoning code, only the editor’s notation of the date of reprinting shall appear on any reprinted page of which a portion or all has been repealed. (Prior code § 9216.02)

 

18.66.030 Official Zone Map additions and amendments.
    All adopted ordinances enacting a zone reclassification shall also include the enactment of an amendment and/or addition to the Official Zone Map, and the Official Zone Map shall bear a nomenclatured legend thereon of such amendment or addition by a notation of the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such amendment or addition is adopted. The city clerk shall maintain a copy of the Official Zone Map, and shall certify thereon as to the amendment or addition so made. (Prior code § 9216.03)

 

18.66.040 Zone classification additions.
    All adopted ordinances enacting a zone reclassification shall also include the enactment to the zoning code by adding to this section the various subsection, placing property in the following appropriate category of zones, et seq.:

 

    A.  Additions to O-S Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the O-S (Open Space) zone district:

 

    B.   Additions to R-E Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the R-E zone:

 

    C.   Additions to S-F Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the S-F zone:

 

    1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the S-F (single-family) zone district, and further designated herein as Zone Reclassification 98-297. Attachment “A,” map/legal description titled Zone Reclassification 98-297, made a part hereof.

 

    D.  Additions to R-I Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the R-I Zone:

 

    1.   Zone Reclassification 99-300: Attachment “A,” mapped/legal description titled Zone Reclassification 99-300, made a part hereof.

 

    E.   Additions to PUD Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the PUD zone:

 

    1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the PUD (planned unit development) zone district, and further designated herein as Zone Reclassification 97-295: Attachment “A,” map/legal description titled Zone Reclassification 97-295, made a part hereof.

 

    F.   Additions to R-M Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the R-M zone:

 

    G.  Additions to Civic Center Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the Civic Center zone:

 

    H.  Additions to P-A Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the P-A zone:

 

    I.    Additions to C-N Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the C-N zone:

 

    J.    Additions to C-C Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the C-C zone:

 

    K.  Additions to C-G Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the C-G zone:

 

    L.   Additions to CPD Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the CPD zone:

 

    1.   In accordance with Section 18.66.040 of the Pico Rivera Municipal Code, the zone classification of the herein described real properties at the southwest corner of Paramount and Whittier Boulevards and north of Fishman Road as shown on Attachment “A”, are hereby placed in the CPD (Planned Commercial Development) zoned district, and further designated as Zone Reclassification No. 98-296.

    Said zone reclassification to be in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance heretofore adopted by the city council of the City of Pico Rivera by Ordinance No. 534, adopted April 7, 1975.

 

    M.  Additions to C-M Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the C-M zone:

 

    N.  Additions to I-L Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the I-L zone:

 

    O.  Additions to I-G Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the I-G zone:

 

    P.   Additions to IPD Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the IPD zone:

 

    Q.  Additions to P Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the P zone:

 

    R.   Additions to R-M PUD Zone.

 

    1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the R-M PUD zone:

 

    S.   Additions to SP-301 Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the SP-301 zone:

 

    1.   The following described real property within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the SP-301 (Specific Plan 301) zone district and further described on Attachments “A-1” and “A-2” as shown on the attached map, made a part hereof as though set forth in full.

 

    T.   Additions to SP-400 Zone. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the following described land within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the SP-400 zone:

 

    1.   The following described real property within the city of Pico Rivera is placed in the SP-400 (specific plan 400) zone district and further described on Attachments “A-1” and “A-2” as shown on the attached map, made a part hereof as though set forth in full—Zone Reclassification 96-294.

 

    U.  Pursuant to this section and Section 18.66.020, the following are examples of the form in which changes shall appear:

 

    1.   An example showing an amendment of a section (or subsection) of the zoning code (reprinted for insertion):

 

    Examples:

 

    9216.01 INTENT AND PURPOSE ——The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to re-establish methods and form for amending and adding to the Zoning Code and Official Zone Map. (Amended by Ord. 306, August 3, 1975)

 

    2.   An example showing an addition of an amendment of a section (or subsection) of the zoning code (reprinted for insertion):

 

    9216.05 DISSOLUTION OF MEN ——All men shall hereinafter be dissolved and shall forthwith cease to exist. (Added by Ord. 593, October 13, 1984; Amended by Ord. 741, June 21, 1993)

 

    3.   An example of an addition to a zone classification under appropriate subsection designation (reprinted for insertion):

 

    D.  ADDITIONS TO PUD ZONE ——Notwithstanding any other provision of this Division, the following described land within the City of Pico Rivera is hereby placed in the PUD Zone, to wit:

    1.   ZC 81-563 - Lots 36 through 51, all inclusive, of Tract No. 89361, in the City of Pico Rivera, County of Los Angeles, State of California, as per Maps recorded in Book 26, pages 31 and 32, of Maps in the office of the County Recorder of Los Angeles County. (added by Ord. 831, July 2, 1981).

    2.   ZC 82-17 - Lots 3, 7, 8 and 9, all inclusive, of Tract No. 91141, in the City of Pico Rivera, County of Los Angeles, State of California, as per Map recorded in Book 93, page 141, of Maps in the office of the County Recorder of Los Angeles County. (added by Ord. 1067, March 3, 1983)

 

(Ord. 963 § 1, 2001; Ord. 940 § 1, 2000; Ord. 918 § 1, 1998; Ord. 908 § 1, 1998; Ord. 902 §§ 4, 5, 7, 1997; Ord. 877 §§ 4, 6, 1996; Ord. 865 § 2, 1995; Ord. 864 § 4, 1995; prior code § 9216.04)

Chapter 18.67 REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS UNDER THE FAIR HOUSING ACT
18.67.010 Purpose of provisions.
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to provide a formal procedure to request reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts) in the application of zoning laws and other land use regulations, policies and procedures, and to establish relevant criteria to be used when considering such requests. (Ord. 1083 § 7, 2014)

 

18.67.020 Applicability.
    In order to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability, any person may request a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice.

    A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This chapter applies only to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Acts. (Ord. 1083 § 7, 2014)

 

18.67.030 Application requirements.
    A.  Requests for reasonable accommodation, in a form approved by the zoning administrator, together with the appropriate fee, as established by resolution adopted by the city council, and other required information, shall be filed with the planning division.

    B.   If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval under this title (including, but not limited to, a conditional use permit, design review, variance, general plan amendment or zone change), the application shall be submitted and reviewed at the same time as the related applications. (Ord. 1083 § 7, 2014)

 

18.67.040 Approval process.
    A.  Approval Authority.

    1.   Administrative Review. The zoning administrator or designee has the authority to review and decide upon requests for reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is a disabled person within the meaning of this chapter. The zoning administrator or appointed designee may refer the matter to the planning commission, as appropriate.

    2.   Planning Commission Review. The planning commission has the authority to review and decide upon requests for reasonable accommodation, including whether the applicant is a disabled person within the meaning of this chapter, when referred by the zoning administrator or when a reasonable accommodation request includes any encroachment into the front yard setback area, results in a building size increase above what is allowed in the applicable zoning district with respect to height, lot coverage and floor area ratio maximums, or whenever a reduction in required parking is requested.

    B.   Notice. No advance notice or public hearing is required for consideration of reasonable accommodation requests by the zoning administrator. Requests for reasonable accommodation subject to review by the planning commission shall require advance notice and a public hearing pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 1.12.

    C.   Decision. The zoning administrator or an appointed designee shall render a decision or refer the matter to the planning commission within thirty days after the application is complete, and shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application, based on the findings set forth in Section 18.67.050. The decision shall be in writing and mailed to the applicant.

    If the application for reasonable accommodation involves another discretionary decision, the reviewing body for that decision shall accept as final the determination regarding reasonable accommodation by the zoning administrator or an appointed designee, unless the reasonable accommodation request has been referred by the zoning administrator or an appointed designee to the planning commission for consideration.

    If the application for reasonable accommodation is referred to, or reviewed by, the planning commission, a decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application shall be rendered within twenty working days after the close of the public hearing, based on the findings set forth in Section 18.67.050. (Ord. 1083 § 7, 2014)

 

18.67.050 Findings and decision.
    A.  Any decision on an application under this chapter shall be supported by written findings addressing the criteria set forth in this subsection. An application under this chapter for a reasonable accommodation shall be granted if all of the following findings are made:

    1.   The housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual disabled as defined under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.

    2.   The requested reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.

    3.   The requested reasonable accommodation would not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

    4.   The requested reasonable accommodation would not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including, but not limited to, land use and zoning.

    5.   The requested reasonable accommodation would not adversely impact surrounding properties or uses.

    6.   There are no reasonable alternatives that would provide an equivalent level of benefit without requiring a modification or exception to the city’s applicable rules, standards and practices.

    B.   In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection A. (Ord. 1083 § 7, 2014)

 

18.67.060 Appeal determination.
    Any decision on an application under this chapter shall be subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 18.64 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 1083 § 7, 2014)

TABLE C CITY OF PICO RIVERA RANCHO DE BARTOLO SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENT (SP 400)
Note
1.0  INTRODUCTION
2.0  LAND USE PLAN
3.0  URBAN DESIGN PLAN
4.0  INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
5.0  IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM

Note
City of Pico Rivera

6615 Passons Boulevard

Pico Rivera, California 90660

 

 

 

February 2003

 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 

Section

1.0         Introduction

1.1         The Specific Plan’s Scope and Purpose

1.1.1     Purpose and Background

1.1.2    Organization of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan
Amendment

1.1.3     Objectives of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment

1.1.4     Specific Plan Amendment’s Authority

1.2         Background for Planning

1.2.1     Planning Area Location and Setting

1.2.2     History of Planning Area

1.3         Relationship of the Amendment to the General Plan

2.0         Land Use Plan

2.1         Land Use Designations

2.1.1     Land Use Designations

2.1.2     Permitted Uses

2.2         Land Use and Development Standards

2.2.1     Floor Area Standards

2.2.2     Land Use Criteria

2.3         Guiding Principles for Land Use

2.4         Conformity of Current Development Scenario

3.0         Urban Design Plan

3.1         Urban Design Concepts and Criteria

3.2         Urban Design Criteria

3.3         Urban Design Standards

3.4         Guiding Principles for Urban Design

3.5         Design Standards and Guidelines

3.5.1     Overview of Design Concepts

3.5.2     Streetscape Concept

3.5.3     Parking, Loading, Storage Area, and Refuse Storage Standards

3.5.4     Signage Standards

3.5.5     Utilities, Communication Devices, Exterior Electrical
Equipment, and Transformers

3.5.6     Lighting Standards

3.5.7     Landscaping Concept

4.0         Infrastructure Plan

4.1       Infrastructure Development Concepts

4.2       Circulation Criteria and Guiding Principles

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS (Continued)

 

4.3     Utilities and Public Services

4.3.1    Water Facilities

4.3.2    Sewer Facilities

4.3.3    Storm Drain Facilities

4.3.4    Infrastructure Requirements

4.3.5    Power Utilities and Energy Conservation

4.3.6    Solid Waste Disposal

5.0     Implementation Program

5.1      Adoption of the Specific Plan Amendment

5.2      Actions Required for Implementation of the Amendment

5.3      Specific Plan Review, Approval, and Minor Revisions

5.4      Enforcement of this Specific Plan Amendment

5.5      Phasing and Phased Development

5.6      Development Density Transfers

5.7      Implementation Conditions

 

 

List of Tables

 

Table

1-1         Relationship of the Pico Rivera General Plan to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and Amendments

2-1         Distribution of Land Uses by Sub-Area

2-2         Permitted Land Uses

2-3         Development Potential for Sub-Areas/Planning Area

2-4         Development and Land Use Criteria

2-5         Land Use Distribution of Proposed Applications

3-1         Urban Design Criteria

3-2         Urban Design Plan—Development Standards

3-3         Landscaping Materials

 

 

List of Exhibits

 

Exhibit

1-1         Regional Location

1-2         Vicinity Map

1-3         Planning Area Boundaries

2-1         Land Use Plan

2-2         Conceptual Site Plan—Sub-Area A

2-3         Conceptual Site Plan—Sub-Area B

3-1         Entryway and Activity Nodes

3-2         Conceptual Landscaping Plan—Sub-Area A

3-3         Conceptual Landscaping Plan—Sub-Area B

4-1         Circulation System

4-2         Roadway Cross-Sections

4-3         Existing and Proposed Water Facilities

4-4         Existing and Proposed Sewer Facilities

4-5         Existing Storm Drain Facilities

1.0  INTRODUCTION
1.1  THE SPECIFIC PLAN’S SCOPE AND PURPOSE
 

1.1.1  Purpose and Background

 

This document, originally adopted as Specific Plan Amendment 400.3 in January of 2001, was subsequently modified in February 2003 to reflect a request for an additional 184,294 square feet in Sub-area B, and 85,372 square feet in Sub-area C. Revisions to the document were made throughout changing the amendment number from 400.3 to 400.4 and to accommodate the changes in square footages. Please be aware that the remaining language of the document was left intact and may not reflect current development conditions (for example, the site is no longer occupied by the Northrop Grumman Corporation).

 

The City of Pico Rivera initiated the preparation of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan in 1996 to provide a comprehensive set of guidelines, regulations, and implementation programs to guide the future redevelopment of the 200 gross acre site currently occupied by Northrop-Grumman. In addition, the 35-acre area located to the south of the Northrop-Grumman plant site, occupied by the Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BN&SF) rail yard, was included in the Planning Area governed by the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan.1-1

 

The primary objective of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan is to ensure that the future redevelopment of this area mirrors the land use and development objectives outlined in the City’s General Plan, while providing maximum flexibility to facilitate the site’s timely reuse. A comprehensive planning program was undertaken to identify possible development scenarios that should be considered as part of the site’s planning and development. Four different development scenarios emerged from this initial planning process that were ultimately included in the Specific Plan.1-2 The four development scenarios considered in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan included the following:

 

1. The Aerospace Retention Alternative provided for the adaptive reuse of the existing plant facilities;

 

2. The Mixed-Use Alternative contemplated the site’s redevelopment in industrial, research and development, distribution-related uses, and a mix of retail, office, industrial, and manufacturing uses;

 

3. The Theme Park Alternative permitted a wide range of resort and recreational amenities for the Planning Area; and

 

4. The Mega-Mall Alternative provided for the development of a regional commercial shopping center within the Planning Area.

 

Over the course of planning and development that occurred since the Specific Plan’s initial adoption, the Mixed-Use scenario emerged as the development that was ultimately selected for implementation.

 

The focus of this Amendment (Specific Plan Amendment 400.3, updated in February 2003 by Amendment 400.4) to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan (referred to hereinafter as the “Amendment”) is to provide further guidance concerning the commercial retail development currently proposed within those portions of the Planning Area located along Washington Boulevard and the light manufacturing and distribution-related land uses within the remainder of the Planning Area. Unlike the development contemplated under the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan, formal development applications have been submitted to the City of Pico Rivera, indicating the location, extent, and mix of land uses.1-3 The purpose of this Amendment, then, is to accomplish the following:

 

1. To consider the current development proposal’s conformity with the standards and guiding principles outlined in the adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan;

 

2. To address the additional floor area and other entitlements being requested in the Conditional Use Permit Applications;

 

3. To revisit the previously-adopted mitigation measures and mitigation monitoring program included in the original Specific Plan’s environmental impact report (EIR) to determine their relevance to the current development proposal;

 

4. To update the information included in the adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan; and

 

5. To determine if any additional guidance regarding development and/or mitigation is warranted.

 

1.1.2  Organization of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment

 

This comprehensive Amendment to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan consists of the following elements:

 

1. The Introduction provides an overview of the scope and content of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment and outlines its statutory authority.

 

2. The Land Use Plan contains regulations and standards related to land use and development within the area governed by the Specific Plan that are applicable to the current development proposal.

 

3. The Urban Design Plan focuses on development standards, landscaping, and overall appearance of future development now contemplated within the Planning Area.

 

4. The Infrastructure Plan describes transportation facilities, water, storm drainage, sewer infrastructure, solid waste disposal services, and energy conservation measures that will be required to serve future development currently envisioned under this Amendment.

 

5. The Implementation Program details the actions that will be required to implement and enforce the development contemplated under this Amendment.

 

6. The Environmental Analysis includes the environmental document, which analyzes the impacts associated with the current development proposal, and evaluates the development’s conformity with that analyzed in the certified Final EIR prepared for the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan.

 

The Land Use Plan, Urban Design Plan, and Infrastructure Plan provide specific guidance concerning the current development proposal, and outline specific requirements and/or guidelines applicable to the current development proposal. These requirements may also serve as mitigation measures in the environmental analysis.

 

1.1.3  Objectives of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment

 

The majority of the Planning Area is owned by the Northrop-Grumman Corporation, which presently occupies the main improvements located to the north of Rex Road and south of Washington Boulevard. The area south of Rex Road, currently under development, is now owned by Majestic Realty. The Northrop-Grumman facility recently ceased operations in the fall of 2000. The facility was an important source of jobs and revenue, and as a result, its timely reuse is a concern to both the City and property owner. The objectives the City intends to achieve with the ongoing implementation of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan in general, and this Amendment in particular, include the following:

 

1. To promote the timely redevelopment and/or reuse of the Northrop-Grumman plant;

 

2. To provide new employment opportunities for the City and region, replacing those jobs lost as a result of the plant’s closure;

 

3. To promote new development that will benefit the City of Pico Rivera;

 

4. To eliminate or reduce the adverse environmental effects associated with future development within the Planning Area; and

 

5. To ensure that any future development is compatible with the surrounding community, and in conformance with the vision outlined in the City of Pico Rivera General Plan.

 

1.1.4  Specific Plan Amendment’s Authority

 

The original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan was established through the authority granted to the City of Pico Rivera under the Government Code that authorizes local governments to adopt specific plans by resolution and/or by ordinance.1-4 This Amendment to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan (SP 400.4) will be considered for adoption by the City Council following public hearings before both the Planning Commission and City Council. This Amendment, which was prepared in conformance to the Government Code requirements, includes regulations, conditions, programs, and legislation governing the following:1-5

 

1. The distribution, density, and location of land uses and development;

 

2. The location and development standards for streets, sewers, storm drains, and other essential infrastructure needed to support the proposed land uses envisioned under the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and the proposed Amendment;

 

3. Specific standards and criteria for the development to promote the conservation and efficient utilization of natural resources;

 

4. An implementation program including regulations, programs, public works projects, and financing measures to carry out future development; and

 

5. A statement indicating the relationship of the Specific Plan Amendment to the City of Pico Rivera General Plan.

 

1.2  BACKGROUND FOR PLANNING
 

1.2.1  Planning Area Location and Setting

 

The Planning Area governed by the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and this Amendment to the original Specific Plan, is located in the south-central portion of the City of Pico Rivera. The City is located in southeastern Los Angeles County and is bounded by Whittier on the east, Montebello on the west, Downey on the south, and the Whittier Narrows Recreational Area on the north (the City’s location is provided in Exhibit 1-1, included at the end of this section, Section 1.0). The City’s total land area is approximately 8.4 square miles. According to the most recent California Department of Finance population estimates, the City’s population as of January 1, 2000 was 65,202 persons.1-6

 

That portion of the Planning Area located north of Rex Road includes land presently owned and occupied by Northrop-Grumman’s Pico Rivera facility. A 40-acre area located to the south of Rex Road is owned by Majestic Realty and is presently undergoing development. An area located further south, consisting of approximately 35 acres, is owned by the Burlington Northern and Santa Fe (BN&SF) railroad and is used as a rail yard. The Planning Area, in its entirety, is bounded on the east by Rosemead Boulevard (State Route 19), on the north by Washington Boulevard, on the west by Paramount Boulevard, and on the south by a single-family residential neighborhood and a trucking facility. Rex Road, a private street, presently bisects the southerly portion of the Planning Area, connecting with Paramount Boulevard on the west and Rosemead Boulevard on the east. The Planning Area’s location in a local context is shown in Exhibit 1-2, provided at the end of this section.

 

Surrounding land uses are characterized by a mix of development types. Commercial and retail uses are located north of the Planning Area along the north side of Washington Boulevard. Residential uses are also located along Washington Boulevard and to the rear (northerly) of the commercial uses fronting Washington Boulevard. The area to the east, along the east side of Rosemead Boulevard north of Danbridge Street, was previously developed with commercial uses. This area recently underwent redevelopment with the construction of single-family homes. Single-family and multi-family residential developments are located south of Danbridge Street. Other uses in this area include motel and institutional activities.1-7 Another residential neighborhood is located south of the BN&SF railroad right-of-way. Land uses within this neighborhood are characterized by single-family detached homes. The area to the west, west of Paramount Boulevard and east of the Rio Hondo River Channel, is developed in industrial uses.1-8

 

As part of the preparation of the original Specific Plan, the 235-acre Planning Area was divided into nine sub-areas in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. The sub-area boundaries generally corresponded to roadways that presently existed or were planned at that time. Three sub-areas (Sub-Areas 1, 2, and 3) included the frontage along Washington Boulevard. Two sub-areas (Sub-Areas 4 and 5) included those parcels with frontage along Rosemead Boulevard, north of Rex Road. Sub-Areas 6 and 7 included the central and easterly portion of the Planning Area and are connected to Paramount Boulevard. Sub-Area 8 was located south of Rex Road, north of the BN&SF rail yard, between Paramount Boulevard and Rosemead Boulevard. Finally, the existing BN&SF rail yard was included in Sub-Area 9.1-9

 

The “sub-area” concept was employed in the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan to facilitate the varied development options that were contemplated at the time the original Specific Plan was prepared. At the same time, the concept was intended to provide a maximum amount of flexibility to the property owner and prospective developers. This current Amendment provides for a “re-organization” of the nine aforementioned sub-areas to conform to the current development proposal that was ultimately selected. The revised sub-areas included in this Amendment are applicable to the following:

 

1. Sub-Area A corresponds to those portions of the Planning Area located along the Washington Boulevard frontage. A variety of commercial and retail uses are contemplated within this Sub-Area.1-10

 

2. Sub-Area B includes that portion of the Planning Area located to the north of Rex Road and south of Sub-Area A. Future development contemplated within this area includes a mix of light industrial and distribution-related uses.1-11

 

3. Sub-Area C includes that portion of the Planning Area located to the south of Rex Road and north of the existing BN&SF rail yard. Development is currently underway within this portion of the Planning Area.1-12

 

4. Sub-Area D includes the existing BN&SF rail yard.1-13

 

    The mix and distribution of land uses provided for in this Amendment generally correspond to those included in the previously-adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. A map indicating the new sub-area boundaries is shown in Exhibit 1-3, also provided at the end of this section.

 

1.2.2  History of Planning Area

 

Prior to 1955, the 235-acre Planning Area was occupied by orchards and farm houses. The land that is presently included in the Planning Area became part of the Rancho Paso de Bartolo land grant in 1835. In 1843, 700 acres of this land grant, which includes the Planning Area, was passed on to Bernardino Guirado. The first “American” to own property in what is now the City of Pico Rivera was Oliver Perry Passons. In 1855, Passons acquired 100 acres of land from Guirado’s widow, which included a portion of the Planning Area. Another portion of the Rancho that was located within the Planning Area was purchased by C.W.A. Pallet some years later.1-14

 

In 1955, the Ford Motor Company purchased the property and constructed an automobile assembly plant. Automobile assembly operations began in 1956 and continued until 1980, when production ceased. In 1982, the plant was sold to the Northrop Corporation, and the facility was then converted for aerospace engineering and research and development. Most recently, the plant has been engaged in the engineering and fabrication of the B-2 bomber.1-15 The facility was recently closed in the fall of 2000. The plant’s closure is due to the Federal government’s scheduled cutbacks in further orders for the B-2 stealth bomber. At its peak, the plan employed more than 12,000 persons. The site is occupied by twenty-five structures containing a total gross floor area of approximately 3.9 million square feet. That portion of the Planning Area located to the south of Rex Road is currently undergoing development.

 

1.3  RELATIONSHIP OF THE AMENDMENT TO THE GENERAL PLAN
 

The Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan, and the Amendments to that Plan, will serve as the primary implementation tool to guide future development policy for the Planning Area. With the adoption of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan in 1997, the Specific Plan essentially “replaced” the zoning standards that previously applied to the Planning Area. The City of Pico Rivera General Plan promotes the use of a comprehensive planned development process involving the preparation of a “specific plan,” which provides both the City and property owner additional flexibility in the development of standards to match the unique characteristics for a particular site to meet the goals of the General Plan.1-16

 

The adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan, and this Amendment, serve as a “bridge” between the City’s General Plan and more specific development proposals that will implement the General Plan. This Amendment to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan also facilitates the implementation of Conditional Use Permit (CUP) 598 and CUP 599. Policies contained in the City of Pico Rivera General Plan that are germane to the original Specific Plan, and this Amendment, are listed in Table 1-1. The Specific Plan’s conformity to these policies is also indicated in Table 1-1.

 

Table 1-1

 

Relationship of the Pico Rivera General Plan to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and Amendments

 

City of Pico Rivera General Plan Policies

Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Policies

General Plan Policy—Create a unified City image as seen by residents and visitors to the City.

The main feature of this Specific Plan and this Amendment is to establish a comprehensive and uniform set of design guidelines for the entire Planning Area. This Specific Plan Amendment will be incorporated into the City’s Zoning Ordinance to establish a design framework for future development within the Planning Area.

General Plan Policy—Promote a positive visual impression at major entries to the City.

Future development, as specified in this Specific Plan Amendment, will provide residents and visitors to the City with a positive impression of Pico Rivera.


 

City of Pico Rivera General Plan Policies

Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Policies

General Plan Policy—Ensure that the renovation of existing buildings and the construction of new buildings on vacant infill parcels within the City are compatible with the existing character of the surrounding development in the neighborhood.

This Specific Plan Amendment provides for the redevelopment and reuse of the large site occupied by the Northrop-Grumman plant. This Amendment also considers land use compatibility between future development within the Planning Area and both existing and planned land uses in the surrounding areas.

General Plan Policy—Require that effective buffer areas be created between uses that have significantly different densities/intensities or that have operating characteristics that could create nuisances along a common boundary; ensure that individual site designs and operations avoid the creation of nuisances and hazards for either use.

This Specific Plan Amendment promotes site planning techniques, the use of landscaping, and other design treatments as a means to buffer future development within the Planning Area.

General Plan Policy—Require that the density or intensity, as well as design, of new developments be compatible with adjacent neighborhoods and land uses.

This Specific Plan Amendment establishes land use policy that considers surrounding land uses in the area. The Amendment also promotes the use of creative site planning techniques, the use of buffers, and extensive landscaping to separate activities that may otherwise result in impacts on nearby uses.

General Plan Policy—In areas of high commercial concentrations, consolidate driveway locations by using shared access and circulation whenever possible.

The Infrastructure Plan calls for limited use of driveways to facilitate ingress and egress onto and from the site. The Infrastructure Plan included in this Amendment calls for the use of existing driveways, as much as possible, to access future development within the Planning Area. Curb cuts along Rosemead, Paramount, and Washington Boulevards, serving individual businesses, are limited under this Specific Plan Amendment.

General Plan Policy—Strive to create on-site circulation systems that are logical and easy to understand from the users’ point of view.

As indicated previously, existing roadways and driveways will be adapted, as much as possible, to provide ingress and egress to and from the Planning Area. The overall circulation plan calls for the construction of collector roadways designed to facilitate a direct and logical movement of traffic through the Planning Area.

City of Pico Rivera General Plan Policies

Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Policies

General Plan Policy—Internal roadways should be designed so that direct access is available to all structures visible from a particular parking area in order to eliminate unnecessary vehicle travel, and to improve emergency response.

The land use and design standards included in this Specific Plan Amendment provide for site planning techniques that will ensure that businesses are readily visible to traffic using public roadways in and around the Planning Area.

General Plan Policy—Use the presence of the Northrop-Grumman site as the entrance to the City’s southern industrial area by identifying the area with City signage improvements located at the intersection of Washington Boulevard and Paramount Boulevard, Rosemead Boulevard and Slauson Avenue, and along Slauson and the City’s western boundary.

The Urban Design Plan component of this Specific Plan Amendment establishes standards and guidelines related to signage and entryway treatments.

General Plan Policy—As an enhancement to investment in the area, pilot projects could be undertaken by the City focusing on demonstrating opportunities for the consolidation of parcels, efficient use of underutilized parcels, and simple landscape and façade improvement projects. Such projects should strive to involve the private sector in a public-private partnership, to the extent that this is feasible.

The design and site planning criteria set forth in this Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment may provide the framework for similar development in the City and/or surrounding area.

General Plan Policy—Develop examples of design concepts with the other corridor studies that promote the development or rehabilitation of buildings within the industrial area that would create new landmark architectural statements.

This Specific Plan Amendment establishes design guidelines for the street frontages along Rosemead, Washington, and Paramount Boulevards. These guidelines are concerned with open space, landscaping, buffering, signage, entryway treatments, parkway landscaping, and building architecture. The design standards and concepts will provide the foundation for future development plans for this key area of the City.


City of Pico Rivera General Plan Policies

Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Policies

Implementation/Monitoring Program—Placement of buildings should consider the context of the surrounding development, the location of any incompatible land uses, and the location of major tragic generators, as well as an analysis of a site’s characteristics and particular influences.

The Land Use Plan, included in this Specific Plan Amendment, considers the proper placement of those activities that may result in more intrusive impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods.

Implementation/Monitoring Program—Fences and walls should incorporate changes in materials, color or texture, and vine pockets, in order to prevent graffiti, undue glare, heat, or reflection, or aesthetic inconsistencies.

The Urban Design Plan included in this Amendment includes guidelines concerning the architecture, color, fence materials, and walls that will be constructed within the Planning Area.

Urban Design Plan—Development projects should provide adequate screening so that the development is shielded from the negative impacts of adjacent uses, and neighboring properties are shielded from the adverse external effects of that development. On-site utilities and ancillary equipment should be located in an inconspicuous area or vaulted underground away from public view. When equipment cannot be vaulted, screening should be required.

The design guidelines included in the Urban Design Plan call for the use of materials and site planning to shield certain activities and/or equipment from public view. Loading areas, trash enclosures, and mechanical equipment will be screened from public view pursuant to the requirements of this Specific Plan Amendment.

Urban Design Plan—Where provision of a wall or fence cannot be avoided, the establishment of theme walls is encouraged. However, such walls should coordinate with perimeter landscape design and provide aesthetic enhancement to the project without creating a “walled-in” appearance.

The use of “theme walls” and other design treatments are required as part of this Specific Plan’s implementation.


City of Pico Rivera General Plan Policies

Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Policies

Urban Design Plan—Where construction of a solid wall that will be visible along a public street is necessary, provide landscaping such as trees, shrubs, and vines to soften the appearance of the wall, and to reduce undue glare, heat, and reflection. Ensure that fencing is constructed of durable material that will resist the damaging effects of wind, rain, and irrigation.

The landscaping component of the Urban Design Plan calls for the use of landscaping treatments to soften the overall appearance of future development permitted within the Planning Area.

Urban Design Plan—All exterior lighting should be designed as part of the overall project architectural design concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories should be harmonious with the building design and visual environment.

The Urban Design Plan includes design guidelines for exterior lighting, parking area lighting, and other types of lighting that will add to the overall visual integration of future development. The Plan also includes standards and guidelines related to light and glare.

 

Sources: Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan, 1997, and City of Pico Rivera General Plan, 1992.

 





 



 

 

Footnotes

 

1-1)   The Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan was adopted by Resolution in December, 1997.

 

1-2)   Several alternatives were developed as part of a study that was financed by the Federal government to facilitate the conversion of defense-related industry in southern California to non-defense activities. This earlier planning effort included the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and the Southeast Los Angeles County (SELAC is now called GATEWAY) consortium of cities. Other development scenarios were advanced by citizen’s groups, the property owner, and a local nonprofit organization.

 

1-3)   The 40-acre area located to the south of Rex Road is presently undergoing development.

 

1-4)   California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Sections 65450 through 65457.

 

1-5)   California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 3, Article 8, Section 65451.

 

1-6)   California Department of Finance. Population and Housing Estimates, Report E-5. May 2000.

 

1-7)   Blodgett/Baylosis Associates. Site Survey. 2000.

 

1-8)   Blodgett/Baylosis Associates. Site Survey. 2000.

 

1-9)   City of Pico Rivera. Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. 1997.

 

1-10) This Sub-Area corresponds to Sub-Areas 1, 2, and 3 included in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan.

 

1-11) This Sub-Area corresponds to Sub-Areas 4 through 7 included in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan.

 

1-12) This Sub-Area is unchanged from that considered in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and corresponds to Sub-Area 8 included in the original Specific Plan. A total of 885, 600 square feet of development is currently under construction within this Sub-Area.

 

1-13) This Sub-Area is unchanged from that considered in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and corresponds to Sub-Area 9 included in the original Specific Plan.

 

1-14) City Pico Rivera, Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan (Section 1). 1997.

 

1-15) Ibid.

 

1-16) City of Pico Rivera. General Plan. 1990.

2.0  LAND USE PLAN
2.1  LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
 

This section of the Amendment to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan establishes land use and development standards and guiding principles for the Planning Area governed by the Specific Plan. The objective of this Amendment is to establish a range of land uses that will foster economic growth in the area. The standards and guidelines contained herein indicate the uses permitted under each land use designation, the density of development, building height, floor area, parking requirements, and other special development standards and/or requirements applicable to the four sub-areas that comprise the land area governed by the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment.

 

2.1.1  Land Use Designations

 

This section establishes standards and regulations regarding the specific land uses and activities permitted within the Planning Area. The character of future development within the Planning Area will be maintained through the regulation of land uses, building orientation, building height and accessory structures, parking, etc. (Those elements related to architectural design and the overall aesthetic character of this future development are addressed in Section 3.0 of this Amendment, Urban Design Plan.) The development intensity of each permitted land use is limited to the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) standards set forth in Section 2.2 of this document. The following land uses are permitted within the Planning Area:

 

1. Commercial Retail activities refer to commercial retailing establishments. Commercial Retail land uses are limited to Sub-Area A. Commercial major tenants (with floor areas of at least 25,000 square feet) may include, but not be limited to, large specialty retailers, food stores, apparel and accessory stores, home furnishings, etc. The Commercial Retail category also includes smaller specialty retailers that may include florists, bakeries, eating and drinking places, salons, dry cleaners, etc.

 

2. Entertainment activities include theaters, cinemas, and other activities engaged in providing family recreation. The location of these uses is restricted to Sub-Area A.

 

3. Office uses refers to those commercial-serving businesses, including personal services, business services, and financial institutions. These uses are also restricted to Sub-Area A. Administrative offices, when ancillary to the primary use, are permitted in Sub-Areas B and C.

 

4. Food-Serving activities are also restricted to Sub-Area A. Businesses engaged in food and beverage services include fast-food restaurants with drive-thru lanes, sit-down restaurants, and food courts. All businesses included in this category are restricted to Sub-Area A. No more than three fast-food businesses with drive-thru lanes will be permitted.

 

5. Public/Institutional includes a variety of civic-related uses, and these uses shall be restricted to Sub-Areas A or B. The public institutional use may include, but not be limited to, a City Hall/Civic Center, recreation building, sheriff’s station, a county health center, post office, or main library. These civic and institutional uses are permitted within Sub-Areas A or B. In addition, a maintenance yard is permitted in the Planning Area, though its location is limited to Sub-Area B.

 

6. Light Industrial/Distribution includes a wide range of industrial and manufacturing activities. Land uses permitted in this category include those activities engaged in manufacturing, assembly, wholesale trade, packaging, research and development, and supporting office uses. These uses are permitted in Sub-Areas B and C.

 

7. Heavy Industrial uses are restricted to Sub-Areas B and C. Land uses in this category include those activities engaged in processing and/or manufacturing requiring specialized facilities and/or equipment that would not be accommodated in smaller light-industrial and R&D development. Uses included in this category typically require building floor areas in excess of 100,000 square feet.

 

8. Rail Yard provides for the retention of the existing rail yard located in the southernmost portion of the Planning Area within Sub-Area D. The Specific Plan Amendment also provides for the development of a future Metrolink Station and a modest expansion of the existing BN&SF facilities within Sub-Area D.

 

The various categories of land uses permitted under the Specific Plan Amendment are summarized in Table 2-1. The table indicates those major categories of land uses that are permitted, conditionally permitted, or prohibited within each sub-area. The location and extent of permitted land uses are depicted in Exhibit 2-1, provided at the end of this section.


Table 2-1

 

Distribution of Land Uses By Sub-Area

 

Land Use

Sub-Area A

Sub-Area B

Sub-Area C

Sub-Area D

Commercial-Retail

*

x

x

x

Entertainment

+

x

x

x

Office

*

+

+

x

Food Service

*

x

x

x

Public/Institutional

*

*

x

x

Light Industrial

x

*

*

x

Heavy Industrial

x

*

*

x

Rail Yard

x

x

x

*

Key:

 

* Land uses permitted

+ Land uses conditionally permitted (office uses in Sub-Areas B and C must be ancillary to
primary use.)

x Land uses prohibited

 

Note: Specific land uses permitted within each land use category (Commercial, Entertainment, etc.) are noted in Table 2-2. Some of the permitted uses may require CUPs or PPDs approvals

 

2.1.2  Permitted Uses

 

Table 2-2 indicates the uses that are permitted under each land use designation. Prior to proceeding with any new development, a master conditional use permit shall be submitted to the Community Development Department for Planning Commission review and approval. Additional requirements for certain uses are noted in Table 2-2 below. A phased timeline agreement shall also be submitted to the Community Development Department for review and approval prior to permit issuance. The master conditional use permit shall conform to the appropriate criteria, standards, and other regulations contained in this Specific Plan Amendment.


Table 2-2

 

Permitted Land Uses†

 

 

Designation

Permitted Uses

Permitted Uses

 

Commercial Sub-Area A (All retail sales must consist of new goods)

Alcohol Sales1

Insurance Carriers

 

Apparel and Accessory Stores

Medical Offices

 

Auto and Home Supply Stores

Miscellaneous Shopping Goods Stores6

 

Beauty and Barber Shops

News Dealers and Newsstands

 

Business Office Related to Retail Trade or Service

Optical Goods Stores

 

Candy, Nut, and Confectionary Stores

Pet shops and Supplies. Veterinary services, animal adoption centers, pet grooming and/or training may be conducted only in conjunction with the primary use of Pet Shops and Supplies.

 

Child Care Services**

Photo finishing

 

Drug Stores***

Photocopy and Duplicating Services

 

Dry Cleaners

Photographic Studio, Portrait

 

Eating and Drinking Places (sit-down)2

Physical Fitness Facilities

Real Estate Agents and Managers

Eating and Drinking Places (fast food)3

Retail Bakeries

Service Station 4*

Financial Institutions***

Tax Return Preparation Services

 

Florists

Tobacco Stores

 

Food Court2

Travel Agencies

 

Food Stores

Video Tape Rental6

 

General Merchandise Stores

 

 

Hardware Stores

 

 

Home Furniture, Furnishings, & Equipment Stores

 

 

Entertainment Sub-Area A

Bowling Alleys*

Motion Picture Theaters (Except for Drive-in)*

 

 

Cultural Center or Performing Arts Center*

Physical Fitness Facilities*

 

Office

Banks and Financial Services

Health Services (Except Nursing & Personal Care)

Sub-Area A

 

Business Services (including Accounting/Tax Preparation Services)

Individual and Family Social Services

Insurance Carriers

Non Depository Credit Institutions

Designation

Permitted Uses

Permitted Uses

 

 

Business Associations

Real Estate Agents and Managers

 

 

Child Care Services**

Security and Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges, and Services

 

Depository Institutions

 

 

Public/Institutional

City Hall/Civic Center

Maintenance Yard (permitted only in Sub-Area B)

Sub-Areas A or B

Government Offices

 

Heavy Industry

Assembly and Fabrication

Processing Plants (except rendering plants)

Sub-Area B and C

 

Manufacturing Plants

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities5

 

Light Industrial/ Distribution

Child Care Services**

Research, Development, and Testing Services

 

Manufacturing, except animal slaughtering/processing

Warehousing and Distribution

 

Sub-Areas B and C

Motion Picture Production and Allied Services

Wholesale Trade

 

Office Uses ancillary to the primary use

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities5

 

Railyard

Local and Suburban Transit Facilities

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities5

Sub-Area D

 

Notes:

1. Alcohol sales (off-site) in conjunction with a grocery store or similar retail establishment of not less than 10,000 square feet are permitted. On-site sales require a CUP.

2. A CUP is required for the serving of alcoholic beverages and a PPD is required for outdoor dining areas.

3. No more than three (3) fast-food restaurants with a drive-thru lane will be permitted and takeout is only permitted in conjunction with fast-food sit-down establishments. Drive-thru restaurants are subject to PPD requirements.

4. No more than one (1) service station will be permitted.

5. Roof or building mounted (of stealth design) are permitted within Sub-Area B with PPD approval. Installation within Sub-Areas B and C must conform to the City’s Zoning Ordinance.

6. Pre-owned merchandise limited to computer and video game software, movies or music permitted as ancillary to primary retail sale of new merchandise of the same type up to a maximum of 15% of total retail sales area.

 

† The Zoning Administrator may allow other similar uses subject to the provisions included in the City’s Zoning Code.

* CUP required.

** PPD required.

*** Drive-thru permitted with PPD approval.

 

(Ord. 1068 § 4, 2011; Ord. 999 § 4, 2003)

 

2.2  LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
 

2.2.1  Floor Area Standards

 

This Amendment to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan promotes development that will facilitate the timely and productive use of the Planning Area presently occupied by the Northrop-Grumman plant. The total maximum floor area permitted within the four sub-areas under this Specific Plan Amendment is 3,774,066 square feet (refer to Table 2-3). No future density transfers are permitted among the four sub-areas.

 

Table 2-3

 

Development Potential for Sub-Areas/Planning Area

 

Sub-Area

Land Area1 (in acres)

Land Use

Maximum Permitted Floor Area2

Sub-Area A

49.87

Commercial, Institutional

629,000 s.f.

Sub-Area B

92.85

Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial, Distribution, Institutional

2,096,094 s.f.

Sub-Area C

36.42

Light Industrial, Distribution, Heavy Manufacturing

970.972 s.f

Sub-Area D

35.00

Rail Yard

78,000 s.f.

Total Net Area

214.14

 

3,774,066 s.f.

1 Land area figures for each sub-area refer to “net” land area. The total gross land area is 235 acres.

2 Figures for each sub-area assume gross floor area.

 

2.2.2  Land Use Criteria

 

The land use concept for the Planning Area provides for a range of land uses and development intensities within the 235-acre Planning Area. The focus of this section of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment is to ensure that future development within the Planning Area is compatible with existing and planned development. This section identifies additional land use and development standards applicable to each sub-area. The general development standards and the matrix illustrated in Table 2-4 provide for the following land uses and development standards for the four sub-areas.

 

1. Development Intensity Criteria. These development criteria indicate the maximum floor area permitted within each of the four sub-areas. These floor area figures are “non-transferable” among the four sub-areas. The maximum floor area ratio, or FAR, for individual parcels that may be created as part of any future subdivision is also identified. Finally, other development criteria that future development must conform to are also identified.

 

2. Parking and Loading Area Criteria. The location and distribution of the parking areas required to accommodate future development within the four sub-areas are discussed in this section. This section also indicates the location of loading docks and truck-high doors, with respect to adjacent roadways.

 

3. Site Development Criteria. The orientation and location of buildings and open space requirements for landscaping are identified.

 

Standards for development intensity for each land use designation are identified in Table 2-4. The floor area ratio, or FAR, is used to define the development intensity for the various land use categories.2-1 In addition to the FAR standards, all future development must also comply with the other applicable requirements and standards, including those related to setbacks, landscaping, and parking.

 

Table 2-4

 

Development and Land Use Criteria

 

Development Intensity Criteria

Parking & Loading Criteria

Site Development Criteria

Sub-Area A

 

 

The total floor area of commercial and retailing uses may not exceed 629,000 square feet. Any combination of commercial uses (specialty retail, anchor, etc.) is permitted as long as the maximum floor area within the sub-area does not exceed 629,000 square feet.

Surface parking for new development may be provided in those portions of the sub-area visible from Washington Boulevard, Rosemead Boulevard, and Paramount Boulevard.

Primary structures shall be oriented toward the major arterials. Primary structures are to be located along the easterly and/or southerly portions of the sub-area.

 

Development Intensity Criteria

Parking & Loading Criteria

Site Development Criteria

Sub-Area A

 

 

A minimum of four major tenants must have a minimum floor area of 25,000 square feet. A minimum of four major tenants will be required. Individual free-standing structures containing commercial uses must have a minimum floor area of 3,500 square feet with the exception of fast-food restaurants with drive-thru lanes. Fast-food restaurants with drive-thru lanes may have a minimum floor area of 1,500 square feet. Businesses with floor areas of less than 1,500 square feet will be limited to food-court uses.

Loading areas, docks, and ramps for the primary structures (those not included in the outlying pads) are restricted to those areas not visible or sufficiently screened from Paramount, Rosemead, and Washington Boulevards.

Building pads will be permitted within the parking areas, though structures situated on the building pads must not obstruct views of the primary structures from Paramount Boulevard, Rosemead Boulevard, and Washington Boulevard. A minimum of 10% of the total gross area of Sub-Area A must be landscaped.

 

 

 

Sub-Area B

 

 

Up to 2,096,094 square feet of light industrial, manufacturing, research and development uses, and distribution uses are permitted within this sub-area.

Loading areas, docks, and ramps the primary structures are restricted to the rear or sides of the primary structure and must not be visible from Rosemead, Paramount, and Washington Boulevards, and any public or private street.

A minimum of 10% of the total gross site area must be landscaped. Truck loading and parking areas must be oriented away from adjacent arterial roadways. Railroad spur easements must be screened from public view.

No more than 20% of the gross floor area of any individual structure may be used as “office” space. The maximum FAR for any future development within the sub-area is 0.6 to 1.0. The maximum permitted lot coverage is 60%.

 

 


Development Intensity Criteria

Parking & Loading Criteria

Site Development Criteria

Sub-Area C

 

 

This scenario assumes that the sub-area, in its entirety, may be developed as Light Industrial/Distribution or Heavy Industrial. Up to 970,972 square feet of floor area is permitted.

Loading areas, docks, and ramps for the primary structures are restricted to the rear or side of the primary structures. Loading and storage areas must be screened so they are not visible from the public right-of-way.

Structures shall be oriented toward Rex Road. A minimum of 10% of the gross site area must be landscaped.

The maximum floor area ratio for future development within this sub-area is 0.6 to 1.0. The maximum permitted lot coverage is 60%.

 

 

 

 

 

Sub-Area D

 

 

The land use plan also provides for the retention of the existing rail yard, along with a modest increase in floor area (10%).

Loading and storage areas must be screened so they are not visible from the public right-of-way.

Any realignment of the access roads in Sub-Area D must provide landscaping along Paramount and Rosemead Boulevards where deemed appropriate by the City.

No change in the overall uses within this sub-area is contemplated under this Specific Plan Amendment. The Specific Plan also provides for a Metrolink station to be located in the sub-area.

 

 

 

2.3  GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR LAND USE
 

The Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment provides for a wide range of amenities to be provided as part of any future development within the Planning Area. These amenities are detailed in Section 3.0 of this Specific Plan. The purpose of this section is to highlight specialized land uses and public facilities that may be provided as part of any future redevelopment within the Planning Area. The previous sections outlined the specific land use requirements that are applicable to each sub-area. In addition to those standards applicable to each sub-area, the following requirements apply:

 

1. Food-Serving Uses. As indicated previously, businesses engaged in food and beverage service activities are limited to Sub-Area A. No more than three (3) fast-food restaurants with drive-thru lanes are permitted with a Precise Plan of Design approval. These restaurants may employ drive-thru lanes as long as the lanes are confined to the internal circulation areas. Such uses may have a minimum square footage of 1,500 square feet. No direct access between the drive-thru lanes and the public rights-of-way will be permitted. No food-serving uses will be permitted in Sub-Areas B through D. Landscaping and other design measures should be used to “screen” the views of the drive-thru lanes/windows from Washington Boulevard.

 

2. Office and Administrative. Office uses will not be permitted in Sub-Areas B and C unless such use is ancillary to the primary use. These uses may not exceed more than 20% of the gross floor area of the individual buildings.

 

3. Financial Services. Banks and other financial services are permitted only in Sub-Area A. These uses may include a drive-thru lane with PPD approval as long as the vehicle storage area and drive-thru lane do not interfere with on-site circulation. No direct access to the drive-thru lane from a public right-of-way is permitted.

 

4. Commercial Drive-Thru Lanes. Specialty commercial uses, such as drug stores, may be permitted to employ drive-thru lanes with PPD approval as long as these drive-thru lanes do not interfere with on-site vehicular circulation. The drive-thru lanes must not interfere with pedestrian circulation.

 

5. Automotive Fuel Retailing (Service Station). No more than one (1) service station will be permitted within the Planning Area, and this use will be restricted to Sub-Area A. The location of this use is limited to the northwest corner of Sub-Area A (the southeast corner of Paramount Boulevard and Washington Boulevard).

 

6. Light Industrial/Heavy Industrial. No outdoor wholesale or retail activities open to the public will be permitted within Sub-Areas B through D.

 

7. Day-Care Center. This Specific Plan Amendment continues to promote the development of a day-care facility to serve patrons, employees, and residents alike. The day-care facility will be permitted in Sub-Areas A, B, and C. The floor area bonus granted for this future development will conform to those requirements contained in the State of California’s Planning, Zoning, and Development Laws.

 

8. Transit Center. The Planning Area’s location in close proximity to the Metrolink line provides an opportunity for future development to take advantage of the existing commuter rail transit operations. Consultation is needed with the BN&SF railroad, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), and the Southern California Commuter Rail Transit Authority to further determine the feasibility of locating a commuter station within the Planning Area. Any future commuter stop would be required to meet applicable MTA specifications. The land area required to accommodate a future Metrolink station would depend on the parking required to serve the site. However, the location of this use will be limited to Sub-Area D.

 

9. Fire Station. Los Angeles County Fire Station Number 103 (7300 Paramount Boulevard) is located within the westerly portion of the Planning Area fronting on Paramount Boulevard. Future development within the Planning Area must maintain and preserve the integrity of the existing station, and coordination with the Fire Department must be maintained throughout the planning and design process. The fire station is preserved in the current site plan. Future reuse of the property will be determined at such time the fire station is closed or relocated.

 

10.   Subdivision Requirements. The subdivision of land must conform to the requirements and regulations outlined herein. All lot subdivisions must be designed to accommodate all development standards and infrastructure improvements identified in the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. Proposed subdivisions must identify phasing to ensure access and availability of infrastructure to service proposed lots.

 

2.4  CONFORMITY OF CURRENT DEVELOPMENT SCENARIO
 

There are active development proposals being considered for review by the City, and these proposals led to the reconsideration of the standards included in the current adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and Specific Plan Amendment. These current development applications were weighed against the development contemplated in the original adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. The key elements of the current development concept include the following:

 

1. A total of 629,000 square feet of commercial uses were proposed within Sub-Area A. Square footage will not change under Amendment 400.4.

 

2. A total of 1,911,800 square feet of manufacturing, light industrial and distribution uses was permitted under the previous Amendment 400.3. Under Amendment 400.4, a total of 184,294 additional square feet is permitted.

 

3. A total of 885,600 square feet of industrial uses is permitted within Sub-Area C. The adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan provided for 717,800 square feet of floor area for this sub-area. The additional floor area permitted within this sub-area was approved through a previous development intensity transfer from Sub-Area B and the Specific Plan Amendment. Under Amendment 400.4, an additional 85,372 square feet is permitted over the 885,600 square feet.

 

4. No changes are contemplated for Sub-Area D.

 

While the current development concept considered in this Amendment provides for additional floor area over that proposed in the original Specific Plan, the impacts of this future development will be less for several reasons. First, the original “mixed-use” scenario contained land uses that would represent significant traffic generation (offices, hotels, etc.). Secondly, the “heavy industrial” uses proposed in the original Specific Plan contemplated specialized manufacturing activities instead of the light industrial, research and development, and distribution uses that are currently proposed.

 

Table 2-5 provides a breakdown of the current development proposal. As indicated within Table 2-5, the development intensities and uses correspond to, and are consistent with, the overall land use guidelines outlined previously. A total of 629,000 square feet of commercial uses and 2,096,094 square feet of industrial/distribution uses are currently being proposed. Over subsequent phases of planning, additional modifications to the concept plan (identified in Table 2-5) are likely to ensure conformance with the Specific Plan. These future changes are addressed in Section 5.3.


Table 2-5

 

Land Use Distribution of Proposed Applications

 

Bldg. No.

Land Use

Floor Area (sq. ft.)

Bldg. No.

Land Use

Floor Area (sq. ft.)

 

Sub-Area A

 

 

Sub-Area B

 

C-1

Gas/Retail

5,000

1

Manufacturing/Distribution

180,371

C-2

Fast Food

3,500

2

Manufacturing/Distribution

254,780

C-3

Retail

10,000

3

Manufacturing/Distribution

254,754

C-5

Fast Food

3,500

4

Manufacturing/Distribution

188,552

C-6

Retail/Food

10,000

5

Manufacturing/Distribution

411,250

C-7

Retail/Food

10,000

6

Manufacturing/Distribution

313,878

C-8

Restaurant (sit down)

7,000

7

Manufacturing/Distribution

50,995

C-9

Retail

15,120

8

Manufacturing/Distribution

140,619

C-10A

Retail

10,000

9

Manufacturing/Distribution

195,844

C-10B

Retail

24,000

10

Manufacturing/Distribution

105,051

C-11

Retail

20,000

 

 

 

C-12

Retail

25,000

 

 

 

C-13A

Retail

10,000

 

 

 

C-13B

Retail

23,700

 

 

 

C-14

Retail

15,000

 

 

 

C-15

Retail

30,187

 

 

 

C-16A

Retail

83,921

Subtotal

 

2,096,094

C-16B

Retail

84,800

 

Sub-Area C

 

C-16C

Retail

54,740

Subtotal

Manufacturing/Distribution

970,972

C-19A

Retail

135,197

 

Sub-Area D

 

C-19B

Garden Center

42,288

Subtotal

Rail Yard

78,000

C-20

Retail/Food

6,000

 

 

 

Subtotal for Sub-Area

628,953

 

 

 

 

The conceptual Site Plans for future development presently contemplated within Sub-Areas A and B are shown in Exhibits 2-1 through 2-3. Future “minor” modifications to those site plans are permitted as long as the standards and regulations contained in this section are adhered to. A definition of a “minor” modification to this Specific Plan is provided in Section 5.0.

 



 



 

 

Footnotes:

 

2-1)   The FAR standard used in this Specific Plan is simply the ratio of the gross floor area of development permitted within each sub-area to the net area of the sub-area. A FAR of 0.5 to 1.0, for example, implies that the total floor area of permitted development within a particular sub-area is half of the total land area of the sub-area.

3.0  URBAN DESIGN PLAN
3.1  URBAN DESIGN CONCEPTS AND CRITERIA
 

The design standards and guidelines contained herein have been established to further promote quality and attractive development, to ensure land use compatibility, and to provide guidance with regard to building mass and form, architectural styling, color and materials, and landscape design. Future development within the Planning Area must conform to the overall design concept established herein and/or within any future conditional use permit requirements. This design concept will integrate the various uses contemplated under the Specific Plan. New development must be designed to be compatible so as not to detract from the character of other development. Abundant landscaping must be provided along the perimeter of the Planning Area and along the interior roadways. Landscaping within the parking areas and along the roadways within the Planning Area will be used to “soften” the overall appearance of development. Criteria discussed in this section focuses on design requirements, standards, and guidelines unique to the various types of development envisioned under the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. This section of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan considers the following:

 

1. Design criteria for the commercial, institutional, manufacturing, and other types of development;

 

2. Development standards for future land uses;

 

3. Design standards applicable to the entire Planning Area; and,

 

4. Additional landscaping design standards applicable to the current development proposal.

 

3.2  URBAN DESIGN CRITERIA
 

This section indicates the design criteria that apply to development permitted within the Planning Area pursuant to the Land Use Plan contained herein in Section 2.0. This section of the Urban Design Plan discusses design guidelines that will provide a coordinated selection of landscaping and paving materials, while emphasizing important architectural elements.

 

Individuality as well as cohesion between various development types permitted in the Planning Area will be strengthened through the implementation of the design criteria contained herein. In addition, the overall project identity and character will be further defined and enhanced by the continuity of landscape materials along publicly-visible areas. The landscape plan will define an overall framework, identifying streetscape design and a plant palette for the perimeter areas, interior roadways, major entries, and the nodes.

 

The identity of individual areas may be established through variations in landscaping at major entry points, along smaller streets within the project, and within individual open space areas. The development of the overall project character and the individual parcels is controlled and restricted by these guidelines as well as by applicable governmental codes and regulations. The individual parcel owners, in coordination with their architects, will implement all provisions applicable to their specific site development by adherence to these guidelines and the conditions of approval as noted in any future conditional use permit. Table 3-1 indicates design criteria and guidelines for the major categories of development.

 

Table 3-1

 

Urban Design Criteria

Commercial Development

Office Development

Industrial Development

Single-Story and Multi-Story Elements

 

 

A combination of one- and two-story elements should be created within the overall form of commercial buildings in order to provide a variety of scale and reduce the perceived building mass. Any building mass above the second story should be set back and reduced in size.

Massing should be simple and possess strongly integrated geometric forms. The massing should relate to the internal function and nature of the space it is intended to enclose.

A combination of one- and two-story elements may be created within the overall form of commercial buildings in order to provide a variety of scale and reduce the perceived building mass.

Perimeter Mass

 

 

The portions of the buildings adjacent to pedestrian corridors and walkways shall be stepped down with the use of sub-elements to create a more human scale for pedestrians.

Varying the wall plane in depth and/or direction will create a more human scale for pedestrians on the portions of the buildings adjacent to pedestrian corridors walkways.

Varying the wall plane, variation in the siting of structures so they are off-set, and variable setbacks will be used to promote the development of a “campus-like” setting.

The use of pedestrian-friendly design treatments, street furniture, outdoor cafés, kiosks, and other amenities must be incorporated into the design.

Barrierless perimeters are encouraged to promote a campus-like setting. The use of landscaped yards areas, parkways, and berms are encouraged.

The use of landscaped yard areas, parkways, and berms are required to provide separation between structures.

 

Commercial Development

Office Development

Industrial Development

Building Façades

 

 

The façades of commercial retailing uses should clearly identify the entry and provide clear directions to patrons.

Office uses should have strong contrast between the solid mass of façade and the lighter elements of the glazing and entry.

Industrial buildings should have strong contrast between the solid mass of façade and the lighter elements of the glazing and entry.

The exterior of the commercial uses must avoid using blank or solid walls in those areas adjacent to the pedestrian walkways, or those areas facing Washington, Rosemead, and Paramount Boulevards.

The façade should clearly identify the entry and direct people to it. Also, the creation of strong shadow lines via recessed features and projections is strongly encouraged.

The façades should clearly identify the entry and direct people towards it. Blank walls along the front elevations should be avoided.

Articulation

 

 

The apparent mass of buildings should be reduced by means of articulation, i.e., the varying of wall planes in depth and/or direction.

One-sided architecture, where only the dominant street frontage possesses articulation, should be augmented by using elements such as window treatments and trellises on the other visually-exposed elevations.

The apparent mass of buildings will be reduced by means of articulation in the front elevations.

This articulation creates visual interest and human-scale outdoor spaces such as patios and terraces. Large blank single-planed walls are not permitted.

 

Any loading areas must be screened from view to maintain a campus-like setting.

Use of Architectural Elements

 

 

Elements such as canopies, awnings, porches, arcades, and balconies may be used to add wall articulation and provide a varied transition of building mass from ground level to roof.

Office building design should incorporate a simple, unified architectural treatment or style that provides a framework for storefronts and signage.

Building design should incorporate a simple, unified architectural treatment or style that provides a framework for the character of the business park and the basis for the necessary signage program.

 

Commercial Development

Office Development

Industrial Development

 

The overall architecture should be compatible with that used in the remainder of the sub-area development.

 

Building Entrances

 

 

Entrances should be oriented toward walkways to maximize pedestrian circulation. For example, this can be done by recessing storefront entrances that open onto pedestrian thoroughfares.

The main public entrance should be readily visible from the parking area or pedestrian connection. Architectural elements such as a porte-cochere, framework, or skylight may be used to emphasize the entry/lobby areas.

Entrances should be oriented toward walkways and the parkways to maximize pedestrian circulation.

Ground Floor Interest

 

 

Commercial retail buildings should be designed so that the ground floor presents an interesting and varied appearance to pedestrians and motorists, using windows, arcades, architectural detailing, artwork, and similar design features to bring a more human scale to pedestrians.

Design solutions should emphasize color, texture, and other treatments that provide visual interest. Specific elements that may generate this interest include colonnades, awnings, windows, and enriched design details.

Building should be designed so that the ground floor presents an interesting and varied appearance.

Number of Materials

 

 

The number and variety of materials on commercial buildings should establish harmony and visual continuity. Trellises, frameworks, wood or tile details, artwork, and other features are encouraged as design features on otherwise blank walls.

One dominant material should be selected and expressed with its own natural integrity. Use of materials that convey permanence, substance, timelessness, and restraint are encouraged.

One dominant material should be selected and expressed with its own natural integrity for the front elevations visible from the primary and secondary roadways.


Commercial Development

Office Development

Industrial Development

Roof Materials

 

 

Materials must be fire-resistant, such as clay or concrete tile on pitched roofs, and composition materials on flat roofs. Roof equipment must be concealed from ground-level views.

Materials must be fire-resistant, such as clay or concrete tile or architectural composition shingles on pitched roofs, and composition materials on flat roofs.

All roofing materials must be fire-resistant. Standing-seam metal roofs may also be used if City staff determines that such a roof is consistent with the character and style of the building. Roof equipment (air conditioning units, vents, etc.) must be concealed from ground-level views.

Standing-seam metal roofs may also be used if City staff determines that such a roof is consistent with the character and style of the building

Standing-seam metal roofs may also be used if City staff determines that such a roof is consistent with the character and style of the building.

 

Acceptable Wall Materials

 

 

Stucco, wood, masonry, river rock veneer, or other durable high-quality materials may be used. Proven steps to protect and preserve such materials are encouraged to retain and ensure an attractive appearance over time.

Dominant wall materials that will usually comprise over 70 percent of total wall surface, and secondary materials that cover the remainder and serve as accents or to emphasize entry focal points, should be used. Dominant materials include: stucco, brick, split-faced or other decorative block, glass (non-reflective), wood, and textured concrete. Secondary materials may include any dominant material listed above, metal, tile, plaster, glass block, and stone.

Dominant wall materials that will usually comprise over 70 percent of total wall surface, and secondary materials that cover the remainder and serve as accents or to emphasize entry focal points, should be used. Dominant materials for the front elevation may include: stucco, brick, split-faced or other decorative block, glass, wood, and textured concrete. Secondary materials may include: any dominant material listed above, metal, tile, plaster, glass block, and stone.


Commercial Development

Office Development

Industrial Development

Wall Colors and Color Accents

 

 

One dominant color should be used for the building walls. Although subdued colors, such as beige, tan, cream, sand, light gray, etc., usually work best as the dominant wall color, bolder colors may be used if City staff determines they are consistent with the character of the project, surrounding properties, and/or the streetscape.

Glass should not be used over more than 70 percent of the wall surface per elevation to allow for human scale elements along the lower levels. Colors of dominant material should generally be subdued or earth-tone shades (e.g., gray, off-white, tan, beige, and similar) and relatively light.

Wall surfaces should be embellished by means of texturing, the use of exposed aggregate, fenestration (wall openings such as doors and windows), variations in wall color, insets and overhangs to create shadow lines, and similar design features to add interest and relief.

Also where possible, material with integral color, such as brick, should be left natural.

Secondary material colors should complement and be a tasteful accent to the dominant material color. Color palettes should be kept simple, with one dominant color per building and accent colors on doors, window surrounds, address numbers, light fixtures, and architectural details such as cornices and soffits.

Colors of dominant material should generally be subdued or earth-tone shades (e.g., gray, off-white, tan, beige, and similar) and relatively light. Secondary material colors should complement and be a tasteful accent to the dominant material color.

 

3.3  URBAN DESIGN STANDARDS
 

This section of the Specific Plan indicates development standards for those land use categories provided herein. The following standards, outlined in Table 3-2, are identified for the various types of development considered herein.

 

1. Building Height Criteria. The maximum building height for the development permitted under the various land use designations is indicated. The maximum height for accessory structures is also indicated.

 

2. Parking and Loading Area Criteria. Parking requirements for the various land use designations are indicated.

 

3. Building Setback Criteria. Minimum setback standards for each land use category are identified.

 

Table 3-2

 

Urban Design Plan—Development Standards

Building/Accessory Structures Height Limits

Parking Requirements and Standards

Development Setback Requirements

Commercial (Sub-Area A)

 

 

The maximum building height for uses governed by this land use designation is 60 feet.

No on-street parking is permitted under this Specific Plan. All parking must be provided on-site. A minimum of 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area must be provided. The individual stall dimensions and the percentage of compact and handicapped stalls must meet City Zoning Code requirements.

The minimum front setback is 35 feet along Rosemead, Paramount, and Washington Boulevards from back of curb. Should any street widening occur, the 35-foot landscaped setback shall be re-established. The minimum side yard setback is 35 feet for corner lots as measured from the back of the curb along Paramount, Rosemead, and Washington Boulevards; no setback is required for interior lots. The minimum rear setback is 15 feet for corner lots and 10 feet for interior lots. Every required yard or open space area must be maintained completely open from the ground to the sky.

 

All commercial parking ratios are based on gross floor area. Refer to parking, loading, and storage area standards for specific requirements.

 

 

Off-street parking facilities may be located in any yard, although these parking facilities may not be located closer than the 35-foot landscaped setback along Paramount, Rosemead, and Washington Boulevards. A 20-foot landscaped setback between the parking area and other street frontages is required.

 

Building/Accessory Structures Height Limits

Parking Requirements and Standards

Development Setback Requirements

Entertainment

 

 

(Sub-Area A)

The maximum building height for development governed by this land use designation is 60 feet.

No on-street parking is permitted. The following standards apply:

The minimum front setback is 35 feet from the property line along Rosemead, Paramount, or Washington Boulevards. The minimum side yard setback is 35 feet for corner lots; 0 feet for interior lots. The minimum rear setback is 15 feet.

1. Commercial Recreation - 1 stall/3 seats;

2. Health club/spa - 10 stalls/1,000 s.f.;

3. Theater/cinema - 1 stall/3 seats.

 

Refer to parking, loading, and storage area standards for specific requirements.

Off-street parking facilities may be located in any yard, although these parking facilities may not be located closer than 35 feet from the street property line.

Manufacturing/Research, Development, and Distribution

 

 

(Sub-Areas B and C)

The maximum building height for this land use designation is 45 feet.

No on-street parking is permitted under this Specific Plan. All parking must be provided on-site. A minimum of 1.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area must be provided. In this instance, parking requirements will be determined through the conditional use permit. Refer to parking, loading, and storage area standards for specific requirements.

The minimum front setback is 35 feet. The minimum side yard setback is 35 feet for corner lots; 15 feet for interior lots. Every required yard or open space area must be maintained completely open from the ground to the sky.

 

 

Building/Accessory Structures Height Limits

Parking Requirements and Standards

Development Setback Requirements

 

 

Off-street parking facilities may be located in any yard although these parking facilities may not be located closer than 35 feet from the street property line along major arterials and 20 feet from the parking line along interior roadways.

Heavy Industrial

 

 

(Sub-Areas B and C)

The maximum building height must not exceed 100 feet.

No on-street parking is permitted under this Specific Plan. All parking must be provided on-site. A minimum of 1.0 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross building floor area will apply to development included in this category.

The minimum front set back is 35 feet. The minimum side yard setback is 35 feet for corner lots; 15 feet for interior lots. Every required yard or open space area must be maintained completely open from the ground to the sky.

 

This parking standard may be relaxed if future uses will operate multiple shifts. In this instance, parking requirements will be determined through the conditional use permit process. Refer to parking, loading, and storage area standards for specific requirements.

Off-street parking facilities may be located in any yard, although these parking facilities may not be located closer than 35 feet from major arterials and 20 feet from the property line along primary and secondary roadways. Fences must be set back a minimum of 60 feet from the front property line.


Building/Accessory Structures Height Limits

Parking Requirements and Standards

Development Setback Requirements

Office/Institutional

 

 

(Sub-Area A or B)

Commercial office uses permitted in Sub-Area A are limited to those identified herein in Section 2.0. Public and civic-related uses are permitted in Sub-Area A. No offices, other than those that are ancillary to the primary use, are permitted in Sub-Areas B and C.

No on-street parking is permitted. All parking must be provided on-site. A minimum of 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area must be provided. Refer to parking, loading, and storage area standards for specific requirements.

The minimum front setback is 35 feet. The minimum side yard setback is 35 feet for corner lots; 10 feet for interior lots. The minimum rear setback is 15 feet. Every required yard or open space area must be maintained completely open from the ground to the sky. Off-street parking facilities may be located in any yard, although these parking facilities may not be located closer than 35 feet from major arterials and 20 feet from the property line along primary and secondary roadways. A 20-foot landscaped set back must be provided in front of structure when parking is located to the front of the structure.

 

3.4  GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR URBAN DESIGN
 

The purpose of this sub-section is to highlight guidelines and principles pertaining to urban design related to future redevelopment within the Planning Area. The previous sections outlined the specific design requirements to future development. In addition to the aforementioned standards applicable to future development, the following requirements apply:

 

1. Commercial Development Design. Future commercial development permitted within Sub-Area A must be integrated in terms of design and pedestrian access. Commercial structures located within the outlying pads must be compatible in architectural style and design with the primary structures.

 

2. Commercial Drive-thru Lanes. The location and orientation of drive-thru lanes must be designed so that the drive-thru lanes are not visible or sufficiently screened from Washington Boulevard. All order boards and speakers must be oriented away from Washington Boulevard. These lanes may be concealed using landscaping, decorative walls, or other design elements.

 

3. Commercial Building Articulation. Building articulation measures must be utilized to prevent the appearance of blank walls along those elevations visible to the general public. The use of windows, wall treatments, awnings, and other design elements may be used to avoid the creation of blank walls. The primary focus of this issue is related to the north-facing elevations of the commercial development permitted in Sub-Area A.

 

4. Pedestrian Activity. The commercial development within Sub-Area A must be designed to promote pedestrian circulation. This may be accommodated through the creative use of “street furniture,” walkway treatments, canopies, and other amenities designed to encourage pedestrian activity.

 

5. Signage. A signage plan must be submitted to the City for approval. No pole signs will be permitted. Guidelines regarding signage are provided in Section 3.5.4.

 

6. Entries. Entryway design treatments must be provided at the key nodes and entryways as shown in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. These major and minor nodes are discussed in Section 3.5.1.

 

7. Industrial/Distribution Development. Future light industrial/distribution development must be integrated in terms of design, building mass, and orientation. Larger structures should be located within the westerly and central portion of the Planning Area. The campus-like atmosphere called for in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan must be maintained.

 

8. Loading and Storage. All loading areas must be screened from view from public rights-of-ways (Washington Boulevard, Paramount Boulevard, and Rosemead Boulevard). No loading is permitted along those building elevations facing the aforementioned roadways. No outdoor storage will be permitted.

 

9. Rail Access. Railroad spurs and/or easements between buildings must be screened from view from both public rights-of-ways and internal roadways. The tracks must be recessed and the location, screening, and gates of the spur tracks must be provided pursuant to PPD review.

 

10.   Accessories. Trash enclosures, air conditioning, equipment, and other machinery must be screened from views from the front elevations. Trash enclosures must be located outside the required building setbacks.

 

11.   Corner Treatments. Buildings located near the corners of Washington/Rosemead and Washington/Paramount must be oriented so that loading area and drive-thru lanes are appropriately screened from view.

 

12.   Fencing. PPD approval is required for all fencing not identified on the development plans submitted as part of the CUP application.

 

3.5  DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
 

The design standards and guidelines described in this section are applicable to the entire planning area. The guidelines focus on those key design elements that will promote a pleasing and comfortable environment to those working in and/or patronizing future development within the Planning Area.

 

3.5.1  Overview of Urban Design Concepts

 

The use of focal points will provide both orientation and organization. These focal points create a visual counterpoint to the massing of nearby buildings. There are four major entries (Crossway Drive, Danbridge Street, Rex Road—east entrance, and Rex Road—west entrance) noted in Exhibit 3-1. All four major entries are located at the entrances to the Planning Area from the adjacent public arterial roadways. These entries shall be “grand entries” that reflect the quality and uniqueness of the project. Elements of these entries will include, but not be limited to, special paving areas for visual and auditory experience; large, dominant trees and plant material; and monument signage to establish project identity.

 

Opportunities for major project identification are located at the corners of Washington and Rosemead Boulevards and Washington and Paramount Boulevards, as well as in a number of key locations within the Planning Area. Potential elements of these nodes could include special paving, distinctive plant material, arcades, raised planters, fountains/water features, sign monument, and outdoor art. These nodes provide the opportunity for dominant project identification statements. In addition, the design of the prominent corners shall take into consideration the architectural elements of the adjoining parcel. Depending on the use of the adjacent parcel, the site planning and architecture of the building could integrate the design of the project identification node to further enhance the quality and urban design of the project. For example, landscaping, decorative walls, or monuments may be incorporated into the design of those businesses located at the Washington/Paramount and the Washington/Rosemead intersections.

 

The definition and corresponding guidelines for the key design elements are described below:

 

1. Entryway Nodes. Entryway nodes refer to those special design treatments that will be provided at the major entryways at Rex Road (both the east and west entrances), Danbridge Street, and Crossway Drive.

 

2. Internal Nodes. Elements included in the nodes will incorporate some of the plant material from the major entries for continuity and consistency, and as visually recognizable gateways into the project or parcels within the project.

 

3. Courtyards and Patios. Courtyards and patios are encouraged to add amenities and interest to individual areas of the development and to integrate and harmonize adjacent buildings. Also, courtyards developed in a “human scale” will create areas that are both inviting and user-friendly to people.

 

4. Water Features. Water features, including fountains, ponds, and streams, will provide visual interest and auditory enrichment. A minimum of two water features will be required for the each Sub-Area A through C, in areas containing open area outdoor spaces such as courtyards.

 

5. Towers. Towers serve numerous practical and symbolic functions. Towers become the actual or symbolic center and gathering point for a project and can maintain a sense of orientation within a grouping of buildings. These design treatments will be encouraged within Sub-Area A’s commercial development.

 

The following guidelines related to focal elements apply to the area subject to this Specific Plan.

 

1. A higher degree of architectural detail should be provided in courtyards in relation to other open spaces. Architectural details must be consistent with the overall design theme of the surrounding development.

 

2. Furnishings (street furniture, directional signs, information kiosks, trash enclosures, etc.), lighting, paving, and plantings should be emphasized and richly detailed. Seating choices and paving patterns directly impact the way the courtyard space and other pedestrian activity areas are perceived. A variety of seating choices (low walls, benches, chairs) should be offered in both shaded and sunny areas.

 

3. Paving should be enriched (e.g. pavers, brick, or stamped concrete).

 

4. When used, fountains should vary greatly in scale and design and may be freestanding or wall-mounted. Low-evaporation, water-conserving designs are required for all water elements.

 

3.5.2  Streetscape Concept

 

The conceptual streetscape plan establishes structure, hierarchy, coherence, continuity, and visual identity for the project. The following standards apply to the overall “streetscape concept” for the Planning Area:

 

1. Street Furniture. The street furniture pertinent to the major perimeter arterials may include such elements as bollards, decorative plant containers, tree grates, and benches. The style and design of these elements shall be complementary to the architectural theme established throughout the Specific Plan Area, yet consistent among all major perimeter arterials.

 

2. Lighting. The light fixtures chosen for the project shall be consistent with the overall architectural theme of the project. All fixtures will ensure safety for both vehicular and pedestrian circulation. The height of fixtures should not generally exceed 24 feet.

 

3. Screening Techniques. To enhance the appearance of the streetscape within the Planning Area, screening techniques, such as berming and landscape planting, shall be used to screen parking areas from prominent visual corridors. Landscape treatment shall also be used to screen utility fixtures and equipment.

 

3.5.3  Parking, Loading, Storage Area, and Refuse Storage Standards

 

Given the nature of permitted uses, exterior loading and storage areas will be required to serve future development. The use of open space within the designated yard and/or setback areas for storage and loading will not be permitted. To ensure that visual quality within the Planning Area will be maintained, the following guidelines apply to those activities and uses requiring areas for loading and storage:

 

1. All materials, supplies, or equipment, including trucks or other motor vehicles, shall be stored on-site inside a closed building or behind a visual barrier to screen such materials, supplies, or vehicles from adjacent sites so they are not visible from neighboring properties and streets.

 

2. Provisions shall be made on each site for any necessary vehicle loading. No on-street vehicle loading shall be permitted. Loading dock areas shall be set back, recessed, or screened so as not to be visible from the public right-of-way within primary roadways, and in no event shall a loading dock be closer than 75 feet from a property line fronting upon a street unless otherwise approved.

 

3. Exterior storage shall be fully screened by walls constructed of materials and designed to be architecturally compatible with the adjacent structures. The height shall be adequate such that no materials will be visible above the wall. Screen walls shall be accompanied with a combination of vines, shrubs, and trees to soften the visual impact of wall surfaces (refer to landscape guidelines). Wall heights must not exceed 12 feet from ground elevation. No wire or mesh materials will be permitted on the walls.

 

Walls must be limited to rear and side property lines outside of the required setbacks. Recessed walls/gates to screen exterior storage are permitted between the side property line and the structure, provided that such walls/gates maintain a 60-foot minimum setback from the front and/or corner side property lines.

 

4. Refuse collection areas should be designed and located upon the lot so as to be convenient for the deposition of refuse generated on-site. Refuse collection areas must be located within the lot to provide clear and convenient access to refuse collection vehicles. Refuse collection areas should be effectively designed to contain all refuse generated on-site and deposited between collections. Enclosures must be constructed of durable materials, with finishes and colors that are unified and harmonious with the overall architectural theme. Trash enclosures must be located outside the designated set-back areas.

 

5. All outdoor refuse containers shall be visually screened within a non-combustible enclosure, and a non-combustible solid metal gate, so as not to be visible from adjacent lots or sites, neighboring properties, or streets. Refuse screen walls or fences shall be sited for the least visibility (such as adjacent to side and rear walls, and toes of slopes), with vine planting along the perimeter. No refuse collection areas will be permitted between a street and the front of building.

 

6. All commercial, entertainment, manufacturing/R&D, distribution, heavy industrial, office/ institutional, and rail yard uses shall adhere to loading and parking design standards set forth in Chapter 18.44 of the Municipal Code, unless modified through the conditional use permit.

 

7. All new development shall conform to Transportation Demand Management requirements set forth in Chapter 18.47 of the Municipal Code.

 

3.5.4  Signage Standards

 

Signage for the future development contemplated as part of this Amendment’s implementation will serve to unify the overall appearance of the future commercial center and business park. The following standards must be adhered to regarding signage for the development contemplated in the Planning Area.

 

1. Commercial free-standing signage is limited to monument signs of no more than 6 feet in height (no pole signs will be permitted). Four pylon signs not exceeding 30 feet in height are permitted.

 

2. Free-standing and building identification signage standards will be established through the Master Conditional Use Permit process. Building identification standards for the commercial area (Sub-Area A) must generally reflect the requirements of the General Commercial zoning standards in the Pico Rivera Municipal Code. Building identification and signage for industrial development within Sub-Area B must conform to that development located south of Rex Road (in Sub-Area C).

 

3. Promotional advertising is permitted in Sub-Area A, but this advertising shall not encroach into required setbacks, and is subject to those requirements outlined in the Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

 

4. Proposed letter style and design concepts shall be submitted to the Community Development Department as part of the review of the signage plan. A comprehensive signage plan must be submitted as part of the review of the Master Conditional Use Permit process. The signage plan must be approved prior to any final building permit.

 

5. Service station signage (Sub-Area A) is limited to two freestanding monument type signs that do not exceed six feet in height. The required advertising of gasoline prices must be incorporated into these monument signs. No other fee-standing signs of any type will be permitted.

 

3.5.5  Utilities, Communication Devices, Exterior Electrical Equipment, and Transformers

 

Specialized equipment and mechanical devices may detract from the overall appearance of future development in the absence of design measures that will be effective in screening or concealing this equipment/machinery from view. The following standards related to utilities are applicable to the planning area:

 

1. All exterior on-site utilities, including but not limited to, storm drain infrastructure, sewers, gas lines, water lines, and electrical, telephone, and communications wires and equipment, will be installed and maintained underground. Antennae or other devices for transmission or reception of signals, including but not limited to, telephone, television, and radio, should be screened from public roadways and adjacent structures. Wireless telecommunications equipment (monopoles) must conform to City regulations as well as those requirements included in the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan.

 

2. On-site underground utilities should be designed and installed so as to minimize the disruption of off-site utilities, paving, and landscaping during construction and maintenance.

 

3. Temporary overhead power and telephone facilities are permitted during the construction phases only.

 

4. Transformer enclosures attached to the building should be designed of durable materials, with finishes and colors that are unified and harmonious with the overall architectural theme.

 

5. Electrical equipment shall be mounted on the interior of a building wherever possible. When interior mounting is not practical, electrical equipment shall be installed in a location where it is substantially screened from public view. In no case shall exterior electrical equipment be mounted on the street side or primary exposure side of any building.

 

Where visible, such equipment shall be installed in a neat and orderly fashion, and shall be painted to blend with its mounting background. Landscape screening shall also be provided if required by the Zoning Administrator.

 

6. Down-spouts must be designed so that they are integrated into the wall design and are not visible along any front elevation or side elevation facing a street. All other down-spouts must be painted to match the building elevation. Storm water drainage shall be routed to drain directly into the storm drain system rather than into the street gutter or other public right-of-way areas. Water from roof down-spouts shall not be drained into landscape areas.

 

7. Exterior components consisting of plumbing, processing, cooling, and ventilating systems (including, but not limited to, piping, tanks, stacks, collectors, heating, cooling, and ventilating equipment fans, blowers, ductworks, vents, louvers, meters, compressors, motors, incinerators, ovens, etc.) shall be screened from view from public roadways and adjacent structures. Building parapets shall be of such a height that roof-mounted screening devices are not required. If building parapets do not provide the required screening, mechanical equipment should be screened by an unobtrusive screening device that will appear as an integrated part of the overall architectural design.

 

8. Any devices employed to screen exterior components of plumbing, processing, heating, cooling, and ventilating systems from direct view should appear as an integrated part of the architectural design, and as such, should be constructed of complementary and durable materials and finished in a texture and color scheme complementary to the overall architectural design.

 

 

3.5.6  Lighting Standards

 

The creative use of lighting equipment as a means to enhance the appearance of nighttime views will be promoted through the implementation of this Specific Plan Amendment. Future development will require security lighting along walkways, in parking areas, and along the internal roadways. The following standards will be followed:

 

1. Exterior building materials and the on-site lighting plan shall be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator to minimize the potential for light and glare impacts.

 

2. The site lighting plan for the exterior parking areas shall be designed to direct all light sources downward and onto the site. Outdoor lighting shall be designed and installed so that all direct illumination is confined to the site, and adjacent properties are protected from spillover illumination.

 

3. Low-wattage security lighting directed away from light-sensitive uses shall be utilized and shall be shielded to prevent spill-over and glare.

 

4. Street lights must be consistent with the development in terms of scale and design, and their height should not exceed 25 feet.

 

5. The creative use of building security lighting will be required in all sub-areas. Ground lighting fixtures directed upwards along exterior walls may also serve as effective illumination.

 

6. Ground-mounted lighting shall be installed in the landscaped medians, entryways, and activity nodes as a means to enhance these features during the nighttime periods.

 

7. The use of decorative lighting treatments in landscaping, pedestrian activity areas, and nodes and entryways will be encouraged. These treatments may also be incorporated into the overall architectural design of the future buildings.

 

3.5.7  Landscaping Concept

 

The high-quality environment envisioned for the Planning Area will be established, in part, by the landscaping treatment. The landscaping is intended to give structure and identity to the overall project by creating continuity in plant material and streetscape design. The landscaping theme will establish a framework, starting from the exterior of the site, the major perimeter arterials, major entries and project identification nodes, to the interior of the site, the internal collectors, and individual parcels.

 

The plant palette and landscape treatment for each of the streets serve to reinforce the overall concept. The focus of the landscaping plan is to provide a combination of evergreen and deciduous plantings to promote variety in tree shapes and sizes. The landscaping concept also promotes the abundant use of landscaping and plantings along the roadways, parkway areas, and in the yard areas. The landscaping concept reflects the hierarchy of the street system, with taller trees defining the major arterials, and medium-sized trees denoting the more local street network. Other key elements of the landscaping concept include the following:

 

1. Linear berms are proposed throughout the project perimeter. These berms are intended to further enhance the landscape character of the planning area, and are designed to create topographic variation and interest on an otherwise flat site. Shrubs, ground cover, and turf areas will articulate the ground planes. These streetscape elements will collectively yield coherence, structure, and identity.

 

2. The major arterials at the perimeter of the planting area are critical to the identity and the character of the project. It is envisioned that Washington, Rosemead, and Paramount Boulevards will have a sufficient number of mature trees to reinforce a campus-like atmosphere. A 3:1 continuous turf berm shall be a landscape element consistent with all major perimeter arterials. These improvements shall be made only on the project’s side of the street.

 

3. Table 3-3 includes a list of suggested plant material to be utilized within the streetscape design of the major perimeter arterials.

 

4. The interior streetscape shall act as a unifying element within the Planning Area. Landscape treatments shall include small deciduous flowering accent trees planted in a formal single row pattern at 40 feet on center. Within the right-of-way, the character of these collectors shall be strong and identifiable. However, they shall be of smaller scale than the major perimeter arterials.

 

5. Landscape and irrigation plans to be prepared by a landscape architect and requires Zoning Administrator review and approval.

 

6. Landscape plans shall adhere to water-efficient landscape provisions set forth in Chapter 18.45 of the Municipal Code.

 

The landscaping concept for the conceptual commercial development plan for Sub-Area A is illustrated in Exhibit 3-2. The conceptual landscaping plan for the proposed development for Sub-Area B is provided in Exhibit 3-3.


Table 3-3

 

Landscaping Materials

 

TREES

 

 

 

Albizia Julibrissin

Syagrus Romanzoffianum

Melaceuca Linarifolia

Prunus Serrulata

Cinnamomum Camphora

Tipuana Tipu

Phoenix Canariensis

Prunus Persica

Cupaniopsis Anacardioides

Tristania Conferta

Phoenix Dactilifera

Malus Almey

Eucalyptus Sideroxylon

Ulmus Parvifolia

Pinus Canariensis

Crataegus Oxycantha Paulii

Geijera Parviflora

Washingtonia Robusta

Pinus Eldarica

Pittosporum Philyraeoides

Jacaranda Mimosifolia

Koelreuteria Bipinnata

Platanus Acerifolia Yarwood

Pyrus Kawakamii

Lagerstroemia Indica

Koelreuteria Paniculata

Pyrus Calleryana  “Aristocrat Pear”

Liquidambar Styraciflua

Magnolia Grandiflora “Samuel Summers”

Tabebuia Avellanedae

Quercus Ilex

Phoenix Roebelenii

Melaleuca Quinquenervia

Xylosa Congestum

Schinus Molle

 

SHRUBS

 

 

 

Buxus Japonica

Escallonia Fradesii

Pittisporum Tobira

Tecomaria Capensis

Camellia Sasanqua

Feijoa Sellowiana

Plumbago Auriculata

Xylosma Congestum “Compacta”

Carissa Macrocarpa

Liriope Muscari

Prunus Caroliniana

Rosa Floribunda Rose

Coleonema Pulchrum

Nerium Oleander  “Petite Pink”

Raphiolepis Indica

Osmanthus Fragrans

Calliandra Inequilatera

Moraea Iridioides

Rhaphiolepis Indica Ballerina

Dodonaea Viscosa

GROUNDCOVER

 

 

 

Agapanthus Africanus

Rosmarinus Officinallis Lockwood De Forest

Lantana Montevidensis (Purple & White)

Japanese Spurge

Bougainvillea Spectabilis

Trachelospermum Jasminoides

Lavandula Species

Rhyncosperum

Carissa Macrocarpa  “Green Carpet”

Hedera Helix   “Hahns”

Limonium Perezii

Jasminoides

Cerastium Tomentosum

Lantana Sellowiana

Lonicera Japonic

 

Gazania Clear Yellow

Ceanothus Gloriosus

 

 


VINES

 

 

 

Bougainvillea Spectabilis

Jasminum Polyanthum

Hardenbergia Violacea

Wisteria Sinensis

Clystostoma Callistegoides

Macfadyena Unguiscati

Hibbertia Scandens

Gelsemium Sempervicens

Ficus Repens

Parthenocissus Tricuspidata

4.0  INFRASTRUCTURE PLAN
4.1  INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT CONCEPTS
 

This Infrastructure Plan provides a comprehensive framework for the future infrastructure and improvements required to serve the development permitted under this Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan and the Plan Amendments. The following guiding principles were considered in the formulation of the Specific Plan and this Amendment (SP 400.4)

 

1. The circulation system and infrastructure required to serve future development must be designed to minimize the traffic impacts from this development.

 

2. The infrastructure required to serve future development must be designed and programmed to accommodate future growth and demand.

 

3. The circulation plan must facilitate the safe and efficient movement of persons and goods, and promote the use of public transit in the area.

 

This section of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment consists of the following elements:

 

1. Circulation Criteria indicate the location and extent of roadways contemplated as part of future development within the Planning Area.

 

2. Traffic and Circulation Development Standards indicate those guidelines and standards related to construction of future roadways.

 

3. Utilities and Service Development Standards indicate development standards related to utilities and services that will be required to fully serve future development.

 

4.2  CIRCULATION CRITERIA AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
 

The conceptual circulation plan illustrated in Exhibit 4-1 is designed to facilitate the efficient movement of people and goods throughout the Planning Area. The circulation system described herein is designed to accommodate the broad land use mix being contemplated as part of the current development proposal. However, some minor modifications to the circulation framework may be required as development progresses.

 

The roadways and other facilities designed to serve future development in the Planning Area must conform to standards contained herein. Primary roadways identified herein will move traffic through the Planning Area and connect with nearby major arterial roadways (Rosemead Boulevard, Paramount Boulevard, and Washington Boulevard). Other secondary roadways will facilitate internal circulation throughout the Planning Area. In addition to providing for internal circulation through the Planning Area, these roadways provide connections to the adjacent arterial roadway network (Rosemead, Washington, and Paramount Boulevards). The following circulation system elements are considered herein, along with the applicable standards:

 

1. Primary Roadway. The minimum curb-to-curb pavement width for this category of roadway must be 64 feet. A total of four travel lanes shall be provided, with a minimum lane width of 12 feet and a minimum total right-of-way width of 72 feet. Two roadways are included in this category: Rex Road and the Crossway Drive entrance to Sub-Area A. Cross-sections of this roadway classification are provided in Exhibit 4-2.

 

2. Secondary Roadway. Secondary entries serve the internal roadways connecting to Sub-Areas B and C. The minimum curb-to-curb width of these roadways is 40 feet, with a total right-of-way width of 56 feet. Cross-sections of this roadway are provided in Exhibit 4-2.

 

3. Driveway/Aisles. All driveways connecting to an arterial roadway and secondary roadway must have a minimum width of 40 feet.

 

4. Parkway Sidewalks. A minimum 4-foot wide sidewalk must be provided on at least one side of the roadway. Landscaping must separate the sidewalk from the roadway.

 

5. Curb Cuts. The number of curb cuts along the Washington Boulevard frontage must be kept to a minimum. No more than four curb cuts will be permitted along the Washington Boulevard frontage (the limitation does not include the main entry at Crossway Drive). No curb cuts will be permitted within 400 feet of the Rosemead/Washington Boulevard intersection.

 

6. Egress. All egress points at unsignalized driveways and intersections will be restricted to right-turning movements.

 

7. Right-Turn Pocket. An existing right-turn pocket in the southbound lanes of Rosemead Boulevard at Rex Road must be maintained as a means to prevent vehicle stacking associated with the use of the railroad spur crossing Rex Road near Rosemead Boulevard.

 

8. Driveway Aisle. The driveway aisle configuration near the westerly (Paramount Boulevard) and easterly (Rosemead Boulevard) entrances must be designed to prevent vehicle queuing that may result in the blockage of these driveways. The medians shown in the conceptual site plan may be further extended to eliminate stacking problems.

 

9. Drive-Thru Lanes. All drive-thru lanes for the restaurants, banks, and other commercial uses must not interfere with the circulation within the public rights-of-way.

 

10.   On-Street Parking. No on-street parking will be permitted within the designated Primary and Secondary roadways.

 

11.   Direct Internal Access Between Sub-Areas A and B. The extension of Crossway Drive will serve as a “limited use” driveway connection to the rear (loading) areas of the commercial establishments located in Sub-Area A. No trucks will be permitted to use this driveway. Barriers, subject to the Zoning Administrator’s approval, will be incorporated into the project design to ensure this condition is maintained.

 

12.   Employee Parking/Deliveries. Employee parking and deliveries to Sub-Area A’s commercial uses (excluding the outlying pads) will be restricted to the south-facing elevations.

 

4.3  UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES
 

This section outlines the requisite water, sewage, flood control facilities that will be required to accommodate proposed development envisioned under this Specific Plan Amendment. Given the demands required to accommodate the previous Northrop-Grumman plant (which consisted of approximately 3.9 million square feet), limited improvements are required to serve the current proposal. The proposed infrastructure, shown in the exhibits provided herein, will accommodate the individual buildings and development currently planned.

 

4.3.1  Water Facilities

 

The Planning Area is bordered by water facilities belonging to three different water agencies. Pico Water District has an 8-inch pipeline in the north side of Washington Boulevard, and another 8-inch line in the east side of Rosemead Boulevard. Also in the east side of Rosemead Boulevard is a 10-inch line belonging to the Santa Fe Springs Water Company. The City of Pico Rivera Water Department has a 17-inch line in the south side of Washington Boulevard, a 12-inch pipeline in the west side of Paramount Boulevard, and a 17-inch line in the west side of Rosemead Boulevard, which only extends southerly from Washington Boulevard into Sub-Area A. This 17-inch line in Washington Boulevard is fed directly by a well located just westerly of Paramount Boulevard. Three main water connections from these City lines currently serve the Planning Area. A 10-inch service exists on the west side of the site at Rex Road, a 12-inch service feeds from the north, and another 12-inch line serves the easterly portion of the Planning Area.

 

The existing water system adequately served the Northrop-Grumman facility when it was in full production. When the facility was operating at full capacity, it used about 25 percent of the annual 6,000 acre-feet of water pumped by the City. This equates to a demand of approximately 930 gallons per minute (gpm). The existing water system is sufficient to accommodate the development contemplated under this Amendment without additional off-site improvements. However, if future development includes any high-water usage industries, such as bottling plants, the water demands of such industries should be estimated, combined with the demands of the entire development, and compared with the above figures to ensure continued water system adequacy. Exhibit 4-3 illustrates the water facilities, existing and proposed, that will serve the project.

 

4.3.2  Sewer Facilities

 

Sewer service currently exists along the west side of Paramount Boulevard. The analysis of the potential service demand requirements for the development scenarios provided for under the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan indicated that there is adequate capacity to serve future development. The main sewer line located adjacent to the Planning Area is a 63-inch trunk line in Paramount Boulevard. This line, which is operated by the County Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County, has three direct connections in the area. The first connection is a 10-inch public line in Washington Boulevard that extends easterly. The other two connections are private lines. One of these is a 15-inch line located north of Rex Road, extending easterly into the site, and the other is a 10-inch line extending easterly in Rex Road. The wastewater generated from future development would be conveyed through the aforementioned 63-inch trunk line, and treated at the Los Coyotes Water Reclamation Plant in the City of Cerritos, and/or at the Joint Water Pollution Control Plant in the City of Carson.

 

According to the Districts, the design capacity of the 63-inch trunk line is 59.4 million gallons per day (mgd). The latest measured peak flow of the trunk line (in 1994) is 45.2 mgd. Information provided by the Districts indicates that in 1990, the combined sanitary and industrial waste flows from the Northrop-Grumman facility totaled approximately 0.26 mgd.

 

Based on the previous figures estimated for the previous development, any future increase would raise the peak flow of the trunk line by 1.33 percent, to approximately 45.8 mgd, which is still far below the design capacity. Also, either of the potential treatment facilities has enough additional capacity to accommodate the increased flow generated by this project. Therefore, no additional off-site sewer improvements should be required to accommodate the future development contemplated under this Specific Plan Amendment. However, it should be noted that, as with the water facilities, this analysis should be reviewed if future development includes any high-water usage industries. Exhibit 4-4 illustrates the existing and proposed sewer facilities.

 

4.3.3  Storm Drain Facilities

 

Significant storm drain facilities currently exist both within and adjacent to the Planning Area. A 27-inch reinforced concrete pipe (RCP) conveys flows from north of Washington Boulevard to an open channel located on the west side of Rosemead Boulevard. This channel then continues in a southerly direction in the easterly portion of the Planning Area, where it outlets to a double 72-inch RCP. At that point, there is a confluence with an existing 66-inch RCP that extends northerly to Rex Road, and an existing 72-inch RCP that extends westerly. The 66-inch RCP feeds a network of on-site drainage facilities.

 

The Planning Area is considered to be fully developed. As such, the existing storm drain facilities are capable of conveying the “developed” condition storm flows generated on-site. Due to the fact that future development permitted under this Specific Plan Amendment also represents a “developed” condition, it is assumed that the existing drainage facilities will be capable of conveying these flows as well. As a result, the existing major storm drain facilities are adequate to properly drain the Planning Area, following redevelopment. The existing backbone facilities (i.e., concrete channel, large diameter RCPs, etc.) should therefore remain in place and be utilized by future development. However, some modifications, outlined in Exhibit 4-5, may be required to accommodate future development. In addition, on-site infrastructure and connections may need upgrading, depending on the uses ultimately selected.

 

4.3.4  Infrastructure Requirements

 

Future development shall coordinate the provision and installation of off-site facilities with service providers needed to provide adequate water service to the site.

 

1. Development plans shall be submitted to the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts to determine the required water system improvements.

 

2. Fire flow requirements for public and private hydrants shall be provided in accordance with Los Angeles County Fire Department standards.

 

3. On-site sewer lines and connections shall be provided in accordance with City requirements and accepted engineering standards.

 

4. The City shall approve a landscaping plan that utilizes drought-tolerant plants and provides water-efficient irrigation systems (i.e., drip irrigation, automatic shut-offs, soil moisture sensors, automatic controllers and valves, etc.).

 

5. Water-conserving plumbing fixtures and appliances shall be used in all new construction. These shall include ultra-low-flush toilets, low-flow showerheads, low-flow faucets, water-efficient appliances and equipment, and an on-site leak detection program.

 

6. All applicable sections of Titles 20 and 24 of the California Code of Regulations regarding water consumption and conservation shall be enforced.

 

7. Irrigation systems that minimize runoff and evaporation, and maximize water availability to plant roots, shall be required. Drip-line irrigation, soil moisture sensors, and automatic irrigation systems are acceptable water-saving irrigation methods.

 

8. Adequate storm drain facilities shall be constructed prior to the occupancy of the proposed project, in accordance with future development.

 

9. On-site activities shall comply with stormwater quality management requirements of the City and County (under NPDES Permit No. CA-0061654), with appropriate permits, prior to connection with the County drainage system. This may include implementation measures designed to reduce the quantity of street pollutants that enter the local storm drainage system, both during construction and after permanent facilities have been built.

 

10.   Temporary erosion control devices shall be installed, as required by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board, to mitigate potential impacts on groundwater qualities.

 

4.3.5  Power Utilities and Energy Conservation

 

The following standards are concerned with the provision of energy to the Planning Area (natural gas and electric utility purveyors) and the attendant need for energy conservation:

 

1. The developer shall work with Southern California Edison (SCE) and Southern California Gas Company (SCG) in abandoning existing overhead power lines and gas lines. New and existing utility lines shall be installed underground. SCE and SCG will facilitate the extension and/or relocation of power and gas lines and facilities that will serve future development within the Planning Area.

 

2. The developer shall work with telephone and cable television companies in abandoning existing overhead lines and undergrounding all new telephone and cable lines that will serve future development.

 

3. All proposed structures on-site shall adhere to State and City standards regarding energy conservation, insulation, and energy-efficient site planning, design, and appliance use. Energy conservation practices shall be incorporated into the project, and the use of energy-efficient or gas air conditioning systems and appliances will be required.

 

4. Design measures that maximize the use of climate and reduce heating and cooling requirements will also be incorporated into future development. All proposed structures on-site shall adhere to State and City standards on energy conservation, insulation, and energy-efficient site planning, design, and appliance use.

 

4.3.6  Solid Waste Disposal

 

Future occupants will be encouraged to implement waste recycling practices for paper, cardboard, glass, plastics, metals, green waste, and other recyclable materials at the project site, and the project shall comply with the City’s recycling and source reduction programs, in compliance with AB 939.

5.0  IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
5.1  ADOPTION OF THE SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENT
 

The adoption of and provisions of the Specific Plan Amendment are not intended to have application to Sub-Area C without the express written consent of the owners thereof. Subject to the foregoing, this Amendment to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan will serve as the primary regulatory document for the Planning Area. The consistent application of the standards contained in this Specific Plan will ensure that the Planning Area’s development reflects the community’s overall vision for the Planning Area, while providing a maximum amount of flexibility for the property owner. The adoption of the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment (SP 400.4) as an amendment to the City of Pico Rivera Zoning Ordinance will provide policy consistency and legal status equal to other zoning requirements.

 

This Specific Plan Amendment does not nullify those provisions and/or regulations contained in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan or the previously adopted Amendments not addressed in this Specific Plan Amendment.

 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Specific Plan Amendment, none of the provisions of this Amendment are intended to, or will apply to “Sub-Area C” without the express written consent of the owner of the 40 acres designated as “Sub-Area C” in the Specific Plan 400.3 Amendment during the term of the Development Agreement 98-273 between the City and Pico Rivera Business Center I, LLC, as amended, or as it may be amended from time to time. These 40 acres shall remain subject only to the provisions of the Specific Plan as previously adopted and amended.

 

5.2  ACTIONS REQUIRED FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AMENDMENT
 

The Pico Rivera Zoning Ordinance has already been amended to reflect a Specific Plan (SP) zone to encompass this Planning Area. The City of Pico Rivera General Plan has also been amended to reflect this Specific Plan. Finally, an ordinance has been adopted to establish the Specific Plan area.

 

The primary objective of the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan, and this Specific Plan Amendment, is to provide clear and consistent direction regarding the future development of the 235 gross acre Planning Area. Both the original Plan and this Amendment were formulated to provide maximum flexibility to better accommodate future development. However, both the Plan and this Amendment provide a clear definition as to the Community’s overall vision for the Planning Area’s development.

 

The original Plan identified four broad and very different development scenarios that would be permitted within the Planning Area, and one of these scenarios ultimately emerged as the candidate for additional consideration. The guiding principles and standards contained in the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan are a direct outgrowth of the large number of community workshops, study sessions, and public hearings held during the Specific Plan’s development and public review. As a result, these earlier standards, guidelines, and guiding principles serve as the foundation for this Specific Plan Amendment. Given the size of the Planning Area and the complexity of the current development concepts and site plans, additional staff review and other discretionary review will be required. This review will consists of the following steps:

 

Step 1. The City may consider and approve a Master Conditional Use Permit (MCUP) for all or a portion of the future development contemplated within the Planning Area. This approval may only be considered as long as the MCUP Application is deemed complete and in conformance to City requirements by City Staff.

 

Step 2. Recognizing that additional design and site plan details are likely to be unresolved with the approval of a Master Conditional Use Permit, additional detail, site plans, and/or alternative designs may be required as part of the conditional use permit process. Such information and/or plans are to be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator and a determination made by that individual as to the submittal’s conformity to the Specific Plan’s regulation and intent. Should the Applicant disagree with the Zoning Administrator’s determination, then the determination/decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures outlined in the City of Pico Rivera Municipal Code.

 

The environmental impact report (EIR) prepared for the original Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan, and the Mitigated Negative Declaration prepared for this Plan Amendment, will provide the requisite environmental review for the aforementioned actions. In the event that revisions or modifications are made to the site plan and/or development concept, and these changes and/or revisions are deemed not to be “minor revisions,” then additional environmental review may be required.

 

5.3  SPECIFIC PLAN REVIEW, APPROVAL, AND MINOR REVISIONS
 

Plan review procedures for development within the Planning Area are intended to shorten the processing time for the applicant. The developer will be required to file final site plans for development with the Planning Area governed by the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan in accordance with the procedures established in the City’s conditional use permit and/or precise plan of design review process.

 

An Environmental Impact Report (EIR) was prepared as part of the Specific Plan’s original review and adoption. The development that is to occur through the implementation of this Specific Plan was evaluated fully in the EIR. This Mitigated Negative Declaration provided herein in Section 6.0 indicates the conformity of Amendment (SP 400.3), along with the current development proposal (SP 400.4), with that development originally contemplated in the adopted Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. The nature and extent of any further environmental review will depend on the nature of future Plan amendments. The standards contained herein also reflect mitigation that has been recommended as part of the previous EIR’s preparation, as well as the mitigation contained in the Mitigated Negative Declaration.5-1

 

Minor revisions to the land use and development provisions contained herein will not require further amendments to the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan. Minor revisions include those activities that would normally be subject to a categorical exemption pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act. Other minor revisions will include building footprint, adjustments, minor changes in floor area, revisions to the location of structures, and other modifications to the site plan. The determination as to whether any future changes to the development plan constitute a “minor revision” shall be left to the discretion of the Community Development Director. Changes to the site plan and/or the proposed development concept are not considered to be a “minor revision” if any of the following conditions are met:

 

1. The site plan revisions and/or changes to the development concept involve an increase in floor area exceeding the maximum permitted in Section 2.0 of this Specific Plan Amendment;

 

2. The site plan revisions and/or changes to the development concept require a modification to the standards, regulations, and/or guiding principles outlined in this Specific Plan Amendment;

 

3. The site plan revisions and/or changes to the development concept involve land uses and/or development not identified as being permitted within Section 2.0 of the Specific Plan; and,

 

4. The site plan revisions and/or changes to the development concept involve changes that would result in environmental effects requiring mitigation measures not already considered in previous environmental review.

 

5.4  ENFORCEMENT OF THIS SPECIFIC PLAN AMENDMENT
 

The Community Development Director shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of this Specific Plan. Any person violating use of a building or structure hereafter erected, built, maintained, or used contrary to provisions of the original Specific Plan or the Amendments contained herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

The Community Development Director shall have the duty to interpret the provisions of this Specific Plan. All such interpretations shall be prepared in written form and shall be permanently maintained. Any person aggrieved by such an interpretation may request that such interpretation be reviewed by the Planning Commission and, if needed, appealed to the City Council.

 

Unless otherwise specified, all development within the Planning Area governed by the Rancho de Bartolo Specific Plan Amendment shall comply with the terms of this Specific Plan Amendment and the applicable provisions of the Adopted Specific Plan and previous amendments to that Plan. Maintenance of landscaping, signage, parking areas, streets, structures, fences, and other amenities described herein is required, and will be the responsibility of the property owner(s) to maintain. Failure to maintain those improvements described herein will constitute a failure to comply with the provisions of this Specific Plan. Any appeals of the determinations made by the Zoning Administrator must conform to those procedures outlined in the City of Pico Rivera Zoning Code.

 

5.5  PHASING AND PHASED DEVELOPMENT
 

A key objective of this Specific Plan is to promote the timely and efficient reuse of the existing Northrop-Grumman facility. The City of Pico Rivera desires to facilitate the property owner, potential investors, and the developer through implementation of this Specific Plan. Toward this end, the phasing of future development is important.

 

1. The redevelopment of Sub-Area A may proceed independently from the remainder of the Planning Area, provided that a conditional use permit and phased timeline agreement has been granted by the City. All applicable standards and requirements contained herein must be adhered to.

 

2. The redevelopment of Sub-Area B may proceed independently of the remaining Planning Area upon approval of a conditional use permit and phased timeline agreement. All applicable standards and requirements contained herein must be adhered to.

 

3. The project identity, minor nodes, and entryways, as indicated herein, shall be provided upon development of the sub-areas abutting the said improvements.

 

4. The full improvement of Rex Road shall be provided upon development of Sub-Area B.

 

5. This Specific Plan permits warehousing and distribution uses as long as such uses provide employment consistent with that identified in the Environmental Impact Report (1 job/1,000 square feet of gross floor area or as determined by the development agreement with the City. This conformity will be determined as part of the CUP review.

 

 

5.6  DEVELOPMENT DENSITY TRANSFERS
 

No further development density/intensity transfers among the four planning areas will be permitted.

 

5.7  IMPLEMENTATION CONDITIONS
 

1. Any rail crossing of Rex Road shall require prior approval from the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and any other regulatory agencies with jurisdiction. The applicant shall obtain any required rights of access and shall improve the rail crossing to CPUC standards at the applicant’s expense.

 

2. Any development agreement for the north 160 acres (or any portion thereof) shall include job creation and minimum assessed valuation requirements at least proportional, in light of the greater land area north of Rex Road, to those included in Development Agreement 98-273 for the south 40 acres.

 

3. Truck and heavy equipment traffic related to demolition and hazardous material remediation on the north 160 acres shall be prohibited from using Rex Road.

 

4. In the event of any internal inconsistency within the Specific Plan Amendment, or between this Specific Plan Amendment and the approved Conditional Use Permits, including inconsistency between the text and exhibits of each, the more restrictive condition shall prevail.

 

Footnotes:

 

5-1)   Government Code 65453 empowers a legislative body to amend a specific plan as often as deemed necessary. This Specific Plan may be amended through resolution or ordinance of the City Council.

